TITLE 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
TITLE 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
TITLE 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
TITLE 4 BUSINESS TAX
TITLE 5 BUSINESS REGULATION
TITLE 6 ANIMALS
TITLE 7 RESERVED
TITLE 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY
TITLE 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
TITLE 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
TITLE 11 PUBLIC PARKS AND FACILITIES
TITLE 12 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
TITLE 13 SEWERS
TITLE 14 RESERVED
TITLE 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
TITLE 16 ZONING
TITLE 17 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
TITLE 18 SIGNS

TITLE 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.04 CODE ADOPTION
Chapter 1.08 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.12 GENERAL PENALTY
Chapter 1.14 PROCEDURES FOR ENFORCING AND IMPOSING ADMINISTRATIVE FINES AND PENALTIES
Chapter 1.15 PROCEDURES FOR IMPOSING A LIEN ON REAL PROPERTY TO COLLECT ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS RELATED TO HOUSING, BUILDING, AND ZONING VIOLATIONS
Chapter 1.16 PROCEDURES FOR FILING CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY
Chapter 1.20 CUSTODY AND USE OF OFFICIAL CITY SEAL AND OTHER INSIGNIA

Chapter 1.04 CODE ADOPTION
1.04.010 Adoption.
Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1 through 50022.8 and 50022.10 of the Government Code, there is adopted the Claremont Municipal Code as published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington, together with those secondary codes as are deleted or modified by the provisions of the Claremont Municipal Code. (78-36)

 

1.04.020 Title—Citation—Reference.
This Code shall be known as the Claremont Municipal Code and it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the Claremont Municipal Code in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the Claremont Municipal Code. Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the Claremont Municipal Code and such references shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code. (78-36)

 

1.04.030 Codification authority.
This Code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances of the City of Claremont, California, codified pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1 through 50022.8 and 50022.10 of the Government Code. (78-36)

 

1.04.040 Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code.
The last ordinance included in this Code was Ordinance 77-35, passed October 25, 1977. The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance 77-35, but prior to the adoption of this Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this Code: Ordinances 78-11 (building code), 78-12 (electrical code), 78-13 (mechanical code), 78-14 (plumbing code), 78-17 (PERS City and Board of Administration agreement), 78-20 (street sweeping fees), 78-21 (transient occupancy tax), 78-22 (schedule of fees), 78-25 (Uniform Fire Code), 78-26 (fire zones), 78-28 (purchasing), and 78-35 (alcohol). (78-36)

 

1.04.050 Reference applies to all amendments.
Wherever a reference is made to this Code as the Claremont Municipal Code or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the City of Claremont, California, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. (78-36)

 

1.04.060 Title, chapter and section headings.
Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. (78-36)

 

1.04.070 Reference to specific ordinances.
The provisions of this Code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this Code. (78-36)

 

1.04.080 Effect of code on past actions and obligations.
Neither the adoption of this Code nor the repeal or amendment hereby of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the City shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee, or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee, or penalty, or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (78-36)

 

1.04.090 Effective date.
This Code shall become effective on the date the ordinance codified in this chapter, adopting this Code as the Claremont Municipal Code, shall become effective. (78-36)

 

1.04.100 Constitutionality.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code. The Council hereby declares that it would have passed this Code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. (78-36)

Chapter 1.08 GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.08.010 Code title for citation.
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated “The Municipal Code of the City of Claremont, California,” and may be so cited. (Prior code § 1.1)

 

1.08.020 Definitions and rules of construction.
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the City, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the City Council or the context clearly requires otherwise:

1.     “The City” or “this City” shall be construed as if followed by the words “of Claremont.”

2.     “The Code” or “this Code” means “The Municipal Code of the City of Claremont, California.”

3.     Computation of Time. The time in which any act provided by law is to be done is computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day is a holiday and then it is also excluded.

4.     “Council” means the City Council of the City of Claremont, California.

5.     “The county” or “this county” means the County of Los Angeles.

6.     “Day” means the period of time between any midnight and the midnight following.

7.     “Daytime” means the period of time between sunrise and sunset. “Nighttime” means the period of time between sunset and sunrise.

8.     Department, Board, Commission, Office, Officer or Employee. Whenever any department, board, commission, office, officer or employee is referred to, it means a department, board, commission, office, officer or employee of the City, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.

9.     Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.

10.   “In the City” or “within the City” means and includes all territory over which the City now has, or shall hereafter acquire, jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory powers.

11.   Joint Authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers.

12.   “Month” means a calendar month.

13.   Number. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.

14.   “Oath” includes affirmation.

15.   Official Time. Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall mean Pacific Standard Time or Daylight Saving Time, whichever may be in current use in the City.

16.   “Or” may be read “and,” and “and” may be read “or,” if the sense requires it.

17.   “Person” includes any person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business trust, corporation or company.

18.   “Personal property” includes every species of property, except real property as herein defined.

19.   “Preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after, respectively.

20.   “Process” includes a writ or summons issued in the course of judicial proceedings of either a civil or criminal nature.

21.   “Property” includes real and personal property.

22.   “Real property” includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.

23.   “Roadway” is that portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.

24.   “Shall” is mandatory and “may” is permissive.

25.   “Sidewalk” means that portion of a highway, other than the roadway, set apart for pedestrian travel.

26.   “Signature” or “subscription” includes a mark when the signer or subscriber cannot write, such signer’s or subscriber’s name being written near the mark by a witness who writes his or her own name near the signer’s or subscriber’s name; but a signature or subscription by mark can be acknowledged or can serve as a signature or subscription to a sworn statement only when two witnesses so sign their own names thereto.

27.   “The state” or “this state” shall be construed to mean the State of California.

28.   “Street” or “highway” means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.

29.   “Tenant” or “occupant,” applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies, the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others.

30.   Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future includes the present.

31.   Week. A week consists of seven consecutive days.

32.   “Writing” includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by this Code, it shall be made in writing in the English language unless it is expressly provided otherwise.

33.   “Year” means a calendar year, except where otherwise provided.

34.   “Park” or “parking” means the standing of a vehicle, where occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of, and while engaged in loading and unloading merchandise or passengers.

35.   “Vehicle” means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, street, alley or road excepting a device moved exclusively by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.

36.   “Code enforcement official” means a City employee who has been designated by the City Manager and trained to enforce designated portions of this Code and to issue citations for violations of designated portions of this Code.

37.   “Parking enforcement official” means a City employee designated by the City Manager to issue parking citations for violations of the state parking laws and the municipal parking laws. (89-16; prior code § 1.2)

 

1.08.030 Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances.
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. (Prior code § 1.3)

 

1.08.040 Effect of repeal of ordinances.
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect.

The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, not any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for any offense committed under the ordinance repealed. (Prior code § 1.4)

 

1.08.050 Severability of parts of code.
It is declared to be the intention of the City Council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. (Prior code § 1.5)

 

1.08.060 Intent of section catchlines.
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such section, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, is amended or reenacted. (Prior code § 1.6)

Chapter 1.12 GENERAL PENALTY
1.12.010 Violations of the Municipal Code.
No person, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, shall violate, cause the violation of, or otherwise fail to comply with any of the requirements of this Code. Unless a different penalty is prescribed for violation a specific provision of this Code, every act prohibited or declared unlawful, and every failure to perform an act made mandatory, shall be a misdemeanor or an infraction, at the discretion of the City Attorney or the district attorney.

In addition to the penalties provided in this chapter, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code is declared a public nuisance, and may be abated by civil proceedings such as restraining orders, civil injunctions, abatement proceedings or the like. The expense of such abatement proceedings may, by resolution of the City Council, be declared to be a lien against the property on which such nuisance is maintained, and such lien shall be made the personal obligation of the property owner. (89-16)

 

1.12.020 Penalties for violations of the Municipal Code.
A.     Misdemeanor—Penalty. Every violation of this Code which is prosecuted as a misdemeanor shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

B.     Infraction—Penalty. Every violation of this Code which is prosecuted as an infraction shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for the first offense, a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for the second offense of the same provision within one year, and a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional offense of the same provision within one year.

C.    Parking—Penalty. Every violation of this Code which involves the parking, standing or stopping of a vehicle shall be punishable by a civil penalty as established by the City through resolution. All penalties, with the exception of the overnight parking penalty in Section 10.32.210, shall increase at a progressive rate. The second offense, within one year, shall equal two times the amount of the penalty, as set by resolution, and all subsequent offenses, within one year, shall equal three times the amount of the penalty, as set by resolution.

As used in this section, the term “year” means any consecutive twelve-month period.

As used in this section, the term “offense” includes any violation of the code which is cited or charged and which does not result in:

1.     An acquittal;

2.     A finding of “not guilty”;

3.     A dismissal of charges by the City or the court. (09-15)

 

1.12.030 Continuing violations.
Each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate crime for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this Code is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm or corporation and shall be punishable accordingly. (89-16)

 

1.12.040 Code enforcement and citation authority.
A.     The City Manager and the City police department shall have the duty and authority to enforce the provisions of this Code.

B.     The City Manager may designate in writing specific additional City employees as code enforcement officials. When these code enforcement officials are designated, the designation shall specify which chapters or sections the official is authorized to enforce. These designated code enforcement officials are authorized by the City Council, pursuant to Section 832, 836.5 and 19(d) of the California Penal Code, and subject to the training provisions of subsection B(2) below, to arrest a person without warrant whenever the code enforcement official has reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has violated a provision of this Code, that the official has been designated to enforce, in the code enforcement official’s presence.

1.     In any case in which a person is arrested by a code enforcement official, the official shall issue a “Notice to Appear” and shall release such person on his or her written promise to appear in court, pursuant to Section 836.5, 853.5 and 853.6 of the California Penal Code. Under no circumstances may code enforcement officials take persons to be arrested into custody. In the event that the person to be arrested demands to be taken before a magistrate or refuses to provide his or her written promise to appear in court, code enforcement officials shall either (a) summon a police officer and request that the police officer arrest the person and take that person into custody, or (b) promptly refer the matter to the City Attorney or the prosecuting attorney and request that a complaint be prepared and filed against the person.

2.     Each code enforcement official designated to enforce this Code shall complete a course of training to be coordinated by the Chief of Police which shall include, at a minimum, training in (a) the evidentiary prerequisites to criminal prosecution, and (b) procedures for prudently exercising the code enforcement official’s arrest and citation authority.

C.    The City Manager may also designate in writing specific City employees as parking enforcement officials. The City Council, pursuant to Vehicle Code Sections 40202 and 41102, authorizes these designated parking enforcement officials to issue parking citations to enforce state laws and municipal laws that pertain to the parking or standing of vehicles. If the vehicle is unattended during the time of the violation, the parking enforcement official shall securely attach to the vehicle a notice of parking violation setting forth the following:

1.     A reference to the section of the state or municipal law violated;

2.     The approximate time of the violation;

3.     The location where the violation occurred;

4.     The vehicle license number;

5.     The registration expiration date;

6.     The color of the vehicle; and

7.     The make of the vehicle, if possible.

The notice of parking violation shall be attached to the vehicle either under the windshield wiper or in another conspicuous place upon the vehicle so as to be easily observed by the person in charge of the vehicle upon return of that person. Once the notice of parking violation has been attached to the vehicle as provided above, the notice of parking violation shall be filed with the City’s processing agency. Thenceforth, these citations shall be dealt with in the same manner as are the parking citations issued by the police department of the City. (89-16)

 

1.12.050 Manner of enforcement.
Persons who violate this Code may be cited by the City police officers, the City code enforcement officials, and/or City parking enforcement officials in accordance with the authority granted in this Code. In addition, persons who violate this Code may be charged by the City Attorney or the district attorney. Also, any violation of this Code may be dealt with by civil action such as restraining orders, injunctions, abatement proceedings, and the like.

No person shall interfere with, oppose or resist an authorized person charged with the enforcement of this Code while such person is engaged in the performance of his or her duty. (89-16)

 

1.12.060 Recovery of attorneys’ fees and costs in nuisance abatement actions.
Any activity, object, establishment, property, or facility operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to the provisions of the Claremont Municipal Code or State or Federal law or regulation shall be, and the same is hereby declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance. The City Attorney or other legal counsel retained by the City for that purpose may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement, removal, and enjoinment of such violations in the manner provided by law, and shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such violations and restrain and enjoin any person from conducting activities constituting such a public nuisance. If the City elects at the initiation of a public nuisance action to seek the recovery of its own attorney’s fees, the prevailing party in any such action shall be entitled to recover all of its reasonable costs and expenses incurred with respect to said action, including, without limitation, its costs of investigation and discovery, attorneys’ fees, and expert witness fees. (18-02)

Chapter 1.14 PROCEDURES FOR ENFORCING AND IMPOSING ADMINISTRATIVE FINES AND PENALTIES
1.14.010 Administrative fines and penalties for violations of City ordinances and codes.
Every violation of a provision of this Code, the penalty for which is defined as an “infraction” or “misdemeanor,” shall be subject to an administrative fine and/or penalty. The provisions of this chapter relating to administrative fines and penalties are in addition to all other legal remedies, criminal or civil, which may be pursued by the City to address any violation of codes, ordinances, mandates, regulations, resolutions, rules or other laws adopted by the City, or other applicable State Codes. Use of this chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the City and nothing in this chapter shall prevent the City from initiating a civil, criminal or other legal or equitable proceedings as an alternative to the proceedings set forth in the administrative fine and/or penalty provisions of this chapter. (15-08)

 

1.14.020 Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply for purposes of this chapter:

“Administrative citation” shall mean the ticket issued to a responsible person, by any enforcement officer other than a peace officer or park ranger, who has violated a provision of the City Codes.

“City” shall mean the City of Claremont.

“City Codes” shall mean any codified or non-codified ordinance or law, including, but not limited to, codes, ordinances, mandates, regulations, resolutions, and laws, adopted by the City.

“Enforcement officer” shall mean any individual who has completed a course of study of the laws of arrest as outlined in Penal Code Section 832 and who is employed or otherwise charged by the City to enforce City Codes.

“Hearing officer” shall mean the person designated by the City Manager or designee to determine the validity of an administrative citation after the person to whom the citation was issued requests a hearing.

“Park ranger” shall mean any individual, other than a peace officer, who is employed or otherwise charged by the City to enforce City Codes and who has completed a course of study of the laws of arrest as outlined in Penal Code Section 832.

“Peace officer” shall mean a sworn officer of the City of Claremont Police Department.

“Person” shall mean any individual who has violated any of the City Codes or any individual or corporation, partnership, association or other group or combination of individuals acting as an entity that has an ownership or leasehold interest in real property, or has a contractual obligation to lease or maintain real property, where a violation of the City Codes has occurred or continues to occur.

“Police administrative citation” shall mean the ticket issued to a person by a park ranger or a peace officer. (15-08)

 

1.14.025 Violations of the City Codes.
It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision of the City Codes. Whenever an enforcement officer, peace officer, or park ranger finds that a provision of the City Codes has been violated, the enforcement officer, peace officer, or park ranger may issue a citation contemplated and allowed by this chapter to such person responsible for the violation. (15-08)

 

1.14.026 Violations of Chapter 12.26 City Trees.
It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision of Chapter 12.26 of this Code. In addition to those authorized to enforce all provisions of this Code, if the City’s designated arborist finds that a provision of Chapter 12.26 has been violated, the City’s arborist may issue a citation contemplated and allowed by this chapter to such person responsible for the violation. (15-11)

 

1.14.030 Administrative citations and notices of violations.
A.     Each administrative citation shall state the fine and/or penalty owed to the City as a result of the violation. The administrative citation shall be in writing and may provide, at the enforcement officer’s discretion, a reasonable period of time of no more than thirty (30) calendar days, to correct or otherwise remedy the violation prior to the effective date of an administrative fine and/or penalty. If the citation contains a discretionary period of time in which to remedy the violation, and if the person cited provides proof to the City Manager or designee, that the violation has been corrected or otherwise remedied within the period of time allotted for correction, then no fines or penalties shall be assessed and the administrative citation shall be deemed null and void.

B.     Each administrative citation issued to a person shall contain, in a form determined by the City, the following:

 

1.     The date of the violation.

2.     The address or a legal description of the location where the violation occurred.

3.     The section of the City Codes violated and a description of the violation.

4.     A description of the action required to correct the violation, if applicable.

 

5.     The number of days provided to correct or otherwise remedy the violation prior to the imposition of fines and/or penalties, if applicable.

6.     The amount of the fine and type of penalty assessed for the violation.

7.     A description of the fine/penalty payment process, including a description of the time within which and the place to which the fine and/or penalty shall be paid.

8.     An order prohibiting the continuation or repeated occurrence of the violation described in the administrative citation.

9.     A description of the administrative citation review process, including the time within which the administrative citation may be contested and the place from which a request for hearing may be obtained.

10.   The name and signature of the citing enforcement officer.

C.    Service of the administrative citation shall be made by: (1) personal service on the person in any of the various ways that a person may be served with a summons in a civil action pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 415.10, as such may be amended from time to time; or (2) certified mail, return receipt requested. When certified mail is used, service shall be complete at the time the citation is deposited into the United States mail; or (3) in instances when personal service or certified mail is not possible, then service shall be provided by publishing a notice in a newspaper of general circulation and posting an 8-1/2″ x 11″ enlargement of the administrative citation in a conspicuous location on or in front of the property.

D.    The City Manager shall have the authority to retract any administrative citation that he or she determines was erroneously issued. A log of all administrative citations that are retracted shall be maintained by the City. (14-07)

 

1.14.035 Recording notices of violation.
A.     Whenever the enforcement officer determines that a violation of the City Codes or applicable State Codes exists, the enforcement official may issue a notice of violation to a responsible person which may include the property owner and/or a financial institution with an interest in the land. The notice of violation shall include the following information:

1.     The street address of the property;

2.     The name of the property’s owner of record;

3.     The code sections in violation;

4.     A description of the property’s condition which violates the applicable codes;

5.     A list of necessary corrections to bring the property into compliance;

6.     A deadline or specific date to correct the violations listed in the notice of violation;

7.     Reference to the potential consequences should the property remain in violation after the expiration of the compliance deadline including, but not limited to, administrative abatement, civil penalties, revocation of permits, recordation of the notice of violation, the withholding of future municipal permits, criminal prosecution and civil injunction.

 

B.     Once the enforcement officer has issued a notice of violation to any person and the property remains in violation after the deadline established in the notice of violation, the enforcement officer may record a notice of violation with the recorder’s office of Los Angeles County.

1.     Before recordation, the enforcement officer shall provide to the responsible person a letter stating that a notice of violation will be recorded, unless a written request to appeal pursuant to the procedures outlined in subsection D is filed. The letter shall be served pursuant to any of the methods of service set forth in subsection C. The enforcement officer may also send a courtesy copy of the letter to any applicable financial institution.

2.     If the enforcement officer does not receive the written request to appeal pursuant to the procedures set forth below, the enforcement officer may record the notice of violation if the violations remain.

3.     The recorded notice of violation shall include the name of the property owner, the property’s assessor’s parcel number, the parcel’s legal description, and a copy of the latest notice of violation.

C.    A copy of the recorded notice of violation shall be served on the responsible person and property owner pursuant to any of the methods of service set forth as follows:

1.     Posting a notice in a conspicuous place on or in front of the property in question and by either one of the following methods:

a.     By personal service on the owner(s); or

b.     By registered or certified mail addressed to the owner(s) of the property at their last-known address. If there is no known address for the owner, lessee, occupant and other person having charge or control of the property, the notice shall be sent to the property address. Service shall be completed at the time of deposit into the United States mail.

D.    Appeal procedures are as follows:

1.     An appeal of the enforcement officer’s letter to record the notice of violation shall follow the procedures set forth in Sections 8.16.050 and 8.16.060 of this Code.

2.     The failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with these provisions shall constitute a waiver of the right to an administrative hearing and shall not affect the validity of the recorded notice of violation.

E.     Appeal hearing shall be as follows:

1.     Upon receiving a written appeal, the enforcement officer shall request the City Manager appoint a hearing officer and schedule a hearing pursuant to Section 8.16.080 of this title. The purpose of the hearing is for the responsible person or property owner to state any reasons why a notice of violation should not be recorded.

2.     At the appeal hearing, the hearing officer shall only consider evidence that is consistent with the City Manager’s rules and procedures for administrative enforcement hearings and that is relevant to the following issues:

a.     Whether the conditions listed in the notice of violation violate City Codes or applicable State Codes; and

b.     Whether the enforcement officer afforded the responsible person with due process by adhering to the notification procedures specified in Section 8.16.080 of this Code.

c.     If the enforcement hearing officer affirms the enforcement official’s decision, the enforcement officer may proceed to record the notice of violation.

d.     If the hearing officer determines that the recordation is improper, the hearing officer shall invalidate the enforcement officer’s decision to record the notice of violation.

F.     Notice of compliance procedures shall be as follows:

1.     When the violations listed on the notice of violation have been corrected, the responsible person or property owner may file with the enforcement officer a written request for a notice of compliance.

2.     Once the enforcement officer receives this request, the enforcement official shall re-inspect the property within thirty (30) calendar days to determine whether the violations listed in the notice of violation have been corrected and whether all necessary permits have been issued and final inspections have been performed.

3.     The enforcement officer shall serve a notice of compliance to the responsible person or property owner in the manner provided in subsection C of this chapter if the enforcement officer determines that:

a.     All violations listed in the recorded notice of violation have been corrected; and

b.     All necessary permits have been issued and finalized; and

c.     All civil penalties assessed against the property have been paid; and

d.     The party requesting the notice of compliance has paid an administrative fee to reimburse the city for all administrative costs.

4.     Administrative costs may include costs incurred in the investigation, inspection, re-inspection, title search, appeal hearing and any other processing costs associated with the violations specified on the notice of violation.

G.    If the enforcement officer denies a request to issue a notice of compliance, the enforcement officer shall serve the responsible person or property owner with a written explanation setting forth the reasons for the denial. The written explanation shall be served by any of the methods of service set forth in subsection C of this section. The enforcement officer’s decision denying a request to issue a notice of compliance constitutes the final decision in the matter and is not appealable.

H.    The City of Claremont may withhold permits for any alteration, repair or construction pertaining to any existing or new structures or signs on the property identified in the notice of violation, or any permits pertaining to the use and development of the real property or the structure if a request to appeal has not been timely filed; or after an enforcement hearing officer affirms the enforcement officer’s decision to record a notice of violation. The City of Claremont may withhold permits until a notice of compliance has been issued by the enforcement officer. The City of Claremont may not withhold permits which are necessary to obtain a notice of compliance or which are necessary to correct serious health and safety violations.

I.      The Director shall issue a signed notice of compliance stating that it cancels the notice of violation once all violations have been corrected and all fines, penalties, and costs have been paid. The notice of compliance shall be recorded by the City, or by the property owner by the request of the property owner. The recordation of the notice of compliance shall have the effect of canceling the recorded notice of violation. (14-07)

 

1.14.037 Police administrative citations—Requests for hearing and hearing on police administrative citations.
A.     Each police administrative citation shall assess a fine or penalty owed to the City as a result of the violation. Each police administrative citation shall be issued and delivered by a park ranger or peace officer in-person to the responsible person at the time of the violation. Each police administrative citation issued shall contain, in a form determined by the City, the following:

1.     The date of the violation.

2.     The address or a legal description of the location where the violation occurred.

3.     The section of the City Codes violated and a description of the violation.

4.     The amount of the fine and type of penalty assessed for the violation.

5.     A description of the fine/penalty payment process, including a description of the time within which and the place to which the fine and/or penalty shall be paid.

6.     A description of the police administrative citation appeal procedures, including the time within which the police administrative citation may be contested and the place from which a request for hearing may be obtained.

7.     The name and signature of the citing park ranger or peace officer.

B.     An appeal of a police administrative citation shall follow the following procedure:

1.     For a period of twenty-one (21) calendar days from the date of issuance of a police administrative citation, a person may request an initial review of the police administrative citation by the City of Claremont Police Department. The request may be made by telephone, in writing, or in-person. There shall be no charge for this initial review. The request shall include a detailed explanation as to why the police administrative citation is being contested. The request shall contain an address to which all notices and other correspondence concerning the request shall be sent. The initial review shall be performed by City of Claremont Police Department personnel designated by the Chief of Police. The questions before the personnel designated to initially review a police administrative citation shall be based upon all evidence reasonably available to the reviewer, including any documentation or other evidence in possession of the Police Department and any documentation or other evidence provided by the person requesting the initial review, whether the violation(s) of the City Codes listed on the police administrative citation occurred; and whether the person who was issued the police administrative citation is responsible for some or all of the violation(s) of the City Codes listed on the police administrative citation. If, following the initial review, the reviewer is satisfied that any listed violation did not occur, or the police administrative citation was written in error, the reviewer shall cancel the police administrative citation, and notify all parties, including any designee of the City of Claremont Police Department as described in this section, if any, of the cancellation. The City of Claremont Police Department shall mail the results of the initial review to the person contesting the police administrative citation by mail to the address provided by the person at the time the request for the initial review was made, and, if following that initial review, cancellation of the police administrative citation does not occur, include a reason for that denial and notification of the ability to request an administrative hearing.

2.     If, after the initial review the police administrative citation is not wholly cancelled by the designated reviewer, and the person is satisfied with the results of the initial review, the fine and/or penalty on the police administrative citation shall become due and payable subject to the payment schedule and late fees outlined in Section 1.14.050(B) of this chapter. If, however, the person is dissatisfied with the results of the initial review, the person may request further review by way of an administrative hearing of the violation no later than twenty-one (21) calendar days following the date of mailing of the results of the initial review. The request for an administrative hearing may be made by telephone, in writing, or in-person and shall include the address for which all communication regarding the administrative hearing shall be sent. The person requesting an administrative hearing shall deposit the full amount of the fine and/or penalty for the police administrative citation and shall deposit an administrative hearing fee with the City of Claremont Police Department or designee. The amount of the administrative hearing fee shall be established from time to time by resolution of the City Council. An administrative hearing shall be held within sixty (60) calendar days following the receipt of a request for an administrative hearing, excluding time tolled pursuant to this section. The City of Claremont Police Department or designee shall provide notice of the administrative hearing either by mail or personal service to the person requesting the hearing at the address provided with the request for an administrative hearing. Service shall be completed at the time of personal service or at the time of deposit of such notice into the United States mail. The person requesting the hearing shall be notified of the time and place set for the hearing at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing.

3.     The administrative hearing process shall include the following:

a.     The person requesting a hearing shall have the choice of a hearing by mail or in-person. An in-person hearing shall be conducted within the jurisdiction of the City of Claremont.

b.     If the person requesting a hearing is a minor, that person shall be permitted to appear at a hearing or admit responsibility for the police citation violation. However, the minor’s parent or legal guardian must also be present at the time of the administrative hearing. The City of Claremont Police Department or designee may proceed against the minor in the same manner as against an adult.

c.     The administrative hearing shall be conducted in accordance with written procedures, including the recording and/or transcription of the administrative hearing proceedings, as established by the City of Claremont or designee insofar as they are not inconsistent with this section. The hearing shall provide an independent, objective, fair, and impartial review of the contested police citation violations. The purpose of the administrative hearing is for the person who was issued the police administrative citation to offer evidence to prove that the violation listed in the police administrative citation did not occur and that the person is not responsible for the violation. At the administrative hearing, all persons contesting the validity of a police administrative citation shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence concerning the police administrative citation. The hearing officer shall only consider evidence that is relevant to whether the violation of the City Codes listed on the police citation occurred and whether the person who was issued the police administrative citation is responsible for the violation of the City Codes listed on the police administrative citation.

i.      Hearing Officers/Examiners shall demonstrate those qualifications, training, and objectivity necessary to conduct a fair and impartial review. An examiner shall not be employed, managed, or controlled by an individual whose primary duties are the enforcement of municipal codes or municipal code citation, processing, collection, or issuance. The examiner shall be separate and independent from the police administrative citation collection or processing function. An examiner’s continued employment, performance evaluation, compensation, and benefits shall not, directly or indirectly, be linked to the amount of fines collected by the examiner or the percentage of police administrative citations that the examiner affirms. Examiners shall have a minimum of twenty (20) hours of training. The examiner is responsible for the costs of the training. The City of Claremont or designee may reimburse the examiner for those reasonable training costs. Training may be provided through: (A) an accredited college or university; (B) a program conducted by the Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training; (C) the American Arbitration Association or a similar established organization; or (D) through any program approved by the City Manager of the City of Claremont, including a program developed and provided by, or for, the City of Claremont.

ii.     Training programs may include topics relevant to the administrative hearing, including, but not limited to, applicable laws and regulations, municipal code enforcement procedures, due process, evaluation of evidence, hearing procedures, and effective oral and written communication. Upon the approval of the City of Claremont Police Department or designee, up to twelve (12) hours of relevant experience may be substituted for up to twelve (12) hours of training. In addition, up to eight hours of the training requirements described in this subparagraph may be credited to an individual, at the discretion of the City of Claremont Police Department or designee, based upon training programs or courses described in subsections (B)(3)(c)(i)(A) to (D), inclusive, that the individual attended within the last five years.

4.     The park ranger or peace officer who issues a police administrative citation shall not be required to participate in an administrative hearing. The City of Claremont Police Department shall not be required to produce any evidence other than the police citation or copy thereof. The documentation in proper form shall be prima facie evidence of the violation.

5.     After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the administrative hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision to affirm or cancel the police administrative citation. The written decision shall include the hearing officer’s findings for that decision, as well as information regarding the recipient’s appeal rights to the courts. The recipient of the police administrative citation shall be served with a copy of the hearing officer’s written decision in-person or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address provided by such recipient at the time of the request for the administrative hearing. The decision of the hearing officer shall be the City’s final administrative decision.

6.     If the hearing officer determines that the police administrative citation should be affirmed, the fine and/or penalty and hearing fee amount on deposit with the City of Claremont Police Department or designee shall be retained.

7.     If the hearing officer determines that the police administrative citation should be canceled, the fine and/or penalty shall be deemed null and void and the fine and/or payment and hearing fee deposit shall, within thirty (30) calendar days, be refunded to the person. No hearing costs shall be assessed against the person.

8.     The failure of a person who has been issued a police administrative citation to request an initial review of a police administrative citation or to request an administrative hearing after the initial review as provided in this section shall constitute a waiver of the person’s right to an initial review and to an administrative hearing and the City shall have the right to collect the fine or penalty prescribed on the police administrative citation in accordance with this chapter, which right shall be unaffected by the person’s failure to request a hearing.

9.     Failure of the person contesting the police administrative citation to appear at the administrative hearing shall constitute forfeiture of the fine and/or penalty, and hearing fee, on deposit and paid, and a failure to exhaust his or her administrative remedies.

10.   The hearing officer may continue the administrative hearing from time to time. In addition, the hearing officer may request additional information or evidence from the peace officer, park ranger, or the recipient of the police administrative citation prior to issuing a written decision. (15-08)

 

1.14.040 Amount of fines and penalties.
The amount of fines and penalties for violations of City Codes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be established by resolution of the City Council. (14-07)

 

1.14.050 Payment of fines.
A.     All fines and penalties pursuant to any administrative citation shall be paid to the City within thirty (30) calendar days from the effective date of the administrative citation. The effective date of an administrative citation shall be the date the citation is issued, unless the enforcement officer granted an opportunity for the person cited to correct the violation. Where a correction period has been granted, the effective date of the administrative citation shall be on the final date of the correction period, if the person has not corrected the violation. Nothing in this subsection shall in any way prohibit the City from using all available legal means to collect any past due fines, penalties and other costs, including late fees, related to issuing administrative citations and collecting the fines and penalties therefor.

B.     All fines and penalties pursuant to any police administrative citation shall be paid to the City within twenty-one (21) calendar days from the date of issuance of the police administrative citation or, if the person requests an initial review of the police administrative citation and the initial review does not result in the cancellation of the police administrative citation and no further administrative hearing is requested by the person as provided in this chapter, within twenty-one (21) calendar days from the date on which the City of Claremont Police Department mails the results of the initial review to the person contesting the police administrative citation. The failure of any person to pay in full the fine or penalty assessed by any police administrative citation within the time periods prescribed by this section, shall result in the assessment of a separate late fee to the person as penalty for failure to timely pay the police administrative citation fine or penalty. The amount of this late fee shall be fifty percent (50%) of the original fine or penalty assessed by the police administrative citation for the first twenty-four (24) days after the expiration of the original time period prescribed by this section for payment of the original fine or penalty (a total of forty-five (45) calendar days), or, if the fine or penalty assessed by the police administrative citation continues to remain unpaid in full after these forty-five (45) calendar days, the amount of the late fee shall be one hundred percent (100%) of the original fine or penalty assessed by the police administrative citation and shall remain this amount for every day thereafter. Nothing in this subsection shall in any way prohibit the City from using all available legal means to collect any past due fines, penalties and other costs, including late fees, related to issuing police administrative citations and collecting the fines and penalties therefor.

C.    Any administrative citation or police administrative citation fine or penalty paid pursuant to this chapter shall be refunded if it is determined, after hearing, that the person charged was not the person responsible for the violation or there was no violation as charged in the administrative citation or police administrative citation.

D.    Payment of a fine or penalty under this chapter shall not excuse or discharge any continuation or repeated occurrence of a violation of the City Codes that is the subject of an administrative citation or police administrative citation.

E.     The City may use all available legal means to collect any past due fines, penalties and other costs related to issuing the administrative citations and police administrative citations and collecting the fines and penalties, including, but not limited to, contracting with collection agencies, filing liens and seeking judgments in court. (15-08)

 

1.14.060 Request for hearing for administrative citations.
A.     Any person issued an administrative citation by an enforcement officer may contest that a violation of the City Code has not occurred or that he or she is not responsible for the violation. A person cited may request an administrative hearing by filing a written request for hearing no later than fifteen (15) calendar days from the effective date of the administrative citation. The written request shall include a detailed written explanation as to why the administrative citation is being contested.

 

B.     The person to whom an administrative citation is issued shall deposit the amount of the fine and/or penalty specified on the administrative citation with the City Clerk at the time he or she returns the request for hearing form, or he or she shall request an advance deposit hardship waiver pursuant to Section 1.14.070 of this chapter.

C.    The person requesting the hearing shall be notified of the time and place set for the hearing at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. The hearing shall be set for a date that is not less than fifteen (15) calendar days from the date that a completed request for administrative hearing is filed in accordance with the above provisions.

D.    No hearing shall be held unless and until the fine or penalty has been deposited with the City Clerk or an advance deposit hardship waiver has been issued. If the person contesting an administrative citation prevails in a challenge to the citation, the City shall within thirty (30) calendar days refund the full amount of the fine or penalty deposited. (14-07)

 

1.14.070 Deposit hardship waivers for administrative citations.
A.     Any person who intends to request an administrative hearing, with respect to an administrative citation only, and is financially unable to make the advance deposit of the fine or penalty as required herein, may file a request for an advance deposit hardship waiver.

B.     A person may request an advance hardship waiver by completing an advance deposit hardship waiver form and returning the form to the City Clerk.

C.    The City Manager may waive the requirement of an advance deposit and issue the advance deposit hardship waiver only if the applicant submits the required advance deposit hardship waiver form and includes a sworn affidavit and any supporting documents or materials demonstrating to the satisfaction of the City Manager that it would be a significant financial detriment on the recipient of the administrative citation to deposit the full amount of the fine or penalty in advance of the hearing. The requirement for depositing the full amount of the fine or penalty shall be sustained unless or until the City Manager makes this determination. In making this determination, the City Manager shall use the same criteria used by the courts to determine whether to waive filing fees. The City Clerk shall serve written notice of the City Manager’s determination on the recipient of the administrative citation by certified mail, return receipt requested. Service shall be deemed complete at the time the notice is deposited into the mail and addressed to the person at the address indicated on the administrative hearing request form. The notice shall include a brief description of the reasons for the City Manager’s determination to issue or not issue the advance deposit hardship waiver. The written determination of the City Manager shall be final.

D.    If the City Manager determines not to issue an advance deposit hardship waiver, the recipient of the administrative citation shall remit the deposit amount to the City Clerk within ten (10) days of service of that decision, or thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the administrative decision, whichever is sooner. (14-07)

 

1.14.080 Hearing officer for administrative citations.
The City Manager shall designate the hearing officer for the administrative citation hearings. (14-07)

1.14.090 Hearing procedure for administrative citations.
A.     All hearings on administrative citations shall be held before the hearing officer designated pursuant to Section 1.14.080 of this chapter.

B.     At the hearing, all persons contesting the validity of an administrative citation shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence concerning the administrative citation.

C.    If the enforcement officer submits an additional written report concerning the administrative citation to the hearing officer, then a copy of this report shall be served on the person requesting the hearing by certified mail, return receipt requested at least five calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. Service shall be deemed complete at the time the report is deposited into the mail and addressed to the person at the address indicated on the administrative hearing request form.

D.    Failure of the party contesting the administrative citation to appear at the hearing shall constitute forfeiture of the fine and a failure to exhaust his or her administrative remedies.

E.     The administrative citation and any additional report submitted by the enforcement officer shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents.

F.     The hearing officer may continue the hearing from time to time and provide the person with additional time in which to remedy the violation. In addition, the hearing officer may request additional information or evidence from the enforcement officer or the recipient of the administrative citation prior to issuing a written decision.

G.    All hearings shall be recorded by a video or audio device, unless the City decides to utilize a court reporter. If a court reporter is not utilized, the City is not required to provide transcriptions of any hearings, but is required to make the video or audio tape(s) available to the person cited within thirty (30) days after the hearing. The City may charge a reasonable fee for reproducing the tapes. If a court reporter is utilized, the recipient of the administrative citation may obtain a copy of the transcript upon payment of any applicable reasonable fees or costs. The City may destroy such tapes or transcripts following the time during which any and all appeals of the administrative citation shall have been made.

H.    The hearings need not be conducted in accordance with technical rules of evidence. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence, but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in a civil action in a California court of competent jurisdiction. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type on which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might consider such admission improper in a civil action. Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation. Irrelevant or unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded.

I.      After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision to affirm or cancel the administrative citation. The written decision shall include the hearing officer’s findings for that decision, as well as information regarding the recipient’s appeal rights to the courts. The recipient of the administrative citation shall be served with a copy of the hearing officer’s written decision by certified mail, return receipt requested. The decision of the hearing officer shall be the City’s final administrative decision.

J.     If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be affirmed, the fine and/or penalty amount on deposit with the City shall be retained by the City. In addition, the hearing officer shall assess the hearing costs associated with holding the hearing.

K.     If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be upheld, but the fine and/or penalty has not been deposited pursuant to an advance deposit hardship waiver, the hearing officer shall set forth in the decision a payment schedule for the fine and/or penalty as well as the hearing costs associated with holding the hearing.

L.     If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation was erroneously issued, the fine or penalty shall be deemed null and void and the City shall, within thirty (30) calendar days, refund the amount of the deposited fine or penalty. In addition, no hearing costs shall be assessed by the City. (14-07)

 

1.14.100 Recovery of abatement costs.
The administrative and police citation processes described in this chapter do not preclude the City from recovering any City Code violation or nuisance abatement costs, including attorneys’ fees as provided by this Code, incurred by the City in performing its code enforcement and nuisance abatement efforts pursuant to this Code. (14-07)

 

1.14.110 Right to judicial review.
Any person aggrieved by the administrative decision of a hearing officer may obtain review of the administrative decision by filing a petition for review with the Superior Court in Los Angeles County in accordance with the provisions set forth in California Government Code Section 53069.4. (14-07)

 

1.14.120 Notices for administrative citations.
Any and all notices or decisions required to be given by the administrative provisions of this chapter for administrative citations, as the term is defined in this chapter, shall be served on the person cited by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notices or decisions shall be addressed to the recipient at the last known address for that person, including the address provided on forms or writings required by the administrative provisions of this chapter. Personal service may be substituted for mailed notice any time. Actual notice shall be deemed adequate notice regardless of the method of service. Failure to receive any notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings conducted hereunder. (14-07)

Chapter 1.15 PROCEDURES FOR IMPOSING A LIEN ON REAL PROPERTY TO COLLECT ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS RELATED TO HOUSING, BUILDING, AND ZONING VIOLATIONS
1.15.010 Imposition of lien on real property to collect administrative costs.
The City, in addition to any other legally available remedy, may collect any fee, cost, or charge incurred in the abatement of public nuisances and in the enforcement of state and local housing, building, and zoning laws, codes, and regulations with respect to construction or land use activities, by making the amount of any unpaid fee, cost or charge a lien against the property that is the subject of the enforcement activity. (03-07)

 

1.15.020 Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply for purposes of this chapter:

“Administrative costs” shall mean the actual cost incurred by the City in performing the inspections, enforcement, and/or abatement activity related to the actions listed in Section 1.15.030 of this Code, including the City’s incidental and direct administrative expenses and any permit fees, late charges, interest, fines and penalties authorized under this Code.

“Enforcement officer” shall mean any individual employed or otherwise charged by the City to enforce codes, ordinances, resolutions, mandates, laws, regulations, or rules within the City.

“Hearing officer” shall mean the hearing officer designated by the City Council to make a recommendation to the City Council regarding a notice of proposed lien.

“Notice of proposed lien” shall mean the notice provided to a responsible party for the administrative costs associated with the violation of any ordinance, law, or regulation set forth under Section 1.15.030 of this Code.

“Responsible person” shall mean any individual or corporation, partnership, association, or other group or combination of individuals acting as an entity, that has an ownership or leasehold interest in the subject property, or has a contractual obligation to lease or maintain the subject property.

 

“Subject property” shall mean the property that is the subject of the enforcement activity where one or more violations of any ordinance, law or regulation set forth under Section 1.15.030 of this Code has occurred or continues to occur. (03-07)

 

1.15.030 Assessment and collection of administrative costs.
Pursuant to Section 54988 of the Government Code and in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter, the City may assess and collect all administrative costs resulting from the following:

A.     Abatement of a public nuisance;

B.     Correction of any violation of any law or regulation that would also be a violation of Section 1941.1 of the Civil Code;

C.    Enforcement of zoning ordinances adopted pursuant to Chapter 4 of Division 1 of Title 7 of the Government Code;

D.    Inspection and abatement of violations of the State Housing Law, as set forth in Part 1.5 of Division 13 of the Health and Safety Code and any regulations adopted pursuant thereto;

E.     Inspection and abatement of violations of the California Building Standards Code, as set forth in Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations; or

F.     Inspection and abatement of violations of any section of this Code that implements or is authorized pursuant to the foregoing provisions of state law. (03-07)

 

1.15.040 Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to owner-occupied residential dwelling units or any enforcement, abatement, or correction that is evident in any final building plans filed with the City for which a building permit was issued. (03-07)

 

1.15.050 Notice of proposed lien.
A.     Prior to placing a lien on the subject property for the recovery of administrative costs, as authorized by Section 1.15.030 of this Code, the enforcement officer shall issue a notice of proposed lien to the responsible party.

B.     The notice of proposed lien shall contain, in a form determined by the City, the following:

1.     The date(s) of violation(s).

2.     The address, or if no address is available, a description of the location where the violation(s) occurred.

3.     A description of the applicable violation(s) of the ordinances, laws, or regulations set forth in Section 1.15.030 of this Code.

4.     The description and amount of all administrative costs related to the violation(s).

5.     A description of the process for paying the administrative costs, including the time within which and the place to which the administrative costs shall be paid.

 

6.     A description of the process for requesting a hearing on the notice of proposed lien, including the time within which such request must be filed and the place from which a request may be obtained.

7.     The name and signature of the citing enforcement officer.

C.    Service of the notice of proposed lien shall be made by:

1.     Personal service on the responsible person in any of the various ways that a person may be served with a summons in a civil action pursuant to Section 415.10 of the Civil Code;

2.     Certified mail, return receipt requested; or

3.     In instances when personal service or certified mail is not possible, then service shall be provided by publishing a notice in a newspaper of general circulation and posting an     8-1/2″ x 11″ enlargement of the notice of costs in a conspicuous location on or in front of the subject property.

Unless a different date of effectiveness is provided in the notice of proposed lien, the effective date shall be as follows: (a) if personal service is made, notice shall be effective upon actual service, (b) if certified mail is used, notice shall be effective at the time of deposit in the United States mail, or (c) if publishing and posting is used, notice shall be effective at the time both the publication and posting are complete. (03-07)

 

1.15.060 Amount of administrative costs.
The enforcement officer shall calculate the amount of the administrative costs imposed pursuant to this chapter by totaling all costs and expenses described in Section 1.15.020. The enforcement officer shall keep an account of the administrative costs and shall prepare a written, itemized report showing the administrative costs and shall maintain such report in the City’s file for the subject property. (03-07)

 

1.15.070 Time for payment of administrative costs.
A.     All administrative costs listed in a notice of proposed lien shall be paid to the City within forty-five (45) calendar days after the effective date of the notice of proposed lien.

B.     Any payment of administrative costs paid pursuant to this section shall be refunded if it is determined, after a hearing conducted pursuant to Section 1.15.090 of this Code, that the person charged was not the responsible person or the violation that created the administrative costs specified in the notice of proposed lien did not occur.

C.    Payment of any administrative costs shall not excuse or discharge any continuation or repeated occurrence of a violation of the ordinances, laws, or regulations set forth in Section 1.15.030 of this Code. (03-07)

 

1.15.080 Imposition of lien.
A.     If the administrative costs listed in a notice of proposed lien are not paid within forty-five (45) calendar days from the effective date of the notice of proposed lien and the responsible person does not request a hearing pursuant to Section 1.15.090, the amount of all unpaid administrative costs may become a lien against the subject property described in the notice if the City Council takes action, as described in Section 1.15.110. If the time for payment of the administrative costs as set forth in Section 1.15.070 expires and the responsible person has not requested a hearing pursuant to Section 1.15.090 of this Code, the enforcement officer shall make a written recommendation to the City Council for a proposed lien against the subject property.

B.     The imposition of a lien under this chapter shall not prohibit the City from using any other available legal means to collect any past due administrative costs, including contracting with collection agencies and seeking judgment in court. (03-07)

 

1.15.090 Request for hearing.
Any responsible person issued a notice of proposed lien by an enforcement officer may request a hearing to contest the violation(s) of the ordinances, laws, or regulations set forth in Section 1.15.030 of this Code, or contest that he or she is not responsible for the violation. The responsible person may request a hearing by following the procedures set forth in Sections 1.14.060 and 1.14.070 of this Code, except that the term “administrative citation” used therein shall mean a “notice of proposed lien,” and the terms “fine” or “penalty” used therein shall mean “administrative costs.” (03-07)

 

1.15.100 Hearing procedure.
A.     All hearings requested pursuant to Section 1.15.090 of this Code shall be held before the hearing officer. The hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 1.14.090 of this Code, except that the term “administrative citation” used therein shall mean a “notice of proposed lien.”

B.     After considering all the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a written recommendation to the City Council, which shall include factual findings based on the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing.

C.    The recommendation of the hearing officer shall be delivered to the responsible person by certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten (10) days before the City Council shall consider such recommendation. Such notice shall also include the date and time at which the City Council shall consider the hearing officer’s recommendation. (03-07)

 

1.15.110 Action by City Council.
A.     Upon receipt of the written recommendation from the hearing officer or the enforcement officer, the City Council may adopt the recommendation or it may set the matter for a new hearing before the City Council.

B.     If the City Council sets the matter for a new hearing, written notice shall be provided to the responsible person by certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten (10) calendar days in advance of the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 1.15.100 of this Code.

C.    If, either upon recommendation by the hearing officer or enforcement officer or after conducting a new hearing, the City Council determines that the proposed lien shall become a lien against the subject property, the City Council may cause a notice of lien to be recorded. The notice shall include the following:

1.     Identify the record owner or possessor of the subject property;

2.     Set forth the last known address of the record owner or possessor;

3.     Set forth the date upon which the lien was created against the subject property; and

4.     Include a description of the real property subject to the lien and the amount of the lien.

D.    The lien shall attach upon recordation in the office of the County Recorder and shall have the same force, priority, and effect as a judgment lien, not a tax lien. (03-07)

 

1.15.112 Judicial review.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the City Council pursuant to this chapter may obtain review of the decision by filing a petition for review in a court of competent jurisdiction in County of Los Angeles, in accordance with applicable provisions of state law. (03-07)

Chapter 1.16 PROCEDURES FOR FILING CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY
1.16.010 State provisions and applicability of chapter.
The provisions of this chapter recognize that the general claim procedures applicable to the City and all local public agencies are governed by the provisions of the California Government Code, Chapters 1 and 2, Part 3, Division 3.6 of Title 1, commencing with Section 900 et seq. The provisions of this chapter are enacted pursuant to Government Code Section 935 and shall apply to all claims against the City for money or damages, including all claims which are excepted by Government Code Section 905 which specifically includes, but is not limited to, claims for tax refunds, provided that such claims are not governed by any other statutes or regulations. (14-07)

 

1.16.020 Presentation of claims—Prerequisite for bringing suit.
No suit subject to this chapter may be brought against the City until a written claim, verified by the claimant, has been presented to the City Council and has been acted upon by the City Council or designee or has been deemed to be rejected. Any action brought against the City on a claim after the claim as been presented to and acted upon by the City shall be subject to the provisions of Government Code Sections 945.6 and 946. (14-07)

 

1.16.030 Time limitation for presentation of claims.
Pursuant to Government Code Section 911.2, any claim subject to this chapter shall be presented within the following time limitations:

A.     A claim relating to a cause of action for death, or for injury to person or to personal property, or for injury to growing crops, shall be presented not later than six months after the accrual of the cause of action.

B.     A claim relating to any other cause of action shall be presented not later than one year after the accrual of the cause of action.

C.    A tax or assessment refund claim shall be deemed to accrue as of the date of payment of the tax or assessment. (14-07)

 

1.16.040 Contents of claim—Review for sufficiency.
A claim shall be presented to the City Clerk by the claimant or a person acting on the claimant’s behalf and shall show all information as required by Government Code Section 910. All claims shall be verified by claimant or by his or her guardian, conservator, executor or administrator. No claim shall be filed on behalf of a class of persons unless verified by every member of that class. The City Manager, or designee, shall review all claims for sufficiency of information. The City Manager, or designee, may, within twenty (20) days of receipt of a claim, either deliver personally to claimant, or by regular mail or electronic mail, a notice stating deficiencies in the claim presented. If such notice is delivered or sent to claimant, the City shall not act upon the claim until at least fifteen (15) days after such notice is delivered or sent. (14-07)

 

1.16.050 Authority of City Manager.
Pursuant to California Government Code Section 935.4, the City Council delegates authority to the City Manager and designee to review all claims for sufficiency and to reject any and all claims. The City Council delegates to the City Manager authority to allow, compromise, or settle claims, including claims for workers’ compensation, up to two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). The City Council shall have sole authority to allow, compromise, or settle claims for an amount in excess of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). (14-07)

 

1.16.060 Time for action by City—Time for commencement of lawsuit.
A.     Pursuant to Government Code Section 912.4, the City Council or City Manager, or designee, shall act on a claim within forty-five (45) days after the claim has been presented. Written notice of action taken on a claim by the City Council or City Manager, or designee, shall be provided to the claimant, in accordance with Government Code Sections 913 and 915.4. If the claim is not acted upon within forty-five (45) days, it shall be deemed to have been rejected on the forty-fifth (45th) day. By mutual agreement of the claimant and the City Council or City Manager, or designee, such forty-five (45) day period may be extended by written agreement. If the forty-five (45) day period is extended by written agreement and the claim is not acted upon within the extended time, the claim shall be deemed to be rejected on the last day of the extended period specified in the extension agreement.

B.     Pursuant to Government Code Section 945.6, any lawsuit brought against the City for which a claim is required to be presented must be commenced within the following time limits:

1.     Six months after the date the City’s written notice of its action on the claim is personally delivered or deposited in the mail.

2.     Two years from the accrual of the cause of action, if no written notice is given in accordance with this section. (14-07)

 

1.16.070 Application to file a late claim.
Any claimant who fails to file a claim within the time period required in this chapter may submit a written application to the City for leave to present a late claim, pursuant to Government Code Section 911.4. The City Manager, or designee, shall grant or deny the application to present a late claim within forty-five (45) days after it is presented to the City, pursuant to Government Code Section 911.6 through 912.2. (14-07)

 

1.16.080 Time of barred claim.
Nothing in this chapter revives or reinstates any cause of action that, on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, is barred by failure to comply with any previously applicable statute, ordinance or regulation requiring the presentation of a claim prior to a suit subject to this chapter, or by failure to commence any action thereon within the period prescribed by an applicable statute of limitations. (14-07)

 

1.16.090 Effective date of chapter.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply retroactively to any causes of action occurring prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter; provided, however, that a claimant who has a cause of action occurring more than ten (10) months before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall file a claim within sixty (60) days after the ordinance codified in this chapter’s effective date in accordance with its provisions or such claim shall be barred. (14-07)

 

1.16.100 Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are severable and the invalidity of any section, paragraph, phrase, clause or part of this chapter shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remainder of this chapter. (14-07)

Chapter 1.20 CUSTODY AND USE OF OFFICIAL CITY SEAL AND OTHER INSIGNIA
1.20.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to specify the permissible uses for the use of the Official City Seal, City Logo, and other official insignia of the City of Claremont. (16-10)

 

1.20.020 Official City Seal and City Logo.
A.     The Official City Seal features an arch shaped outline that encapsulates the branches of an avocado tree with the words “Claremont” and “California” over the arch of the tree, and the year “1907” written under the tree. The Official City Seal of Claremont is as adopted by the City Council on October 9, 1973. The Official City Seal is set forth below:

 



 

B.     The City Logo features the branches of an avocado tree. The City Logo is set forth below:

 



 

(16-10)

 

1.20.030 Custodian of the Official City Seal.
The City Clerk is the custodian of the Official City Seal. (16-10)

 

1.20.040 Use of Official City Seal, City Logo, City Letterhead stationery, business cards or other official indicia.
A.     Official City Seal, City Logo, City Letterhead stationery, business cards or other official indicia of the City or City department or office may be used for purposes directly connected with the official business of the City.

B.     It shall be unlawful for any person without prior approval of the City Council to knowingly or willfully use, or cause the use of, a copy or replica of the Official City Seal of the City of Claremont, a copy or replica of the City Logo, the original or a copy or replica of City Letterhead stationery, business cards, or any other official indicia of the City or any City department or office for any private or commercial purpose.

C.    It shall be unlawful for any person to use any design so closely resembling the Official City Seal, City Logo, City Letterhead stationery, business cards or other official indicia as to be apt to deceive without first having obtained the permission of the City Council therefor. (16-10)

 

1.20.050 Purposes defined.
A.     “Private purpose” means and includes, but is not limited to, the promotion, support or endorsement of or opposition to (1) any candidate for a public office or the support or endorsement of or opposition to any ballot measure, initiative, referendum, or any other matter voted upon at a public election; (2) any person, issue or cause; or (3) any religious, charitable or otherwise not for profit organization entity or cause.

B.     “Commercial purpose” means and includes, but is not limited to, the promotion, support endorsement of any person, group, entity, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, firm or association, which is for profit and/or connected in any way with trade, commerce or business. (16-10)

 

1.20.060 Severability.
If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or applications of the provisions of this chapter, which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or application and, to this end, the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. (16-10)

TITLE 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Chapter 2.04 CITY MANAGER
Chapter 2.08 CITY COUNCIL
Chapter 2.10 DISTRICT ELECTIONS
Chapter 2.12 POLICE
Chapter 2.16 CITY COMMISSIONS GENERALLY
Chapter 2.20 PLANNING COMMISSION
Chapter 2.28 COMMUNITY AND HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION
Chapter 2.40 TRAFFIC AND TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
Chapter 2.42 ARCHITECTURAL COMMISSION
Chapter 2.43 POLICE COMMISSION
Chapter 2.48 LOCAL EMERGENCY AND DISASTER COUNCIL
Chapter 2.52 FIRE PROTECTION
Chapter 2.56 TAXPAYER PROTECTION (3/6/01 Election)

Chapter 2.04 CITY MANAGER
2.04.010 Appointment—Eligibility of councilmembers.
The City Council shall appoint an officer of the City who shall have the title of City Manager and shall have the powers and perform the duties provided in this chapter. No councilmember shall receive such appointment during the term for which he or she shall have been elected nor within one year after the expiration of his or her term. (Prior code §2.9)

 

2.04.020 Qualifications.
The City Manager shall be chosen by the City Council solely on the basis of his or her executive and administrative qualifications, with special reference to his or her actual experience in, or his or her acknowledgement of, accepted practice in respect to the duties of his or her office as set forth in this chapter. (14-07)

 

2.04.030 Term of employment.
The City Manager shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council, which shall, by majority vote of all members of the City Council, appoint or remove him or her. The terms of the manager’s employment shall be as established by written contract, adopted by resolution of the City Council. (90-13; prior code § 2.15)

 

2.04.050 Performance of duties during absence or illness.
To perform his or her duties during his or her temporary absence or disability, the City Manager may designate, by letter and/or email filed with the City Clerk, a qualified administrative officer of the City. In the event of failure of the City Manager to make such designation, the City Council may, by resolution, appoint an officer of the City to perform the duties of the City Manager until he or she shall return or his or her disability shall cease. (14-07)

 

2.04.060 Powers and duties.
The City Manager shall be the administrative head of the City government under the direction and control of the City Council. He or she shall be responsible to the City Council for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the City which are under his or her control. In addition to his or her general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation thereon, it shall be the duty of the City Manager and he or she shall have power to:

A.     See that all laws and ordinances are properly enforced within the City.

B.     Appoint, on the basis of merit and, when necessary for the good of the service, demote, and remove all officers and employees of the City, except as otherwise in subsection C of this section, and except as he or she may authorize the head of a department or office to appoint and remove subordinates in such department or office.

C.    Persons appointed or promoted to the following department head positions on or after June 10, 1989, shall serve at the will and pleasure of the City Manager and may be terminated from City employment by the City Manager without proof of cause or other justification and without right of appeal or hearing:

1.     Director of Community Development;

2.     Director of Community Services;

3.     Director of Human Services;

4.     Police Chief;

5.     Assistant City Manager;

6.     Finance Director.

Any person appointed or promoted to a new department head classification created by resolution on or after June 10, 1989, shall also serve at the will and pleasure of the City Manager and may be terminated from City employment by the City Manager without proof of cause or other justification and without right of appeal or hearing.

Department heads appointed or promoted to their department head positions prior to June 10, 1989, shall have the right to be terminated only under the provisions of this Code as it existed at the time of their appointment to the position, unless they modify the terms of their employment pursuant to a contract as described below.

The City Manager is empowered to enter into contracts on behalf of the City with department heads establishing terms and conditions of employment. Upon approval by the City Council, said employment contracts shall take precedence over and supersede any otherwise applicable ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation, previous or current including, but not limited to, this subsection. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to give the City Manager the right to appoint or remove the City Treasurer or the City Attorney.

D.    Transfer employees from one department to another, and to consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments or units under his or her jurisdiction.

E.     The City Manager whenever possible, shall consult in advance with the Council concerning all matters of major importance, such as, but not limited to, major municipal programs, fiscal policies, reorganization or substantive changes in organizational assignments, and administrative acts which affect the formulation or implementation of legislative policy. The purpose of such consultation requirements shall be to fully inform the Council and learn of its judgment in the matters being considered.

F.     Attend all meetings of the City Council, except when his or her removal is under consideration by the City Council.

G.    Prepare the budget and salary plans, and to submit to the City Council and be responsible for their administration after adoption.

H.    Prepare and submit to the City Council at the end of the fiscal year a complete report of the finances and administration activities for the preceding year.

I.      Keep the City Council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the City and make such recommendations as may seem desirable.

J.     Recommend to the City Council for adoption such measures and ordinances as he or she may deem necessary or expedient to assist in the performance of the duties of City Manager as outlined in this chapter.

K.     City Manager may attend any and all meetings of the Commissions, boards, and committees created by the Council, at which meetings he or she shall be heard by such commissions, boards, and committees as to all matters upon which he or she wishes to address the members thereof, and he or she shall inform such members as to the status of the matter being considered by the Council and cooperate to the fullest extent with the members of all commissions, boards, and committees appointed by the Council.

L.     Oversee the purchase of all supplies for all of the departments or divisions of the City in accordance with City regulations. No expenditure shall be submitted or recommended to the City Council except upon report or approval of the City Manager.

M.    Make investigations of the affairs of the City and any department or division thereof and any contract or the performance of any obligation running to the City.

N.    Investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the government of the City and in regard to the services maintained by public utilities in the City and to see that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the City are faithfully observed.

O.    Exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks, streets and other public property which are under control and jurisdiction of the City Council.

P.     To cooperate, within lawful limits, with all community organizations whose aim and purpose is to advance the cultural and material interests of the City and its people and to provide them within lawful limits, with assistance through the City government.

Q.    To develop and organize necessary public improvement projects and programs authorized by the Council and to aid and assist the Council departments in carrying the same through to successful conclusion.

R.    Serve in any appointed office or as head of any department within the City government to which he or she may be qualified when appointed thereto by the City Council, and to hold and perform the duties thereof at the pleasure of the City Council.

S.     Serve in any appointed office required of him or her by the City Council not inconsistent with this section.

T.     The Council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the City only through the City Manager, except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the Council nor any of its members shall give orders to any subordinate of the City Manager. The City Manager shall take his or her orders and instructions from the Council only when sitting in a duly held meeting of the Council, and no individual councilmember shall give any order or instruction to the City Manager. The City Manager shall act as an agent for the Council in the discharge of its administrative functions but shall not exercise any policy-making or legislative function whatsoever, nor attempt to commit or bind the Council, or any member thereof, to any action, plan, or program requiring official Council action. (14-07; 12-04; 89-11; 84-14; prior code § 2.11)

 

2.04.070 Cooperation of subordinate officers.
It shall be the duty of all subordinate officers, including the City Clerk, the City Treasurer and the City Attorney, to cooperate with and assist the City Manager in administering the affairs of the City most efficiently, economically and harmoniously so far as may be consistent with their duties as prescribed by law and by this Code and other ordinances of the City. (Prior code § 2.12)

 

2.04.080 Authority—Council interference prohibited.
Neither the City Council nor any of its members shall direct or request the appointment of any person to, or his or her removal from office by the City Manager, nor shall any member of the City Council in any manner take part in the appointment or removal of officers and employees in the administrative service of the City, except as provided in this chapter. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the City Council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the City Manager and neither the City Council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the City Manager, either publicly or privately. (Prior code § 2.16)

Chapter 2.08 CITY COUNCIL
2.08.010 Meetings—Time.
The regular meetings of the City Council shall be held on the second Tuesday and the fourth Tuesday of every month beginning at 6:30 p.m. Whenever the second Tuesday or the fourth Tuesday of the month falls on a holiday, the meeting shall be held on the next succeeding business day at the same hour. (85-11; prior code § 2.1)

 

2.08.020 Meetings—Place—Exception.
All regular meetings of the City Council shall be held in the Council Chamber of Claremont City Hall unless the City Council has stated, by motion action, that on a specified date the Council shall hold a regular meeting at another location within the City, or unless the City Manager, with approval of the Mayor, determines that a different location is necessary or better suited for the purpose of the meeting. Special meetings may be held from time to time in the Council Chamber of Claremont City Hall or another location within the City. (14-07)

 

2.08.030 Special meetings—When held—Notice required.
Special meetings may be called at any time by the mayor or by three councilmembers by giving notice as required by Government Code Section 54956. (77-29; prior code § 2.2)

 

2.08.040 Vacancy filling—Term.
Any person appointed to fill a vacancy on the City Council shall hold the office only until the next regularly scheduled election for City Council members. (75-21)

 

2.08.050 Vacancy filling—Special election required when.
In the event that the term of office of a vacated council seat extends beyond the next regularly scheduled election for City Council members, a special election shall be held to fill the vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired term. The special election shall be consolidated with the regularly scheduled election. (75-21)

 

2.08.080 Local campaign contribution and disclosure requirements.
A.     No candidate seeking election to the Claremont City Council shall accept more than $250.00 as a campaign contribution from any individual or single source within one calendar year.

B.     Each candidate seeking election to the Claremont City Council shall file a statement disclosing the receipt of any campaign contribution in excess of ninety-nine dollars ($99.00) during any calendar year. The disclosure statement shall be filed with the City Clerk in accordance with the filing deadlines established for reporting campaign contributions in excess of ninety-nine dollars ($99.00) pursuant to State law. (06-01; 01-01)

Chapter 2.10 DISTRICT ELECTIONS
2.10.010 By-district electoral system.
Pursuant to California Government Code Section 34886 and the schedule established in Section 2.10.030 of this chapter, beginning in November 2020, the five members of the City Council shall be elected on a by-district basis from five single-member Council Districts. The City’s by-district electoral system shall be conducted in accordance with California Government Code Section 34871, subdivision (a). (19-03)

 

2.10.020 Establishment of City Council electoral districts.
A.     The five members of the City Council shall be elected on a by-district basis, as that term is defined in California Government Code Section 34871, subdivision (a), from the five Council Districts depicted on the following map, which shall continue in effect until they are amended or repealed in accordance with law:



B.     Members of the City Council shall be elected in the electoral districts established by this section and subsequently reapportioned pursuant to applicable state and federal law.

C.    Except as provided in subsection D of this section and notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, once the ordinance codified in this chapter is fully phased in, each member of the City Council elected to represent a district must reside in that district and be a registered voter in that district, and any candidate for City Council must live in, and be a registered voter in, the district in which he or she seeks election at the time nomination papers are issued, pursuant to California Government Code Section 34882 and Elections Code Section 10227. Termination of residency in a district by a member of the City Council shall create an immediate vacancy for that Council District unless a substitute residence within the district is established within thirty (30) days after the termination of residency.

D.    Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, and consistent with the requirements of California Government Code Section 36512, the members of the City Council in office at the time the ordinance codified in this chapter takes effect shall continue in office until the expiration of the full term to which he or she was elected and until his or her successor is qualified. At the end of the term of each member of the City Council that member of the City Council’s successor shall be elected on a by-district basis in the districts established in this section and as provided in this chapter. (19-03)

 

2.10.030 Election schedule.
Except as otherwise required by California Government Code Section 36512, the members of the City Council shall be elected from Council Districts 1 and 5 beginning at the General Municipal Election in November 2020, and every four years thereafter, as such Council Districts shall be amended. Members of the City Council shall be elected from Council Districts 2, 3 and 4 beginning at the General Municipal Election in November 2022, and every four years thereafter, as such Council Districts shall be amended. (19-03)

Chapter 2.12 POLICE
2.12.010 Chief of Police—Construction of term.
Whenever in this chapter the term “Chief of Police” is used, it shall be deemed to include the term “acting Chief of Police.” (Prior code § 17.3)

 

2.12.020 Reserve police officers—Appointment.
The Chief of Police of the City is authorized from time to time and in his or her discretion to appoint reserve police officers, who shall have the duties and authorities provided by this chapter. (Prior code § 17.4)

 

2.12.030 Reserve police officers—Supervision.
All reserve police officers of the City shall at all times be under the supervision and control of the Chief of Police and shall be subject to call at any time by the Chief of Police to serve as reserve police officers. (Prior code § 17.5)

 

2.12.040 Reserve police officers—Compensation.
Reserve police officers shall only be compensated when working “special events” that are compensated through third parties, in response to a legal criminal, traffic or civil subpoena, and when authorized by the City Manager for seasonal events. Reserve officers are paid a monthly per diem as approved by the City Manager as reimbursement for personnel expenses related to their position. No reserve officer of the City shall receive compensation from the City while on duty unless specifically authorized to receive compensation by the City Council; provided, however, that this section shall in no way prejudice the right of a reserve police officer to receive compensation arising out of accident or injury incurred while in the course of duty, if such reserve police officer would be otherwise entitled to receive such compensation. (14-07)

 

2.12.050 Reserve police officers—Authority.
A reserve police officer shall have the power and authority of a regular police officer under the following circumstances only:

A.     When having satisfied the requirements of a Level I reserve officer as defined by the Peace Officer Standards and Training (POST) requirements;

B.     When accompanied by a regular police officer;

C.    When on duty during a declared emergency;

D.    When on duty during a declared disaster;

E.     When specifically assigned to duty by the Chief of Police unaccompanied by a regular police officer. (14-07)

 

2.12.060 Reserve police officers—Use of police badge.
No reserve police officer shall wear or use in any way his or her badge, except while on duty with the police department of the City. (Prior code § 17.9)

 

2.12.070 Reserve police officers—Removal from office.
Every reserve police officer of the City shall be subject to removal at any time by the Chief of Police or by the City Council. All property issued to any reserve police officer by the City shall remain the property of the City and shall be returned by such reserve police officer at the end of his or her employment. (Prior code § 17.8)

 

2.12.080 Additional duties of police officers—Assistance to persons or animals.
In addition to the performance of their regular and ordinary duties, it shall be the duty of all police officers, at all times and under all circumstances, to go to the aid of all persons or animals in distress or danger and render them such help and assistance as lies within their power. (Prior code § 2.7)

 

2.12.090 Additional duties of police officers—Compensation for injury.
In case any police officer should be injured while rendering such additional services as provided by Section 2.12.080, he or she shall be deemed to be injured in the course of his or her employment and shall be entitled to workers’ compensation therefor as provided by law. (Prior code § 2.8)

 

2.12.100 Disposition of unclaimed property in police possession.
All unclaimed property in the possession of the police department shall be held by the police department for a period of three months before disposition thereof shall be made. Thereafter, such property shall be sold at public auction to the highest bidder. Notice of such public auction sale shall be given by the Chief of Police at least five days before the time fixed therefor by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation published within the County. The proceeds of such sale shall be deposited in the general fund of the City.

Provided, if the City purchasing officer determines that unclaimed property otherwise eligible for sale at public auction is needed for public use, said property shall not be auctioned, and instead, title to it shall be transferred to the City. (91-8; prior code § 17.2)

Chapter 2.16 CITY COMMISSIONS GENERALLY
2.16.010 Membership—Appointment.
City commissions shall consist of seven members. Members of City commissions shall be appointed by the City Council. At the time of his or her appointment, and during his or her tenure of office, each commission member shall reside within the City. Provided under exceptional circumstances and at the discretion of the City Council, one member of each commission may reside up to one quarter mile outside of the City limits. (14-07)

 

2.16.020 Membership—Term.
The terms of members appointed after the effective date of this section shall, at the sole discretion of the City Council, be for up to four years and until their respective successors are appointed and take office. All terms shall expire on August 31st of the year established by the City Council when the appointment was made. (99-09)

 

2.16.050 Meetings—Time and place.
Meetings of all commissions shall be at a stated time and in a public place. (Prior code §2.17-1)

 

2.16.060 Membership—Appointing and removing commissioners.
The City Council shall establish policies and procedures for appointing and removing commissioners. Said policies and procedures may be amended from time to time as determined by the City Council. (95-06; prior code § 2.21)

 

2.16.070 Travel expenses.
A commission member may be reimbursed for the costs of attending a conference or meeting in accordance with such policies as may be adopted by the City Council. (Prior code § 2.23)

 

2.16.080 Advisory function.
City commissions shall be advisory to the City Council, except that a commission may make a final decision on a matter delegated to it by law, subject to appeal to the City Council. When making recommendations or decisions on matters before a commission, each commission should weigh the environmental ramifications such an action may have. All decisions and/or recommendations shall be predicated upon the goals and policies contained in the City’s general plan and address the unique characteristics of the City through the preservation of neighborhood preservation, quality of life and economic vitality. (95-06; prior code § 2.24)

 

2.16.090 City Manager—Relationship with commissions.
City commissions shall be advisory to the City Manager on administrative matters. (Prior code § 2.25)

 

2.16.100 City Manager—Meeting attendance.
The City Manager or his or her representative shall attend commission meetings but shall serve in an advisory capacity only and shall have no voting rights. (Prior code § 2.25-1)

 

2.16.110 Conflict of interest.
A member is bound by the provisions of the Government Code relating to non-contractual conflicts of interest. In addition to the requirements of such code, a member shall disclose any direct or indirect personal financial interest in any matter coming before the Commission on which he or she serves and the secretary shall record this disclosure. He or she shall refrain from participating in any discussion of the matter, except that he or she may temporarily leave his or her seat as a commission member and present a case on behalf of a client, and he or she shall abstain from voting on the matter. (Prior code § 2.22)

Chapter 2.20 PLANNING COMMISSION
2.20.010 Created—Statutory authority.
A City Planning Commission is established and created under and by the authority of the Government Code. (Prior code § 2.26)

 

2.20.020 Attorney attendance at meetings.
The City Attorney shall attend planning commission meetings from time to time as requested by the Director of Community Development. (95-06; 82-6; prior code § 2.27)

 

2.20.030 Powers and duties.
The Planning Commission enhances the quality of life of the residents of Claremont through its review of and recommendation on land use issues which preserve the residential character of Claremont and the unique identities of Claremont’s specific neighborhoods. The Commission accomplishes this through: (1) planning for future land uses which will serve the needs of the community; (2) fostering citizen participation; (3) applying and reviewing General Plan goals, policies, and codes, and other regulatory and policy documents. Additional consideration is given to review of environmental impacts associated with development to ensure protection of the environment.

A.     In implementing this charge, the Planning Commission will:

1.     Be a liaison between the community, applicants for development, and the City government pertaining to planning matters.

2.     Review and act on requests for development by individual residents, developers, and City officials relative to local and regional planning issues.

3.     Biennially review and identify planning issues in order to advise the City Council on appropriate work plan items for incorporation into the City budget and review the proposed capital improvement program for general plan conformity.

B.     The Planning Commission’s responsibilities include:

1.     To fulfill the mandate given the Commission by state law and the City Council by this Code, the City’s general plan, and other City ordinances;

2.     To plan land uses with regard to the health, safety, convenience, and general welfare of the residential population;

3.     To encourage the preservation of the historic fabric and distinctive character of the City and ensure that land use decisions have a positive effect on the quality of the City’s living environment;

4.     To identify, preserve, enhance and strengthen the City’s residential neighborhoods through the development of appropriate land use regulations and the appropriate application of said regulations on discretionary land use matters;

5.     To encourage the preservation of the hillsides and open areas and the enhancement of recreational opportunities through land use decisions;

6.     To anticipate community planning, environmental and development issues, study alternatives and make recommendations to council;

7.     To encourage citizen participation and serve as an independent vehicle for citizen input and discussion of community values on land use and development matters;

8.     To make decisions on land use and development projects which enhance the quality of life by keeping in balance the physical, social and economic elements of the community while respecting the rights and duties of property owners;

9.     To utilize the various standards outlined in Title 16 of the Claremont Municipal Code when reviewing development proposals to ensure that all new development is of such a quality, design, and type that would meet the goals, policies and actions outlined in the City’s general plan and any other regulatory or policy documents;

10.   To foster communication between applicants for development and the community, and when necessary mediate between competing interests;

11.   To identify, consider and mitigate the environmental impacts of projects and proposals;

12.   To ensure that land use decisions preserve the City as an educational and cultural center;

13.   To ensure that no land use decision diminishes the quality of the City’s circulation system by requiring any necessary upgrades that would offset a development’s transportation/circulation impacts;

14.   To encourage the conservation of natural resources and energy by way of site orientation, enhancements and upgrades to the various local infrastructure components, and compliance with City transportation demand measures through land use decisions;

15.   To encourage economic development which is compatible with surrounding neighborhoods and increases shopping choices in Claremont;

16.   To encourage industrial development which is compatible with surrounding neighborhoods and increases job opportunities in Claremont;

17.   To recommend housing strategies which provide opportunities for all income groups in Claremont with emphasis on providing housing for citizens of low and moderate incomes;

18.   To monitor and make recommendations on regional plans and projects; and,

19.   To maintain and update the City’s general plan and municipal code as directed by the City Council and state law. (97-10; 95-06; prior code § 2.28)

Chapter 2.28 COMMUNITY AND HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION
2.28.010 Created.
There is established and created a Community and Human Services Commission for the City. (18-04, 12-04)

 

2.28.020 Powers and duties.
The Community and Human Services Commission improves and enhances the quality of life in Claremont through its oversight responsibility for: (1) the City’s provision of a variety of innovative community events, leisure activities and social services to meet existing and emerging needs; and (2) the City’s general appearance and the condition of the City’s infrastructure. This oversight responsibility includes the maintenance of parklands, cemetery grounds, streets and street lights, sidewalks, public rights-of-way landscaping, the Urban Forest, recycling, graffiti removal, and water quality.

The Community and Human Services Commission shall have the following powers and duties:

A.     To make recommendations to the City Council and City Manager on matters pertaining to:

1.     Human problems and needs in the community.

2.     The development, improvement, and maintenance of parklands, cemetery grounds, public rights-of-way landscaping, public buildings and facilities, subject only to the restrictions and limitations provided elsewhere in this Code.

3.     The maintenance of streets, sidewalks, sewers and storm drains subject only to the restrictions and limitations provided elsewhere in this Code.

4.     The care, protection, and maintenance of the City’s Urban Forest.

5.     The species of trees to be planted along specific City streets.

6.     The provision of clean City services including refuse collection, recycling, and graffiti removal.

7.     The quality of water provided locally and related issues.

8.     Community based organizations and community development block grants.

9.     Community and Human Services programs and services, such as parks and recreation, designed to meet human needs, in the areas of youth, seniors, homeless, and disabled persons.

B.     To review community analyses assessing human needs and present resources.

C.    To promote understanding and education with regard to human relations among various segments of the community and to recommend measures which will serve to improve human relations within the City.

D.    To act as liaison among the City, public and private social service agencies, and citizens, and to coordinate programs for more effective delivery of services and reduction of duplication.

E.     To perform all other acts referred to and requested of the Community and Human Services Commission by the City Council or City Manager.

F.     To improve and enhance the quality of life throughout the community. (18-04, 12-04)

 

2.28.030 Meeting—Frequency.
The regular meetings of the Community and Human Services Commission shall be held once a month, on dates and times to be established by the members of the Commission. The Commission may hold a second meeting during any given month, if the Commission members find it necessary. (18-04, 12-04)

Chapter 2.40 TRAFFIC AND TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
2.40.010 Created.
There is established and created a Traffic and Transportation Commission for the City. (18-04, 88-9; prior code § 2.35-3)

 

2.40.020 Powers and duties.
The Traffic and Transportation Commission enhances the quality of life for the residents of Claremont through its review of and recommendation on issues which help to promote a safe environment while traveling within the City. Additional consideration is given to the need to pursue alternative modes of travel, including regional transportation systems. In implementing these responsibilities, the Traffic and Transportation Commission will: be a liaison between the community and the City government pertaining to traffic and transportation matters; review and make recommendations on requests by individual residents, City officials, and other interested parties, relative to local and regional traffic and transportation matters; cooperate and consult with other City commissions/committees and other appropriate agencies; and, annually review and identify traffic and transportation issues, including review of the City’s budget, in order to formulate an appropriate work plan. The Traffic and Transportation Commission’s responsibilities include review and recommendation on:

A.     Traffic and parking impacts on City streets resulting from proposed development.

B.     Acceptable levels of traffic on City streets, with special consideration given to historical zones and residential neighborhoods.

C.    Traffic and pedestrian safety through monitoring speed limits, traffic collisions, and pedestrian walkways and crossings.

D.    Citywide and regional bicycle facilities.

E.     Alternative modes of transportation, such as mass transit (bud, light rail, commuter rail), bicycling, and walking, aimed at reducing automotive traffic in the City.

F.     Traffic control devices and regulations not included in the California Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (CAMUTCD).

G.    Regional traffic and transportation matters, including mass transit services (rail and bus systems; e.g., Metrolink, Gold Line, Foothill Transit, etc.), and highway developments such as Express Lane extensions, overpasses and bridges, lane additions, etc., that impact the City.

H.    City parking management policies.

I.      Long-range traffic circulation plans, including the City’s Active Transportation Plan.

J.     Updates to City’s Road System Map as needed, including possible reclassifications.

K.     Transportation programs (such as Dial-a-Ride) for the disabled, elderly, and school children. (18-04, 97-10; 88-9; prior code § 2.35-4)

Chapter 2.42 ARCHITECTURAL COMMISSION
2.42.010 Powers and duties.
A.     The Architectural Commission strives to enhance the quality of life of the residents of Claremont by guiding the design and redesign of physical elements and ensuring the harmonious composition and preservation of visual aspects of the City. The Commission, through its review of development projects and recommendations on design issues, protects the City’s character, sense of place and unique physical environment; maintains the image of Claremont as a community of neighborhoods; encourages the preservation of the City’s architectural, historic and cultural resources; ensures the beautification of streetscapes and public areas; and promotes the public health, safety and general welfare of the community. In implementing this charge, the Architectural Commission will:

1.     Be a liaison among the community, the colleges, applicants for development, and the City government pertaining to design matters.

2.     Review and make determinations as necessary on requests from individual residents, developers, and City officials relative to architectural and community design issues.

3.     As needed, review and identify community design issues and beautification programs in order to advise the City Council on appropriate work plan items for incorporation into the City budget.

B.     The Architectural Commission’s responsibilities include:

1.     To fulfill the mandate given the Commission by the City Council by this Code, the City’s general plan, the City’s municipal code, and other City ordinances.

2.     To encourage the successful intermingling of natural, manmade, and planted features in the community.

3.     To foster the strong sense of place and local identity in the community.

4.     To encourage well designed new construction and other development that builds upon the existing positive physical characteristics of the community.

5.     To make decisions on development proposals that promote and protect the unique identity of residential neighborhoods within the City.

6.     To encourage excellence in architectural and landscaping design, and utilize the review criteria in the City’s municipal code to ensure that new development is consistent with the integrity and character of the area in which is it located.

7.     To encourage citizen participation in design matters and serve as an independent vehicle for gathering citizen comment.

8.     To identify, consider and mitigate the environmental impacts of proposals and projects that come before the Commission for review, with the understanding that typically the Planning Commission and/or City Council are the lead decision-makers for environmental impacts review with the Architectural Commission ensuring that the previous findings remain intact given any new information that comes forward at the time of design review.

9.     To foster communication among applicants, the community, and the City, and when necessary mediate among competing interests.

10.   To encourage developers of new projects creating urban impacts to offset them by participating in programs to provide greenbelts, open spaces, street landscaping, utility undergrounding, and public art.

11.   To recognize, through an awards program, outstanding achievement in architectural design, landscaping and building rehabilitation.

12.   To promote public art that enhances the aesthetic and cultural quality of the community.

13.   To invite artistry and innovation in signs that improve the appearance of the buildings and neighborhoods in which they are placed.

14.   To promote the installation and maintenance of landscaping in public and private areas.

15.   To encourage the preservation of significant trees in public areas and on private property.

16.   To encourage the use of drought-resistant plants where appropriate.

17.   To encourage the restoration and re-use of older structures which contribute to Claremont’s character and sense of historic and cultural identity.

18.   To ensure the preservation of sites, buildings and objects of historic and architectural significance as physical representation of Claremont’s historic and cultural heritage.

19.   To review all Historical Property Contract (Mills Act) applications and forward a recommendation to the City Council.

20.   To review all nominations of structures, buildings, sites, neighborhoods, landscapes, places and objects within the City to the Register of Structures of Historic and Architectural Merit of the City of Claremont.

21.   To promote the continuing education of the citizens of Claremont about the heritage of the City and its cultural resources.

22.   To advise the City Council on all matters relating to the development and the architectural suitability of all governmental buildings and site developments.

23.   To hear appeals of staff architectural review decisions.

24.   To act as the board of appeals for appeals of determinations made by the building official regarding unreinforced masonry buildings and necessary structural alterations within the scope of Chapter 58 of the Uniform Building Code as amended by Municipal Code Section 15.04.045.

25.   To perform such other appropriate duties related to design matters as may be requested by the City Council.

26.   To support incentives for the protection, retention and preservation of cultural resources. (18-04, 97-10)

Chapter 2.43 POLICE COMMISSION
2.43.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the Commission is to facilitate collaborative community dialogue on issues of concern regarding the Police Department. The Commission’s overall objective shall be to create a climate of mutual respect and partnership among ALL community members and the Police Department. (18-04, 00-12)

 

2.43.020 Powers and duties.
The Police Commission shall provide a forum for community discussion on police issues; make recommendations to the City Council, City Manager, and Police Chief on police issues; and promote education and communication between citizens and the Police Department. In seeking to accomplish its mission the Police Commission shall have the powers and duties as described below:

A.     To provide a forum to facilitate communication between the community and the Police Department.

B.     To review and comment on Police Department policies, procedures and practices, and to assist in setting goals for the Department that reflect community values.

C.    To provide a forum to address concerns, complaints and commendations regarding the Police Department and to receive reports on the progress or conclusions of investigations, when legally possible.

D.    To review and comment on an annual report presented by the Chief of Police on the Department’s Best Practices—with specific information to include personnel ethnicities, language diversities, and recruitment and training programs—that promote recruitment and retention of qualified police personnel who represent, understand and respect the cultural diversity of Claremont’s residential, educational and business communities.

E.     To review and comment on quarterly updates presented by the Chief of Police on the Department’s customer service programs, community oriented policing programs, crime trends and statistics, and crime prevention programs.

F.     To review and monitor reported data on police stops, arrests, citations, field interview cards, and police logs.

G.    To perform all other acts referred to or requested of the Commission by the City Council, City Manager or Police Chief. (18-04, 00-12)

 

2.43.030 Composition.
The Commission shall have seven (7) members appointed by the City Council. The goal in making appointments shall be to ensure sufficient diversity among its membership.

Practicing attorneys appointed to the Commission shall recuse themselves from handling criminal or civil cases involving Claremont Police Officers until such time the attorneys are no longer on the Commission.

The City values and welcomes the participation of active or retired law enforcement officials on the Commission. (18-04, 00-12)

 

2.43.040 Orientation/training.
The Police Department, under the direction of the Police Chief, shall develop a training guide for new commissioners to familiarize and acquaint them with police operations and policy, including the procedures for the Police Review Ad-Hoc Committee.

Each commissioner shall participate in a four (4) hour minimum dayshift and a four-hour minimum nightshift ride-a-long with the Department per four (4) year Police Commissioner term. The ride-along should be completed within the first year of each term. (18-04, 00-12)

Chapter 2.48 LOCAL EMERGENCY AND DISASTER COUNCIL
2.48.010 Purpose.
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within this City in the event of an emergency; the direction of the emergency organization; and the coordination of the emergency functions of this City with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations and affected private persons. (Prior code § 8.0)

 

2.48.020 Emergency defined.
As used in this chapter, “emergency” means the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this City caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the service, personnel, equipment and facilities of this City, and requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. (Prior code § 8.1)

 

2.48.030 Disaster Council—Created—Membership.
The Claremont Disaster Council is created and shall consist of the following:

A.     The Mayor, who shall be chair;

B.     The Director of Emergency Services, who shall be vice-chair;

C.    The Assistant Director of Emergency Services;

D.    Such chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in a current emergency plan of this City;

E.     Such representative of civil business, labor, veterans, professional or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be appointed by the Director with the advice and consent of the City Council. (Prior code § 8.2)

 

2.48.040 Disaster Council—Powers and duties.
The Claremont Disaster Council shall develop and recommend for adoption by the City Council, emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The Disaster Council shall meet upon call of the chair, or, in his or her absence from the City or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the vice-chair. (Prior code § 8.3)

 

2.48.050 Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services—Offices created.
A.     There is created the office of Director of Emergency Services. The City Manager shall be the Director of Emergency Services.

B.     There is created the office of Assistant Director of Emergency Services, who shall be appointed by the Director with the advice and consent of the City Council. (Prior code § 8.4)

 

2.48.060 Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services—Powers and duties.
A.     The Director shall:

1.     Request the City Council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a local emergency if the City Council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the City Council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the Director, the City Council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect.

2.     Request the Governor to proclaim a state of emergency when, in the opinion of the Director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency.

3.     Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this City for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter.

4.     Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of this City, and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them.

5.     Represent this City in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined in Section 2.48.020.

6.     In the event of the proclamation of a local emergency as provided in this chapter, the proclamation of a state of emergency by the Governor or the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a state of war emergency, the Director shall:

a.     Make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the City Council;

b.     Obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property, and to bind the City for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use;

c.     Require emergency services of any City officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a “state of emergency” in the County in which this City is located or in the event of the existence of a state of war emergency, command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he or she deems necessary in the execution of his or her duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits, and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service workers;

d.     Requisition necessary personnel or material of any City department or agency;

e.     Execute all of his or her ordinary power as City Manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him or her by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan adopted by the City Council, all powers conferred upon him or her by any statute, by any agreement approved by the City Council and by other lawful authority.

7.     Designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the Director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his or her duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the City Council.

B.     The Assistant Director shall, under the supervision of the Director and with the assistance of emergency service chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of this City. The Assistant Director shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the Director. (Prior code § 8.5)

 

2.48.070 Emergency organization—Duties of City officers and employees.
All officers and employees of this City, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of Section 2.48.060(A)(6)(c), are charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this City during such emergency, and shall constitute the emergency organization of the City. (Prior code § 8.6)

 

2.48.080 Emergency plan.
The Claremont Disaster Council shall be responsible for the development of the City’s emergency plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this City, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency or state of war emergency, and shall provide insofar as possible for the organization, powers and duties, services and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the City Council. (Prior code § 8.7)

 

2.48.090 Expenditures for emergency activities.
Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the City. (Prior code § 8.8)

 

2.48.100 Violation deemed misdemeanor—Penalty.
It is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment for not to exceed six months, or both, for any person during an emergency to:

A.     Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him or her by virtue of this chapter;

B.     Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this City, or to prevent, hinder, or delay the defense or protection thereof;

C.    Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state. (Prior code § 8.9)

Chapter 2.52 FIRE PROTECTION
2.52.010 Annexation to Los Angeles County Fire Protection District.
In accordance with the terms and provisions of the California Health and Safety Code, Section 13948, the City, by its City Council, requests the Consolidated Fire Protection District of Los Angeles County to include and annex the entire City and all territory within its established boundaries, as those boundaries exist as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter to the Consolidated Fire Protection District of Los Angeles County, so that all of the territory within the City shall become a part of the Consolidated Fire Protection District of Los Angeles County. (75-15)

Chapter 2.56 TAXPAYER PROTECTION (3/6/01 Election)
2.56.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the City of Claremont Taxpayer Protection Amendment of 2000. (3/6/01 Election)

 

2.56.020 Findings and declarations.
A.     The people of the City of Claremont (“City”) find that the use or disposition of public assets are often tainted by conflicts of interest among local public officials entrusted with their management and control. Such assets, including publicly owned real property, land use decisions conferring substantial private benefits, conferral of a franchise without competition, public purchases, taxation, and financing, should be arranged strictly on the merits for the benefit of the public, and irrespective of the separate personal or financial interests of involved public officials.

B.     The people find that public decisions to sell or lease property, to confer cable, trash hauling and other franchises, to award public construction or service contracts, or to utilize or dispose of other public assets, and to grant special land use or taxation exceptions have often been made with the expectation of, and subsequent receipt of, private benefits from those so assisted to involved public “decision makers.” The people further find that the sources of such corruptive influence include gifts and honoraria, future employment offers, and anticipated campaign contributions for public officials who are either elected or who later seek elective office. The trading of special favors or advantage in the management or disposal of public assets and in the making of major public purchases compromises the political process, undermines confidence in democratic institutions, deprives meritorious prospective private buyers, lessees, and sellers of fair opportunity, and deprives the public of its rightful enjoyment and effective use of public assets.

C.    Accordingly, the people declare that there is a compelling state interest in reducing the corruptive influence of emoluments, gifts, and prospective campaign contributions on the decisions of public officials in the management of public assets and franchises, and in the disposition of public funds. The people, who compensate public officials, expect and declare that as a condition of such public office, no gifts, promised employment, or campaign contributions shall be received from any substantial beneficiary of such a public decision for a reasonable period, as provided herein. (3/6/01 Election)

 

2.56.030 Definitions.
A.     As used herein, the term public benefit does not include public employment in the normal course of business for services rendered, but includes a contract, benefit, or arrangement between the City and any individual, corporation, firm, partnership, association, or other person or entity to:

1.     Provide personal services of a value in excess of $25,000 over any 12-month period;

2.     Sell or furnish any material, supplies or equipment to the City of a value in excess of $25,000 over any 12-month period;

3.     Buy or sell any real property to or from the City with a value in excess of $25,000, or lease any real property to or from the City with a value in excess of $25,000 over any 12-month period;

4.     Receive an award of a franchise to conduct any business activity in a territory in which no other competitor potentially is available to provide similar and competitive services, and for which gross revenue from the business activity exceeds $50,000 in any 12-month period;

5.     Confer a land use variance, special use permit, or other exception to a pre-existing master plan or land use ordinance pertaining to real property where such decision has a value in excess of $25,000;

6.     Confer a tax abatement, exception, or benefit not generally applicable of a value in excess of $5,000 in any 12-month period;

7.     Receive cash or specie of a net value to the recipient in excess of $10,000 in any 12-month period.

B.     Those persons or entities receiving public benefits as defined receiving public benefits as defined in Section 2.56.030(A)(1)—(7) shall include the individual, corporation, firm, partnership, association, or other person or entity so benefiting, and any individual or person who, during a period where such benefit is received or accrues:

1.     Has more than a ten percent (10%) equity, participation, or revenue interest in that entity; or

2.     Who is a trustee, director, partner, or officer of that entity.

C.    As used herein, the term personal or campaign advantage shall include:

1.     Any gift, honoraria, emolument, or personal pecuniary benefit of a value in excess of $50;

2.     Any employment for compensation;

3.     Any campaign contributions for any elective office said official may pursue.

D.    As used herein, the term public official includes any elected or appointed public official acting in an official capacity. (3/6/01 Election)

 

2.56.040 City public official shall not receive personal or campaign advantage from those to whom they allocate public benefits.
A.     No City public official who has exercised discretion to approve and who has approved or voted to approve a public benefit as defined in Section 2.56.030(A) may receive a personal or campaign advantage as defined in Section 2.56.030(C) from a person as defined in Section 2.56.030(B) for a period beginning on the date the official approves or votes to approve the public benefit, and ending no later than:

1.     One year after the expiration of the term of office that the official is serving at the time the official approves or votes to approve the public benefit;

2.     One year after the official’s departure from his or her office whether or not there is a pre-established term of office; or

3.     Five years from the date the official approves or votes to approve the public benefit; whichever is first.

B.     Section 2.56.040(A) shall also apply to the exercise of discretion of any such public official serving in his or her official capacity through a redevelopment agency, or any other public agency, whether within or without the territorial jurisdiction of the City either as a representative or appointee of the City. (3/6/01 Election)

 

2.56.050 Applicable public beneficiaries section—Responsibilities of City public officials and advantage recipients.
A.     City public officials shall practice due diligence to ascertain whether or not a benefit defined under Section 2.56.030(A) has been conferred, and to monitor personal or campaign advantages enumerated under Section 2.56.030(C) so that any such qualifying advantage received is returned forthwith, and no later than ten days after its receipt.

B.     City public officials shall provide upon inquiry by any person, the names of all entities and persons known to them who respectively qualify as public benefit recipients under the terms of Sections 2.56.030 and 2.56.040. (3/6/01 Election)

 

2.56.060 Disclosure of the law.
The City shall provide any person, corporation, firm, partnership, association, or other person or entity applying or competing for any benefit enumerated in Section 2.56.030(A) with written notice of the provisions of this chapter and the future limitations it imposes. Said notice shall be incorporated into requests for proposal, bid invitations, or other existing informational disclosure documents to persons engaged in prospective business with, from, or through the City. (3/6/01 Election)

 

2.56.070 Penalties and enforcement.
A.     In addition to all other penalties which might apply, any knowing and willful violation of this chapter by a public official constitutes a criminal misdemeanor offense.

B.     A civil action may be brought under this chapter against a public official who receives a personal or campaign advantage in violation of Section 2.56.040. A finding of liability shall subject the public official to the following civil remedies:

1.     Restitution of the personal or campaign advantage received, which shall accrue to the general fund of the City;

2.     A civil penalty of up to five times the value of the personal or campaign advantage received;

3.     Injunctive relief necessary to prevent present and future violations of this chapter;

4.     Disqualification from future public office or position within the jurisdiction, if violations are willful, egregious, or repeated.

C.    A civil action under subsection B of this section may be brought by any resident of the City. In the event that such an action is brought by a resident of the City and the petitioner prevails, the respondent public official shall pay reasonable attorney’s fees and costs to the prevailing petitioner. Civil penalties collected in such a prosecution shall accrue 10% to the petitioner, and 90% to the City’s general fund. (3/6/01 Election)

 

2.56.080 Severability.
If any provision of this chapter is held invalid, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect other provisions or applications which can be given effect without the invalidated provision, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are severable. (3/6/01 Election)

TITLE 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Chapter 3.04 CAPITAL OUTLAY FUND
Chapter 3.08 SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
Chapter 3.12 SALE OF CITY-OWNED REAL PROPERTY
Chapter 3.15 BIDDING AND CONTRACTING, AND OTHER PURCHASES OF SUPPLIES, SERVICES AND EQUIPMENT
Chapter 3.20 DEMANDS AGAINST THE CITY
Chapter 3.24 UNIFORM LOCAL SALES AND USE TAX
Chapter 3.28 TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
Chapter 3.29 UTILITY USERS’ TAX

Chapter 3.04 CAPITAL OUTLAY FUND
3.04.010 Created.
Pursuant to the authority granted in Sections 53730 through 53737 of the State Government Code, and subject to the limitations therein stated, a fund is hereby created to provide for capital outlays and to be known and designated as the “capital outlay fund.” (Prior code § 2.39)

 

3.04.020 Taxation for fund—Statutory limitations.
Taxes may be levied upon the taxable property in the City for the raising of moneys for additions to the capital outlay fund, but no levy so made shall exceed the limitation imposed by the general laws of the state upon the right of the City to impose taxes, subject to the increase in such limitation adopted by the voters of the City. (Prior code § 2.40)

 

3.04.030 Transfers to fund—Council authority.
The City Council may from time to time transfer to the capital outlay fund any unencumbered surplus funds remaining on hand in the City at the end of any fiscal year. (Prior code § 2.41)

 

3.04.040 Expenditures from fund.
The capital outlay fund shall remain inviolate for the making of any capital outlays as may from time to time be designated by the City Council, and no money shall be disbursed therefrom except for such a purpose without the consent of the electors as provided in Section 53736 of the State Government Code. (Prior code § 2.42)

Chapter 3.08 SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
3.08.010 Created.
To comply with the provisions of Sections 180 through 207 of the Streets and Highways Code, there is created in the City treasury a special fund to be known as the “special gas tax street improvement fund.” (Prior code § 2.36)

 

3.08.020 Moneys to be paid into fund.
All moneys received by the City from the state under the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code, Sections 180 to 207, for the acquisition of real property or interests therein for, or the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or highways, other than state highways, shall be paid into the special gas tax street improvement fund. (Prior code § 2.37)

 

3.08.030 Expenditure restrictions.
All moneys in the special gas tax street improvement fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by, and subject to all of the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code, Sections 180 through 207. (Prior code § 2.38)

Chapter 3.12 SALE OF CITY-OWNED REAL PROPERTY
3.12.010 Sale authorized when.
Whenever the City Council determines that the disposition of any parcel of real property is for the common benefit of the City’s citizens, the City Council may direct City staff to sell, lease or dispose of such property in any manner consistent with state and federal law. (98-1; prior code §2.43)

 

3.12.020 Sale at public auction—Terms of sale.
Except as provided in Section 3.12.030, the sale of City-owned real property shall be at public auction, or to the highest responsible bidder after advertisement, and shall be for cash, or upon the following terms: Not less than one-third cash, and the balance in one or more installments falling due not more than five years from the date of sale, with a lien reserved to secure the payment thereof. (Prior code §2.44)

 

3.12.030 Sale by ordinance authorized when—Procedure.
The City Council, when it determines that the public interest or necessity requires the sale, conveyance or exchange of any real property owned by the City, or the quitclaiming by the City of any interest in real property, without notice of sale or advertisement for bids, may, by ordinance adopted by the votes of at least three of the members, authorize the execution of such deed, contract or other instrument as may be necessary to effect such sale, conveyance, exchange or quitclaim at and for a price or consideration and upon the terms and conditions to be specified in such ordinance. (Prior code §2.45)

 

3.12.040 Resolution directing sale—Bidding procedure.
The sale of any City-owned real property, except as provided by Section 3.12.030, shall be conducted in accordance with the following procedure:

A.     The City Council, whenever it determines that the public interest or necessity requires the sale of real property owned by the City, or any department thereof, may by resolution adopted by the votes of at least three of its members order the same to be sold. Such resolution shall direct the City Clerk to cause notice of the sale of such property to be published for three insertions in one or more weekly newspapers printed, published and circulated in the City and shall specify the terms and conditions upon which the same will be sold, which shall be in conformity with this chapter, and also whether the sale of such property shall be at public auction or to the highest responsible bidder.

B.     Bids for such property shall be sealed and filed in the office of the City Clerk at or before a time to be specified in the notice of sale. The City Clerk shall present all bids received by him or her to the City Council at its next regular meeting after the expiration of the time for the submission of bids. The City Council shall thereupon, in public session, open, examine and declare all bids received. At the time of opening the bids, any responsible person may bid for such property a sum exceeding the highest bid by not less than five percent and such bid so made may be raised by any other person until the property shall either be sold or withdrawn from sale. No bid shall be considered unless accompanied by a cash deposit or certified check in an amount not less than ten percent of the amount of such bid as a guarantee that the person making such bid will purchase and pay for such property upon the terms and conditions specified in the notice of sale.

C.    The City Council may, in its discretion, in all cases where property is offered for sale, reject any or all bids, or withdraw such property from sale at any time should it deem such action to be for the public interest. (Prior code § 2.46)

 

3.12.050 Employment of promotional agent, authorized when.
The City Council, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, shall have the right, when previously authorized by a three-fifths vote thereof, to employ and pay, on a commission or other basis, an agent to render service in promoting, furthering or negotiating the sale of City-owned real property. (Prior code § 2.47)

Chapter 3.15 BIDDING AND CONTRACTING, AND OTHER PURCHASES OF SUPPLIES, SERVICES AND EQUIPMENT
3.15.010 Definitions.
Unless otherwise indicated, the following definitions shall apply to all provisions of this chapter:

“Act” means the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act found at Public Contract Code Section 22000 et seq.

“Alternative purchasing procedure” means purchasing supplies, services or equipment when any of the following situations exist: an emergency; no competitive market; competitive bidding already completed; state purchases; or no bids received.

“Authorized contracting party” means the City official or body provided with authority under this chapter to approve a contract or to make a purchase.

“City Manager” means the City Manager or person designated by the City Manager to perform all or some of the duties prescribed in this chapter.

“Commission” means the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission created by Division 2, Part 3, Chapter 2, Article 2 of the California Public Contracts Code (commencing at Section 22010).

“Direct competitive purchasing procedure” bidding means quotes shall be obtained and a pricing quote sheet completed. A vendor agreement or letter of agreement shall be completed when required.

“Emergency” for purposes of public projects shall have that meaning provided in Public Contract Code Sections 22035 and 22050. Emergency for all other purchasing purposes means a situation which makes competitive bidding, either formal or informal, impractical or not in the best interests of the City.

“Facility” shall have that meaning provided in Section 22002(e) of the Act, as that section may be amended from time to time. In this light, facility shall include any plant, building, structure, ground facility, utility system, subject to the limitation found in paragraph 4 of the definition for public project, real property, streets and highways, or other public works improvements.

“Formal competitive purchasing procedure” means a procedure which meets the requirements of state and local law, including the Act, this chapter and any policies and procedures approved by the City Manager consistent with this chapter. The City Council shall approve plans and specifications for purchases, with the exception of vehicles, of more than seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000); the project shall be publicly noticed as required by law so all interested vendors can participate; bid packets may be prepared for purchase by vendors; and  the vendor shall be approved by the City Council based on established criteria.

“General services” mean all services performed by persons not in a professional occupation, including, but not limited to, contract services for park, electrical and computer repair; building, facility and vehicle maintenance; recreation programs; and other similar services which are not professional services.

“Informal competitive purchasing procedure” means that at least three (3) bids shall be obtained from a predetermined vendor list and the City Manager shall approve final selection.

“Maintenance work” shall have that meaning provided in Section 22002(d) of the Act, as that section may be amended from time to time. In this light, maintenance work shall include, but shall not be limited to, all of the following:

1.     Routine, recurring, and usual work for the preservation or protection of any publicly owned or publicly operated facility for its intended purposes.

2.     Minor repainting.

3.     Street and highway maintenance, including utility patching, skin patching, crack filling, filling of pot holes, slurry sealing, edge grading, street striping, resurfacing of streets and highways at less than one-inch, sign replacement, sidewalk repair and replacement, curb and gutter repair and replacement, and street and traffic light repair and replacement. Maintenance work shall not include striping of a new street or highway.

4.     Sewer maintenance, including foaming, video taping, cleaning and manhole restoration.

5.     Traffic signal maintenance. Maintenance work shall not include installation of a new traffic signal.

6.     Storm drain related maintenance.

7.     Landscape maintenance, including mowing, watering, trimming, tree pruning, planting, tree and plant replacement, irrigation and sprinkler system servicing, retrofit and repair, and landscape rehabilitation.

8.     Maintenance of facilities, including roof repairs, heating and air conditioning repairs, and electric repairs.

9.     Vehicle and equipment maintenance and repairs.

10.   Work performed to keep, operate, and maintain publicly owned water, power, or waste disposal systems, including, but not limited to, dams, reservoirs, powerplants, and electrical transmission lines of 230,000 volts and higher.

“Negotiated contract” shall mean a letter of agreement, vendor agreement, contract, professional services agreement, maintenance services/public works projects agreement or written documentation which details terms and conditions of the purchase.

“Professional services” means all services performed by persons in a professional occupation, including, but not limited to, consulting and performance services for accounting, auditing, computer hardware and software support, engineering, architectural, planning, redevelopment, financial, economic, personnel, social services, animal control, legal, management, environmental, cable television, communication and other similar professional functions which may be necessary for the operation of the City.

“Public project” shall have that meaning provided in Section 22002(c) of the Act, as that section may be amended from time to time. In this light, public project shall not include maintenance work. In addition, public project shall include, but shall not be limited to, all of the following:

1.     Construction, reconstruction, erection, alteration, renovation, improvement, demolition, and repair work involving any publicly owned, leased, or operated facility.

2.     Roof replacements for publicly owned, leased or operated facilities.

3.     Painting or repainting of any publicly owned, leased, or operated facility.

4.     In the case of a publicly owned utility system, “public project” shall include only the construction, erection, improvement, or repair of dams, reservoirs, powerplants, and electrical transmission lines of 230,000 volts and higher.

“Purchasing officer” means the City Manager or his or her designee(s) as provided in Section 3.15.020. Pursuant to Section 3.15.020, the City Manager may change his or her designation at any time. (99-11)

 

3.15.020 Purchasing officer—Position created—Appointment.
There is established in the office of the City Manager the role of a purchasing officer. The purchasing officer shall be the City Manager or his or her designee(s). If the City Manager designates one or more persons to act in this role, the purchasing officer(s) shall serve at the pleasure of the City Manager. The duties of the purchasing officer may be combined with those of any other officer(s) or position(s). (99-11)

 

3.15.030 Purchasing officer—Powers and duties.
The purchasing officer, in accordance with the policies set forth in this chapter and in any written procedures approved by the City Manager consistent with this chapter, shall have the power to:

A.     Purchase or contract for supplies, services and equipment required by the City.

B.     Negotiate and recommend to the City Council execution of contracts for the purchase of supplies, services and equipment.

C.    Prepare and implement policies and procedures governing the bidding, contracting, purchasing, storing, distribution and disposal of supplies, services and equipment for the City.

D.    Prescribe and maintain such forms as may be reasonably necessary to the implementation of this chapter and any other policies and procedures approved by the City Manager consistent with this chapter.

E.     Review the working details, drawings, plans and specifications for any projects or purchases requiring such review in this chapter.

F.     Inspect or supervise the inspection of purchased supplies, services and equipment to ensure conformity with any specifications established or required by the City.

G.    Transfer among departments any supplies, services and equipment not needed by one such department, but which are necessary for the operation of one or more other departments.

H.    Sell any supplies and equipment not needed for public use or that may become unsuitable for their intended use.

I.      Develop and maintain any bidder’s list, contractor’s list or vendor’s catalog file necessary to the operation of this chapter and any other policies and procedures approved by the City Manager consistent with this chapter. (99-11)

 

3.15.040 Purchasing policies and procedures.
A.     The City shall secure supplies, services and equipment at the lowest total cost commensurate with the quality and scope needed, and subject to any limitations imposed by state law. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City shall secure professional services based upon demonstrated competence, professional qualifications and suitability for the project in general. The City may consider cost of professional services if the authorized contracting party determines it to be a relevant factor under the circumstances.

In order to promote the economic health and development of the City, to recognize the amount of sales tax that is returned to the City as a result of the award of a purchase contract for supplies and equipment to a Claremont vendor, to encourage local participation in the procurement process, and to exercise the prudent use of public funds, the City Council may, by minute action, award a bid to a Claremont vendor provided the local bid does not exceed the lowest bid by more than five percent (5%) or ten thousand dollars ($10,000), whichever is less.

For purposes of this section, “Claremont vendor” shall mean a local business enterprise whose business address at the point of sale is located within the geographical boundaries of the City and who maintains a valid license or permit to do business in the City.

B.     The purchasing officer shall develop, for approval by the City Manager, such policies and procedures as are necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter. The policies and procedures shall be written and implemented in such a way to encourage open and competitive bidding, provide equal opportunity based on merit, make each selection process free of invidious discrimination, provide for efficient and timely acquisition of needed supplies, services and equipment, and provide effective fiscal controls.

C.    In purchasing, supplies, services and equipment, the City shall make use of competitive bidding, either direct, formal or informal, whenever required by law, this chapter, or any policies and procedures approved by the City Manager consistent with this chapter.

D.    Direct, formal or informal competitive bidding is not required, for instance, when an “emergency” is declared pursuant to Sections 3.15.090(A) of this chapter. With respect to emergencies involving public projects of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) or more, however, this waiver of competitive bidding shall last only so long as the emergency exists in the determination of the City Council. (00-02; 99-11)

 

3.15.050 Bidding, purchasing and contracting.
A.     $5,000 or Less. Any purchase of five thousand dollars ($5,000) or less may be awarded by the division head responsible for the project by any direct competitive purchasing procedure as defined herein.

B.     $25,000 or Less. Any purchase of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) or less may be awarded by the City Manager or by the director of the department responsible for the project by any direct competitive purchasing procedure as defined herein.

C.    $25,001 – $75,000. Any purchase of more than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000), but less than or equal to seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000) may, except as otherwise provided in this chapter or the Act, be awarded by the City Council pursuant to the informal competitive purchasing procedure set forth in Section 3.15.070. If all bids received are over seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000), the City Council may, with the approval of a four-fifths (4/5) vote of those members present, award the contract in an amount not exceeding eighty thousand dollars ($80,000) to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder, so long as the City Council also determines that the City’s cost estimate for the project was reasonable.

D.    $75,001 or More. Any purchase of more than seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000) shall, except as otherwise provided in this chapter or the Act, be awarded by the City Council pursuant to the formal competitive purchasing procedure set forth in Section 3.15.080.

E.     City Engineer Approval. The City Engineer shall review and approve the working details, drawings, plans, and specifications prepared for public projects and maintenance work where applicable in the areas of streets, sewer, storm drains, and traffic signals, but not necessarily for parks, buildings, and landscaping, which may affect the engineering design or operation of public improvements and which may bring into question the City’s liability for dangerous conditions of public property.

F.     City Council Approval. The City Council shall review and approve applicable working details, drawings, plans and specifications prepared for every purchase, with the exception of vehicles, of more than seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000).

G.    Purchasing Officer Approval. The purchasing officer, or his or her designee, shall review and approve all contracts for public projects of five thousand dollars ($5,000) or more.

H.    Five-year term limitation. No agreement or contract shall extend for a period of more than five (5) years, including any authorized extensions. (12-02)

 

3.15.060 Claremont direct competitive purchasing procedure.
A.     Uses of Claremont Direct Competitive Purchasing Procedure. This direct purchasing procedure shall be used for purchases between two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500) and twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000).

B.     At least three (3) vendors shall be contacted to provide informal quotes.

C.    The department shall maintain a list of predetermined vendors. (08-02; 99-11)

 

3.15.070 Claremont informal competitive purchasing procedure.
A.     Uses of Claremont Informal Competitive Purchasing Procedure. This informal purchasing procedure shall be used for purchases between twenty-five thousand and one dollar ($25,001) and seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000).

B.     Contractor/Vendor List. The department shall maintain a list of qualified contractors.

C.    Distribution of Notice Inviting Informal Bids. At least three (3) vendors or contractors shall be asked to submit informal bids, and the City shall endeavor to receive informal bids from at least three (3) vendors or contractors. Notices inviting informal bids shall be mailed to the list of qualified contractors and/or trade journals not less than ten (10) days before bids are due.

D.    Contents of Notice Inviting Informal Bids. When soliciting informal bids, staff shall: (1) describe to the vendor in general terms the project, service or item; (2) advise vendors how to obtain additional information about the project; (3) state the date, time and place for the submission of bids; and (4) include any other information required by state or local law, as determined by the City Attorney. Informal bids for purchases of more than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) shall be sealed bids.

E.     Proprietary Projects or Products. If the director of the using department certifies that, to the best of his or her knowledge, the product or service is proprietary in nature and can be obtained only from a limited number of contractors, and that no equivalent products or services are available, the notice inviting informal bids may be sent exclusively to such vendor(s) or contractor(s).

F.     Contents of Remaining Bid and Contract Documents. The contents and form of the remaining bid and contract documents shall be approved by the director of the using department, as well as the City Attorney.

G.    City’s Authority. The City may reject any or all bids received, and may waive any minor irregularities in each bid received.

H.    Proposal Submittal. Contractors shall submit their proposals in writing.

I.      No Bids Received. If no bids are received, the authorized contracting party may award the contract by any alternative purchasing procedure. (99-11)

 

3.15.080 Formal competitive purchasing procedure.
A.     Uses of Formal Competitive Purchasing Procedure. This formal purchasing procedure shall be used for purchases greater than seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000) or whenever formal competitive purchasing is otherwise required by this chapter.

B.     Required Process. The formal competitive purchasing procedure shall comply with all aspects of state and local law governing formal competitive bidding, including, but not limited to, the Public Contract Code, Government Code, Labor Code, resolutions of the City Council as may be adopted from time to time, and policies and procedures as the City Manager may approve from time to time.

C.    Distribution of Notice Inviting Formal Bids. The notice inviting formal bids shall comply with Section 22037 of the Act, as such section may be amended from time to time. For public projects only, the notice inviting formal bids shall also be sent to all construction trade journals specified in Section 22036 of the Act at least thirty (30) calendar days before the date of bid opening. Any other notice as may be deemed proper may also be given for any particular project.

D.    Contents of Notice Inviting Formal Bids. At a minimum, the notice inviting formal bids shall: (1) describe the project in general terms; (2) state how to obtain more detailed information about the project; (3) state the date, time and place for the submission of sealed bids; and (4) include any other information required by state or local law, as determined by the City Attorney.

E.     Contents of Remaining Bid and Contract Documents. The contents and form of the remaining bid and contract documents shall be approved by the director of the using department, as well as the City Attorney.

F.     City’s Authority. The City may reject any or all bids received, and may waive any minor irregularities in each bid received.

G.    Proposal Submittal. Contractors shall submit their proposals in writing.

H.    No Bids Received. If no bids are received, the authorized contracting party may award the contract by any alternative purchasing procedure. (99-11)

 

3.15.090 Using alternative purchasing procedures.
For non-public projects and other situations provided in this section, an alternative purchasing procedure which results in a negotiated contract, force account, purchase order or any other procedure determined by the authorized contracting party to be in the best interests of the City and in compliance with the City’s policies and procedures may be used.

A.     Emergencies. In situations determined by the City Manager to constitute an emergency for a public project pursuant to Section 22035 of the Act and Public Contract Code Section 22050. The City Council hereby delegates to the City Manager the power to declare a public emergency and take any directly related and immediate action required by the emergency, up to a total of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000), pursuant to Section 22035 of the Act and Public Contract Code Section 22050. Emergency expenditures of more than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) shall first be approved by the City Council. Work shall be performed without the benefit of competitive purchasing, either formal or informal, only so long as necessary under those sections.

For projects of more than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000), a report on the emergency and work performed shall be provided at the next regular meeting of the City Council, and then at every meeting thereafter required by Section 22050. At such meetings, the City Council shall determine, by a four-fifths (4/5) vote, that there is a need to continue the action without the benefit of informal or formal competitive purchasing in accordance with Section 22035 of the Act and Public Contract Code Section 22050. The City Council shall terminate the emergency action at the earliest possible date that conditions warrant, so that the remainder of the emergency action may be completed pursuant to a formal competitive purchasing procedure.

For projects of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) or less, the City Manager shall determine, on his or her own as the action continues, whether there is a need to continue the action without the benefit of public project informal competitive purchasing. The City Manager shall terminate the emergency action at the earliest possible date that conditions warrant, so that the remainder of the emergency action may be completed pursuant to an informal competitive purchasing procedure.

B.     Professional Services. When purchasing professional services.

C.    Computers. When purchasing computer software, hardware maintenance services or software maintenance services.

D.    Competitive Bidding Already Completed. When the authorized contracting party determines that a competitive bid procedure has been conducted by another public agency (e.g., through CMAS or GSA) and the price to the City is equal to or better than the price to that public agency.

E.     State Purchase. When the purchase is made on behalf of the City by the State Department of General Services.

F.     No Bids Received. When no bids are received pursuant to either the public project informal competitive purchasing procedure or the formal competitive purchasing procedure.

G.    No Competitive Market. When the authorized contracting party determines that a competitive market does not exist, such as, but not limited to, with memberships in certain professional organizations, meetings, conventions, some forms of travel, legal advertising and when the needed supplies, services and equipment are proprietary and can only be provided by one source.

H.    Best Interests of the City. When the City Council, on recommendation of the City Manager, determines that an alternative procedure will be in the best interests of the City and the policies set forth in this chapter. (99-11)

Chapter 3.20 DEMANDS AGAINST THE CITY
3.20.010 Presentation to Council.
All demands against the City shall be presented in writing at a regular meeting of the City Council, fully itemized and verified as just and correct by affidavit of the claimant, or someone on his or her behalf. (06-02)

 

3.20.020 Approval by Council.
All demands shall be presented to the City Council as demands for auditing and approval before payment, with the exception of the following claims which may be paid prior to auditing and approval by the City Council as authorized by the Government Code of the state. Warrants drawn in payment of demands certified by the Director of Finance as conforming with the budget approved by ordinance or resolution of the City Council need not be audited by the City Council before payment. Budgeted demands paid by warrant prior to audit by the City Council shall be presented to the City Council for ratification and approval at the first meeting after delivery of the warrants. Approval of such warrants shall be made by affirmative vote of at least three members of the Council. (06-02)

Chapter 3.24 UNIFORM LOCAL SALES AND USE TAX
3.24.010 Title for citation.
This chapter shall be known as the “uniform local sales and use tax ordinance.” (Prior code § 21.21)

 

3.24.020 Purpose.
The City Council declares that this chapter is to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions of this chapter be interpreted in order to accomplish these purposes:

A.     To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

B.     To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

C.    To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes;

D.    To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting City sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of recordkeeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 21.24)

 

3.24.030 Operative date.
This chapter shall be operative on January 1, 1974. (Prior code § 21.23)

 

3.24.040 Contract with state.
Prior to the operative date cited in Section 3.24.030, this City shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of the sales and use tax ordinance codified in this chapter; provided, that if this City shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Prior code § 21.25)

 

3.24.050 Sales tax imposed.
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the City at the rate stated in Section 3.24.070 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this City on and after the operative date. (Prior code § 21.26)

 

3.24.060 Use tax imposed.
An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or consumption in this City of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this City at the rate stated in Section 3.24.070 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Prior code § 21.28)

 

3.24.070 Rate.
The rate of sales and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be one percent. (Prior code § 21.22)

 

3.24.080 Place of sale.
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (Prior code § 21.22)

 

3.24.090 Statutory provisions—Adopted.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Prior code § 21.28-1)

 

3.24.100 Statutory provisions—Amendments adopted.
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. (Prior code § 21.28-7)

 

3.24.110 Limitations on adoption of state law.
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of the City shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word “state” is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the State Constitution; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the City, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the provisions of that code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word “state” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this state” in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Prior code § 21.28-2)

 

3.24.120 Permit not required when.
If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Prior code § 21.28-3)

 

3.24.130 Exclusions and exemptions.
A.     The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer.

B.     The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter.

C.    There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the City in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government.

D.    In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. (83-9; prior code § 21.28-5)

 

3.24.140 Enjoining collection forbidden.
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this City, or against any officer of the state or this City, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this article, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Prior code § 21.28-8)

 

3.24.150 Alternating applicability of provisions authorized when.
At the time the ordinance codified herein goes into operation, the provisions of Ordinance 550 (as amended by Ordinance 681) shall be suspended and shall not again be of any force or effect until and unless for any reason the State Board of Equalization ceases to perform the functions incident to the administration and operation of the sales and use tax imposed in this chapter; provided, however, that power to adopt the ordinance codified in this chapter, or that the State Board of Equalization is without power to perform the functions incident to the administration and operation of the taxes imposed by the ordinance codified in this chapter, the provisions of Ordinance 550 (as amended by Ordinance 681) shall not be deemed to have been suspended, but shall be deemed to have been in full force and effect at the rate of one percent continuously from and after April 1, 1956. Upon the ceasing of the State Board of Equalization to perform the functions incident to the administration and operation of the taxes imposed by the ordinance codified in this chapter, the provisions of Ordinance 550 (as amended by Ordinance 681) shall again be in full force and effect at the rate of one percent. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as relieving any person of the obligation to pay to the City any sales and use tax accrued and owing by the reason of the provisions of Ordinance 550 (as amended by Ordinance 681) in force and effect prior to and including March 31, 1956. (Prior code § 21.28-12)

Chapter 3.28 TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
3.28.010 Definitions.
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter:

“Hotel” means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof.

“Occupancy” means the use or possession, or the right to use or possession of, any room or rooms or portion thereof in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes.

“Operator” means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his or her functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.

“Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

“Rent” means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel, valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.

“Transient” means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any individual who exercises or is entitled to occupancy for a period of thirty (30) days or less shall be deemed to be a transient, regardless of whether the reservation and/or payment for occupancy is made directly by the individual exercising occupancy or another individual or entity. The intent is to tax the individual transient occupying the room. For purposes of this definition, the exercise of or entitlement to occupancy shall be evidenced by any of the following:

1.     An individual’s signature on a hotel registration card or form, a hotel invoice or receipt or any other document associated with an individual’s occupancy in a hotel; and/or

2.     An individual’s providing identification to hotel staff as proof of employment, membership or affiliation with any person as defined in this section as a condition of or in connection with exercising occupancy in a hotel.

In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of this chapter may be considered. (99-01)

 

3.28.020 Tax imposed—Amount—Payable where and when.
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of ten percent of the rent charged by the operator. Such tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the City which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the City. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient’s ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the finance officer may require that such tax be paid directly to the City. (84-8)

 

3.28.030 Exemptions.
A.     No tax shall be imposed upon:

1.     Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the City to impose the tax provided in this chapter;

2.     Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty;

3.     Any federal or state officer or employee when on official business.

B.     No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the finance officer. (84-8)

 

3.28.040 Collection—Certain tax-related advertising prohibited.
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided. (84-8)

 

3.28.050 Transient occupancy registration certificate.
Within thirty days after the effective date of this chapter, or within thirty days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register such hotel with the finance officer and obtain from him or her a transient occupancy registration certificate to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Such certificate shall, among other things, state the following:

A.     The name of the operator;

B.     The address of the hotel;

C.    The date upon which the certificate was issued;

D.    “This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance by registering with the finance officer for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax to the finance officer. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department, or office of this City. This certificate does not constitute a permit.” (84-8)

 

3.28.060 Reports required—Reporting period—Remittance of tax to finance officer.
Each operator shall, on or before the last day of each month file a return to the finance officer on forms provided by him or her, of the total rents charged for transient occupancies during the preceding calendar month. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax payable to the City shall be remitted to the finance officer. The finance officer may establish longer reporting periods of up to three months for any certificate holder due to seasonal fluctuations in occupancy or as he or she deems appropriate for administrative efficiency. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the City until payment thereof is made to the finance officer. (84-8)

 

3.28.070 Recordkeeping—Retention of records—Right of inspection.
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the City of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the City, which records the finance officer shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. (84-8)

 

3.28.080 Failure to remit tax when due—Penalty.
A.     Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of tax in addition to the amount owed. Such penalty shall be added by the finance officer on the first day of each month after the due date thereof. The amount of such penalty shall in no event exceed fifty percent of the amount due.

B.     When the last day of the month in which the tax due falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or a state or national holiday, payment of the tax may be made without penalty on the first working day of the succeeding month. Penalties in such cases shall attach on the second working day of the succeeding month.

C.    For the purpose of this chapter, postmarks shall be accepted as the date of payment made, providing that the transmitting envelope contains a post office postmark cancellation not later than the due date, has been sent to the City first class mail, postage prepaid, and has been properly addressed.

D.    If the finance officer determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsection A of this section.

E.     Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax required to be paid by this chapter. (84-8)

 

3.28.090 Failure to collect and report tax—Determination of tax—Notice—Hearing.
If any operator fails or refuses to collect such tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of such tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the finance officer shall proceed in such manner as he or she may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base the estimate of the tax due. As soon as the finance officer procures such facts and information as he or she is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he or she shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the finance officer shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his or her last known place of address. Such operator may, within ten days after the serving or mailing of such notice, make application in writing to the finance officer for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the finance officer shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the finance officer shall give not less than five days’ written notice in the manner prescribed in this section to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in such notice why such amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing, the finance officer shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed in this section of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 3.28.100. (84-8)

 

3.28.100 Determination of tax—Appeal.
Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the finance officer with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the Council by filing a notice of appeal with the finance officer within fifteen days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The Council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the finance officer shall give notice in writing to such operator at his or her last known place of address. The findings of the Council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed in Section 3.28.090 for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall immediately become due and payable upon the service of notice. (84-8)

 

3.28.110 Refunds.
Any claim for a refund of any tax, interest or penalty collected or received by the City under this chapter shall be presented in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of Title 1 of this Code. (96-04; 84-8)

 

3.28.120 Action by City to collect tax.
Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the City. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the City shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the City. Any person owing money to the City under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the City for the recovery of such amount. (84-8)

 

3.28.130 Violations.
No operator or other person shall fail or refuse to register as required by this chapter, or to furnish any report required to be made, or shall fail or refuse to furnish a supplemental report or other data required by the finance officer, or shall render a false or fraudulent report or claim. No person who is required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim shall make any false or fraudulent report or claim with the intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due according to this chapter. (89-1; 84-8)

Chapter 3.29 UTILITY USERS’ TAX
Note
*      Editor’s note for Chapter 3.29: Utility Users’ Tax ratified by Claremont voters on March 4, 1997 (97-01).

 

3.29.010 Definitions.
The following words and phrases whenever used in this chapter shall be construed as defined in this section.

“Cogenerator” means any corporation or person employing cogeneration technology for producing power from other than a conventional power source for the generation of electricity for self use or sale to others.

“Fuel” means natural or manufactured gas or any alternate hydrocarbon fuel which may be substituted therefor. It shall not include fuel intended for use in motor vehicles and subject to taxation under the State of California motor vehicles fuels tax.

“Month” means a calendar month.

“Nonutility supplier” means a service supplier, other than an electrical corporation franchised to serve the City, which generates electrical energy in capacities of at least fifty kilowatts for its own use or for sale to others; or, a gas supplier other than a gas corporation, that sells or supplies gas to users within the City.

“Person” means any domestic or foreign corporation, firm, association, syndicate, joint stock company, partnership of any kind, joint venture, club, Massachusetts business or common law trust, society, or individual. “Person” shall include both nonprofit and for-profit organizations, and without regard to exemption from real property or income taxes.

“Residence,” for the purpose of Section 3.29.030, means an individual dwelling unit, and not group quarters such as a dormitory or health care facility.

“Service supplier” means any entity required to collect or self-impose and remit a tax as imposed by this chapter.

“Service user” means a person required to pay a tax imposed by this chapter.

“Tax administrator” means the City Manager, or his or her designee.

“Telephone corporation,” “electrical corporation,” “gas corporation,” “water corporation,” and “cable television corporation” have the same meanings as defined in Sections 234, 218, 222, 241 and 215-5, respectively, of the California Public Utilities Code, except “electrical corporation,” “gas corporation,” and “water corporation” shall also be construed to include any municipality, public agency or person engaged in the selling or supplying of electrical power or gas or water to a service user. (93-4)

 

3.29.020 Constitutional and statutory exemptions.
A.     Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as imposing a tax upon any person when imposition of such tax upon that person would be in violation of the Constitution of the United States or that of the State of California, or of any applicable state or federal law.

B.     The tax administrator shall prepare a list of the persons exempt from the provisions of this chapter by virtue of this section and furnish a copy thereof to each service supplier. (93-4)

 

3.29.030 Exemption for low-income households.
A.     The tax imposed by this chapter shall not apply to utilities supplied to the separately metered or billed residence of a service user if: (1) the combined gross income of all members of the service user’s residence is less than the amount established for Los Angeles County by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development for very low-income families for the applicable household size; and (2) such condition is demonstrated to the tax administrator’s satisfaction.

B.     The income exemption limit provided herein shall be revised annually by the tax administrator to conform to the most current very low-income limits for Los Angeles County for applicable household sizes, as determined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) with regard to the Public Housing and Section 8 Program.

C.    The exemption granted by this section shall not eliminate the duty of the service supplier, nonutility supplier, or person to collect and remit utility users’ taxes for exempt persons, or the duty of exempt persons to pay such taxes unless an exemption is applied for and granted in accordance with Section 3.29.040. (93-4)

 

3.29.040 Application for exemption.
A.     Any service user meeting the exemption qualifications of Section 3.29.030 may file an application with the tax administrator for an exemption. Such application shall be made on forms supplied by the tax administrator and shall recite under oath facts which qualify the applicant for an exemption.

B.     The tax administrator shall review all such applications, certify qualified applicants as exempt, and notify all affected service suppliers when an exemption is approved, stating the name of the applicant, the address to which exempt service is being supplied, the account number, if any, and such other information as may be necessary for the service supplier to remove the exempt service user from its tax billing procedure. The service supplier shall remove the exempt service user from its tax billing procedure no later than sixty days after receipt of such notice from the tax administrator.

C.    Approved exemptions under this section shall not apply retroactively.

D.    Except as provided hereinafter, exemptions shall be renewed by the tax administrator as long as the facts supporting the application for exemption continue. An exemption granted shall automatically terminate with any change in the residence of the person exempted, but such person may apply for a new exemption with each change of residence.

E.     Any person exempt from the tax shall notify the tax administrator within ten days of any change in fact or circumstance which might cause the person to become ineligible for exemption.

F.     Any person knowingly receiving the benefits of this exemption when the basis for such exemption does not exist or ceases to exist, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

G.    Any service supplier who determines that a new or nonexempt service user is receiving exempt service through a meter or connection previously used by an exempt service user shall immediately notify the tax administrator of such fact; and  the tax administrator shall ascertain whether or not the provisions of this article have been complied with and, where appropriate, order the service supplier to commence collecting the tax from the nonexempt service user. (93-4)

 

3.29.050 Telephone users’ tax.
A.     There is imposed a tax on the amounts paid for any telephone services, by every person in the City using such services other than a gas, electric, cable television, water, or telephone corporation collecting such tax. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five and one-half percent of the charges for such services, and shall be paid by the person paying for such services.

B.     As used in this section, the term “charges” shall not include charges for advertising, nor state or federal taxes separately billed to and payable by the service user; nor shall the term “charges” include charges for services paid for by inserting coins in coin-operated telephones except that where such coin-operated service is furnished for a guaranteed amount, the amounts paid under such guarantee plus any fixed monthly or other periodic charge shall be included in the base for computing the amount of tax due; nor shall the term “charges” include charges for any type of service or equipment furnished by a service supplier subject to public utility regulations during any period in which the same or similar services or equipment are also available for sale or lease from persons other than a service supplier subject to public utility regulation; nor shall the words “telephone communications services” include land mobile service or maritime mobile services as defined in Section 2.1 or Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as said section existed on January 1, 1970. The term “telephone communication services” refers to that service which provides access to a telephone system and the privilege of telephone quality communication with substantially all persons having telephone stations which are part of such telephone system. The telephone users’ tax is intended to, and does, apply to basic monthly charges for cellular telephone service or enhanced specialized mobile radio communication service, when the service use has a billing address in the City.

C.    The tax imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the person providing the telephone communication services, or the person receiving payment for such services. The amount of the tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator on or before the last day of the following month; or, at the option of the person required to collect and remit the tax, an estimated amount of tax collected, measured by the tax bill in the previous month, shall be remitted to the tax administrator on or before the last day of each month with a reconciliation of estimate amount to the actual amount submitted the following month.

D.    The tax imposed under the provisions of subsection A of this section shall not be imposed upon amounts paid for telephone communication services where imposition of such tax would be in violation of the Constitution of the United States, the United States Code, or the laws of the State of California, or upon toll charges used in the collection and dissemination of news for the public press or on charges for wide-area telephone service used by common carriers in the conduct of their business or on charges which are exempt from taxation under Section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code pursuant to subsections (a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), (g) and (i) of Section 4253 of the Internal Revenue Code. (95-03; 94-14; 93-4)

 

3.29.060 Electricity users’ tax.
A.     There is imposed a tax upon every person in the City using electrical energy in the City other than a gas, electrical, cable television, water, or telephone corporation collecting such tax. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five and one-half percent of the charges made for such energy by an electrical corporation franchised to serve the City and shall be paid by the person using the energy. The tax applicable to electrical energy provided by a nonutility supplier shall be determined by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charges the service user would have incurred if the energy used had been provided by the electrical corporation franchised by the City. Rate schedules for this purpose shall be available from the City. Non-utility suppliers shall install and maintain an appropriate utility-type metering system which will enable compliance with this section. “Charges,” as used in this section, shall include charges made for: (1) metered energy; and (2) minimum charges for service, including customer charges, service charges, demand charges, standby charges, and all other annual and monthly charges, fuel or other cost adjustments authorized by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. “Charges” shall not include state or federal taxes separately billed to and payable by the service user.

B.     As used in this section, the term “using electrical energy” shall not be construed to mean the storage of such energy by a person in a battery owned or possessed by him or her for use in an automobile or other mechanical device apart from the premises upon which the energy was received, provided, however, that the term shall include the receiving of such energy for the purpose of using it in the charging of batteries; nor shall the term include electricity used and consumed by an electric utility supplier in the conduct of its business as an electric public utility; nor shall the term include the mere receiving of such energy by an electric public utility or governmental agency at a point within the City for resale; nor shall the term include the use of such energy in the production or distribution of water by a public utility or a government agency; nor shall the term include the use of electricity generated by a cogenerator or a fuel cell for its own use.

C.    The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier or nonutility supplier. The tax imposed in this section on use supplied by self-generation or from a nonutility supplier not subject to the jurisdiction of this chapter, shall be collected and remitted to the tax administrator in the manner set forth in Section 3.29.070. The amount of tax collected by a service supplier or a nonutility supplier in one month shall be remitted by United States Mail, to the tax administrator, postmarked on or before the last day of the following month; or, at the option of the person required to collect and remit the tax, an estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month or upon the payment pattern of the customers of the service supplier, shall be remitted by United States Mail to the tax administrator, postmarked on or before the last day of each month, with a reconciliation of estimate amount to the actual amount submitted the following month. Remittance of tax may be predicated on a formula based upon the payment pattern of the supplier’s customers. (93-4)

 

3.29.070 Fuel users’ tax.
A.     There is imposed a tax upon every person in the City using natural gas and other hydrocarbon fuels, which is transported through the gas pipeline distribution system or by mobile transport, other than a gas, electrical, cable television, water, or telephone corporation collecting such tax. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five and one-half percent of the amount that will be paid by the person using the fuel. The tax applicable to fuel provided by nonutility suppliers shall be determined by applying the tax rate to the actual charges the service user incurred.

“Charges” as used in this section shall include that billed for: (1) fuel which is delivered through a gas pipeline distribution system or mobile transport; (2) fuel transportation charges; (3) demand charges, service charges, customer charges, annual and monthly charges, and any other charge authorized by the California Public Utilities Commission or Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.

B.     There shall be excluded from the base on which the tax imposed in this section is computed: (1) charges for gas which is to be resold and delivered through mains and pipes; (2) charges made for gas sold for use in the generation of electrical energy or for the production or distribution of water by a public utility or governmental agency; (3) charges made by a gas public utility for gas used and consumed in the conduct of the business of gas public utilities; (4) charges made for gas used in the propulsion of a motor vehicle, as that phrase is defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of California, utilizing natural gas; (5) charges related to late payments and returned checks; (6) charges made for gas used by a nonutility supplier to generate electrical energy for its own use or for sale to others provided the electricity so generated is subject to the tax in accordance with Section 3.29.060 of this chapter; and (7) state or federal taxes separately billed to and payable by the service user.

C.    The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the person using the fuel by the person selling or transporting the fuel. A person selling or providing transportation services of natural gas to a user for delivery through mains or pipes shall collect the tax from the user based upon the cost of transporting the fuel. The person selling or transporting the fuel shall, on or before the twentieth of each calendar month, commencing on the twentieth day of the calendar month after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, make a return to the tax administrator stating the amount of taxes billed during the preceding calendar month. At the time such returns are filed, the person selling or transporting the gas shall remit tax payments to the tax administrator in accordance with schedules established or approved by the tax administrator. The tax imposed in this section on use supplied by self-production or a nonutility supplier not subject to the jurisdiction of this chapter, shall be collected and remitted to the tax administrator in the manner set forth in Section 3.29.080. (93-4)

 

3.29.080 Service users receiving direct purchase of fuel or electricity.
A.     Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a service user receiving fuel or electricity directly from a nonutility supplier not under the jurisdiction of this chapter, or otherwise not having the full tax due on the use of fuel or electricity within the incorporated limits of the City directly billed and collected by the service supplier shall report the fact to the tax administrator within thirty days of said use and shall directly remit to the City the amount of tax due.

B.     The tax administrator may require the service user to provide, subject to audit, filed tax returns or other satisfactory evidence documenting the quantity of fuel or electricity used and the actual price thereof. (93-4)

 

3.29.090 Water users’ tax.
A.     There is imposed a tax upon every person in the City using water, which is delivered through mains or pipes, other than gas, electric, cable television, water, or telephone corporations collecting such tax. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five and one-half percent of the charges made for such water and shall be paid by the person paying for such water.

B.     There shall be excluded from the base on which the tax imposed in this section is computed, charges made for water which is to be resold and delivered through mains or pipes; charges made by a municipal water department, public utility or a City or water district for water used and consumed by such department, utility, or district; state regulatory fees separately billed to and payable by the service user; and City sewer maintenance fees billed by the water corporation.

C.    The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by the person supplying the water. The amount collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator on or before the last day of the following month. (93-4)

 

3.29.100 Cable television users’ tax.
A.     There is imposed a tax upon every person in the City using cable television service. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five and one-half percent of the charges made for such service and shall be paid by the person paying for such service. For purposes of this section, a cable television service shall mean any television signal delivered by cable, microwave or other method of telecommunication for a fee or charge.

B.     There shall be excluded from the base of which the tax imposed in this section is computed charges for unreturned equipment, any amount separately billed equal to the franchise fee paid by the cable television corporation to the City, if any, and state or federal taxes separately billed to and payable by the service user.

C.    The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by the person furnishing the cable television service. The amount collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator on or before the last day of the following month. (93-4)

 

3.29.110 Remittance of tax.
Taxes collected from a service user which are not remitted by the service supplier to the tax administrator on or before the due dates provided in this chapter are delinquent. Should the due date occur on a weekend or legal holiday, taxes collected shall not be delinquent if the tax return is postmarked on the first regular working day following a Saturday/Sunday or legal holiday. (93-4)

 

3.29.120 Actions to collect.
Any tax required to be paid by a service user under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the service user to the City. Any such tax collected from a service user, and not remitted to the tax administrator, shall be deemed a debt owed to the City by the person required to collect and remit. Any person owing money to the City under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the City for the recovery of such amount. (93-4)

 

3.29.130 Duty to collect—Procedures.
The duty to collect and remit the taxes imposed by this chapter shall be performed as follows:

A.     Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 3.29.080, the tax shall be collected insofar as practicable at the same time as and along with the charges made in accordance with the regular billing practices of the service supplier. Where the amount paid by a service user to a service supplier is less than the full amount of the utility charge and tax which has accrued for the billing period, such amount and any subsequent payments by a service user shall be applied to the utility charge first until such charge has been fully satisfied. Any remaining balance shall be applied to taxes due. In those cases where a service user has notified the service supplier of his or her refusal to pay the tax imposed on said utility charges, Section 3.29.150(D) will apply.

B.     The duty to collect tax from a service user shall commence with the beginning of the first full regular billing period applicable to the service user where all charges normally included in such regular billing are subject to the provisions of this chapter. Where a person receives more than one billing, one or more being for different periods than another, the duty to collect shall arise separately for each billing. (93-4)

 

3.29.140 Additional power and duties of tax administrator.
A.     The tax administrator shall have the power and duty, and is directed to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter.

B.     The tax administrator shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with provisions of this chapter for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection, and remittance of the taxes herein imposed. A copy of such rules and regulation shall be on file in the tax administrator’s office.

C.    The tax administrator may make administrative agreements to vary the requirements of this chapter so that collection of any tax imposed here may be made in conformance with the billing procedures of the particular service supplier so long as said agreements result in collection of the tax in conformance with the general purpose and scope of this chapter. A copy of each such agreement shall be on file in the tax administrator’s office.

D.    The tax administrator shall determine the eligibility of any person who asserts a right to exemption from the tax imposed by this chapter. The tax administrator shall notify the service supplier of termination of any person’s right to exemption hereunder, or the change of any address to which service is supplied to any exempt person. (93-4)

 

3.29.150 Service user assessment—Administrative remedy.
A.     The tax administrator may make an assessment for taxes not remitted by a person required to remit.

B.     Whenever the tax administrator determines that a service user has deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed from the amounts remitted to a person required to collect the tax, or that a service user has refused to pay the amount of tax to such person, or whenever the tax administrator deems it in the best interest of the City, such person may be relieved of the obligation to collect taxes due under this chapter from certain named service users for specified billing periods.

C.    The service supplier shall provide the City with amounts refused and/or unpaid along with the names and addresses of service users neglecting to pay the tax imposed under provision of this chapter. Whenever the service user has failed to pay the amount of tax for a period of two or more billing periods, the service supplier shall be relieved of the obligation to collect the past due taxes, except that the service supplier shall forthwith notify the tax administrator if any payment of the past due tax amount is made by the service user.

D.    The tax administrator shall notify the service user that he or she assumed responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods and demand payment of such taxes. The notice shall be served on the service user by handing it to him or her personally or by deposit of the notice in the United States Mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the service user at the address to which billing was made by the person required to collect the tax; or, should the service user have changed his or her address, to his or her last known address. If a service user fails to remit the tax to the tax administrator within fifteen days from the date of the service of the notice upon him or her, which shall be the date of mailing if service is not accomplished in person, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax set forth in the notice shall be imposed, but not less than twenty dollars. The penalty shall become part of the tax herein required to be paid.

E.     If the tax administrator determines that failure to pay the required tax was due to reasonable error, or that the tax due is a minimal amount, the tax administrator may waive all or part of the penalty. (93-4)

 

3.29.160 Records.
It shall be the duty of every person required to collect and remit to the City the tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax as such person may have been liable for remittance to the tax administrator, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. (93-4)

 

3.29.170 Refunds.
Any claim for a refund of any tax, interest or penalty collected or received by the City under this chapter shall be presented in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of Title 1 of this Code. (96-04; 93-4)

 

3.29.180 Notice of termination or suspension of utility users’ tax.
The service supplier shall, upon written notification by the tax administrator, terminate or suspend any billing or collection of utility users’ tax commencing with the first full billing period which occurs after the effective date of such notice. (93-4)

 

3.29.190 Operative dates.
The utility users’ tax imposed by this chapter shall be applied to all covered telephone, electricity, fuel, water and cable television charges billed on or after May 1, 1993, or as soon thereafter as the respective utilities are physically and mechanically able to implement the charges but not more than thirty additional days. (93-4)

 

3.29.200 Review.
The utility users’ tax rate shall be reviewed by the City Council in conjunction with development of the City’s budget over two public hearings to receive public comment on the need to continue the tax and the amount of the tax. (14-07)

TITLE 4 BUSINESS TAX
Chapter 4.02 DEFINITIONS
Chapter 4.04 BUSINESS TAX COLLECTOR
Chapter 4.06 ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
Chapter 4.08 APPORTIONMENT OF TAX
Chapter 4.10 PAYMENT OF TAX AND ISSUANCE OF TAX CERTIFICATE
Chapter 4.12 ENFORCEMENT
Chapter 4.14 EXEMPTIONS
Chapter 4.16 BUSINESS TAX CATEGORIES
Chapter 4.18 BUSINESS TAX RATES

Chapter 4.02 DEFINITIONS
4.02.010 General.
For the purpose of this title, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words, and phrases defined in this chapter shall have the meanings set forth in this chapter. (94-3)

 

4.02.020 Ambulance.
“Ambulance” means any vehicle specifically equipped or previously used to transport the sick, wounded, handicapped, injured or deceased. (94-3)

 

4.02.030 Annualization.
“Annualization” means an estimation, extended for a twelve-month period, based on reported gross receipts for a prior period of less than twelve months. (94-3)

 

4.02.040 Applicant.
“Applicant” means any person who applies for a tax certificate or a certificate renewal under the provisions of this title. It shall also include a person who has not applied for a tax certificate but is deemed by the collector to be required by this title to have such a certificate. (94-3)

 

4.02.050 Arts and crafts fair.
“Arts and crafts fair” means an event at which an arts and crafts fair organizer arranges for temporary individual spaces for retailers, including artists and handicrafters, to sell their products to the public. It may be a one-time event, or scheduled at regular or irregular intervals. (94-3)

 

4.02.053 Arts and crafts fair organizer.
“Arts and crafts fair organizer” means a person who arranges an arts and crafts fair. Such person, if not otherwise exempt, is taxable as a renter of commercial space. (94-3)

 

4.02.055 Arts and crafts fair vendor.
“Arts and crafts fair vendor” means a person who sells products or services, including but not limited to arts and crafts, at an arts and crafts fair. (94-3)

 

4.02.057 Branch or management office.
“Branch or management office” means any office within the City for which separate sales or receipt records are not maintained, and the business which is essentially that of performing administrative functions in connection with sales or service preformed or rendered elsewhere. (94-3)

 

4.02.060 Builder-owner.
“Builder-owner” means any person employing subcontractors, specialty contractors, general engineering contractors, or workers under his or her supervision and direction by the hour or day, for the purpose of constructing improvements on real property owned by him or her within the City; such person shall be charged herein the same as a contractor unless his or her only building activity is constructing on his or her property a single-family dwelling unit or addition thereto which will be used in whole or in part for the purpose of his or her own occupancy for a period of not less than one year. Proof of the sale or offering for sale of any such structure by the builder-owner within one year after completion of same is presumptive evidence that such structure was undertaken for purpose of sale. Provided, however, that any person holding a state contractor’s license pursuant to Sections 7056, 7057 and 7058 et seq. of the California Business and Professions Code, as the same now exists or as hereafter amended, shall be considered a contractor. (94-3)

 

4.02.070 Building and loan.
“Building and loan” means any person who for a fee engages in the loan of money upon personal security, evidences of debt, automobile, or any personal property, or purchases automobile contracts, commercial paper, evidence of debt, assignments of salary, salary warranty, salary demands, time checks, or other evidences of salary due or to become due, or automobile paper. The term building and loan as used in this title includes savings and loans, but does not include pawnbrokers or the holder of a bond brokers license, or any person conducting a banking business under the laws of the state or any person subject to the state corporate income tax as a financial corporation. (94-3)

 

4.02.080 Business.
“Business” means all enterprises, professions, trades and occupations and all and every kind of calling, full time or part time, whether or not carried on for profit, engaged in within the City, including lease or rental of residential or nonresidential real estate, whether or not engaged in as a principal or as an independent contractor, but shall not include the services rendered by an employee to an employer. (94-3)

 

4.02.090 Business tax.
“Business tax” means the privilege tax paid as required by the provisions of this title. (94-3)

 

4.02.100 Business tax certificate.
“Business tax certificate” or “tax certificate” means the certificate required to be posted or displayed as evidence of a business’ payment of the tax required by the provisions of this title. (94-3)

 

4.02.110 Catering truck.
“Catering truck” means a vehicle as that term is defined in the California Vehicle Code which is equipped or used for the sale of food or beverages, or both, whether on public or private property. (94-3)

 

4.02.120 Certificate holder.
“Certificate holder” means any person who holds a valid, current tax certificate issued to that person under this title. (94-3)

 

4.02.130 Coin-operated machine.
“Coin-operated machine or device” means any machine or device that dispenses a product, or provides a service, or utility or amusement; resulting from insertion or use of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc, plug, key, check or other device, or money, or thing of value. (94-3)

 

4.02.140 Collector.
“Collector” means the financial services director, or if there is none, the City Manager or his or her designate, charged with the administration and enforcement of this title. Whenever in this title reference is made to the collector, it shall include anyone designated by the collector to perform all or a portion of his or her duties. (94-3)

 

4.02.150 Commission agent, broker or merchant.
“Commission agent, broker or merchant” means any person engaged in the business of buying and selling of goods, wares, or merchandise for the owner or consignee thereof for a fee of commission, whether or not the operation of such business customarily includes the actual possession, custody or control of goods, wares or merchandise to the extent that such person (1) does not engage in the business of manufacturing, refining, fabricating, milling, treating or other processing of the goods, wares or merchandise bought and sold, and does not cause said goods, wares or merchandise to be manufactured, refined, fabricated, milled, treated or otherwise processed; (2) does not obtain or retain title to said goods, wares or merchandise except during one or more of the following situations: while such goods, wares or merchandise are actually in transit, or for short periods of time before transportation commences or after it ceases; and (3) does not store or warehouse such goods, wares or merchandise except during one or more of the following: while such goods, wares or merchandise are actually in transit, or for short periods of time before transportation commences or after it ceases. (94-3)

 

4.02.160 Conduct.
See “transact and carry on.” (94-3)

 

4.02.170 Contractor.
“Contractor” means any person who is licensed as a contractor by the State of California and who undertakes to or offers to undertake to or purports to have the capacity to undertake to or submits a bid to, or does himself/herself or by others, construct, alter, repair, add to, subtract from, improve, move, wreck or demolish any building, highway, road, railroad, excavation or other structure, project, development or improvement, or to do any part thereof, including the erection of scaffolding or other structures or works in connection therewith. The term contractor as used in this title includes general engineering contractor, general building contractor, specialty contractor and subcontractor except as otherwise specified herein. (94-3)

 

4.02.180 Cost of doing business.
“Cost of doing business” means that amount which is equivalent to the volume of business performed, where the business of any local office, facility, agent, broker or employee is that of performing administrative or management-related services in connection with sales or services performed or rendered elsewhere. Said amount shall be computed by determining the total cost of maintaining said local office, facility, agent, broker or employee. Said total cost of maintaining said local office, facility, agent, broker or employee shall include, but is not limited to the wages, salaries, commissions, bonuses, rent, and/or depreciation, telephone, postage, utilities, janitorial and other expenses allocated for maintenance of said office, facility, agent, broker or employee. (94-3)

 

4.02.190 Day.
“Day” means a calendar day. (94-3)

 

4.02.200 Disabled veteran.
“Disabled veteran” means any honorably discharged member of the Armed Forces of the United States, who is physically unable to obtain his or her livelihood by means of manual labor and who is a qualified voter of the state. (BP Section 16001.) (94-3)

 

4.02.210 Employed.
“Employed” means engaged in the operation or conduct of a business, or related activity, whether as a proprietor or otherwise. (94-3)

 

4.02.213 Employees, determination of number.
In determining the number of employees for the purpose of fixing the tax due under Section 4.18.050 of this chapter, the employer shall take the number of employees earning wages during pay periods ending nearest the fifteenth of each month as shown by Form DE3 of the State Department of Employment or other form which may hereafter be adopted for reporting payments due under the Unemployment Insurance Act, for each month of the previous calendar year, adding the same, and dividing by twelve. If the employer has been in business less than one year, he or she may use the average number of employees as shown by such form for the last quarter; if the employer has not previously engaged in business, he or she may estimate the average number of employees who will be employed by him or her during the remainder of the calendar year. (94-3)

 

4.02.220 Engaged in business.
“Engaged in business” means the transacting and carrying on, managing or operating of a business whether done as owner, or by means of an officer, agent, manager, employee or lessee. (94-3)

 

4.02.230 Fixed place of business.
“Fixed place of business” means the place within the City at which the principal tools, equipment, or machinery used in a business are customarily stored or located, or where services are customarily performed, or at which are maintained the principal stock of materials or supplies and the books and records used in a business. (94-3)

 

4.02.240 Flat or fixed rate tax.
“Flat or fixed rate tax” means a fixed amount assessed per business location, or alternately, a fixed amount or fixed scale of amounts whose sum is variable depending on the number or factors furnishing the basis for determination of the business tax. (94-3)

 

4.02.245 Game machine.
“Game machine” means a coin-operated game such as pinball and video-electronic games. (94-3)

 

4.02.250 Garage sale.
“Garage sale” means the sale, or offering for sale, of personal property in, at or upon any property used or occupied for residential purposes. Garage sales shall include, but not be limited to, any yard sale, home sale, patio sale, or any other sale similarly conducted on any property used or occupied for residential purposes. (94-3)

 

4.02.260 General contractor.
“General contractor” means and shall include any general building contractor or general engineering contractor or any other person who is licensed pursuant to Sections 7056 and/or 7057 of the California Business and Professions Code as the same now exists or as hereafter amended. (94-3)

 

4.02.265 Grocery store.
“Grocery store” means any business where the majority of gross receipts is from the sale of food items packaged by a manufacturer or distributor. (94-3)

 

4.02.270 Gross receipts.
“Gross receipts” means and includes the total amount of the sale price of all sales and the total amount charged or received for the performance of any act or service of whatever nature it may be, for which a charge is made or credit allowed, whether or not such act or service is done as a part of or in connection with the sale of materials, goods, wares or merchandise.

A.     The following shall be included in “gross receipts”: All receipts, cash, credits and property of any kind or nature without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses whatsoever.

B.     The following shall be excluded from “gross receipts”:

1.     Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales;

2.     Credit allowed on property accepted as part of the purchase price and which property may later be sold;

3.     Any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser;

4.     Such part of the sale price of property returned by purchasers upon rescission of the contract of sale as is refunded either in cash or by credit;

5.     Amounts collected for others where the business is acting as an agent or trustee to the extent that such amounts are paid to those for whom collected, provided the agent or trustee has furnished the collector with the names and addresses of the others and the amounts paid to them, other than amounts received as commission of any character received for the performance of any service as agent, or trustee; provided, that any agent or trustee dealing in stocks or other similar written instruments evidencing a right to participate in the assets of any business, or dealing in bonds or other evidences of indebtedness, who also deals in such property as a principal, shall include in the gross receipts by which the tax is measured the amount of his or her trading profits resulting therefrom. No deduction from receipts attributable to trading as a principle shall be made unless such deduction is provided for in this section;

6.     The difference between the balance owed and paid on a defaulted purchase or finance contract upon repossession by seller and the amount received from resale of the repossessed article by the repossessing seller;

7.     Receipts of refundable deposits, except that refundable deposits forfeited and taken into income of the business shall not be excluded;

8.     As to alcoholic beverages, that portion of the receipts of a manufacturer, transporter, retailer or wholesale distributor generated or otherwise collected from the manufacture, sale, possession or transportation of intoxicating liquors within the state pursuant to Article XX, Section 22 of the State Constitution;

9.     As to a retail gasoline dealer, a portion of his or her receipts from the sale of motor vehicle fuels equal to the motor vehicle fuel license tax imposed by and previously paid under the provisions of Part 2 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California;

10.   As to a retail gasoline dealer, the special motor fuel tax imposed by Section 4041 of Title 26 of the United States Code if paid by the dealer or collected by him or her from the purchaser;

11.   Cash value of sales, trades, transfers or other transactions as made between separate departments, divisions or units of any single business entity;

12.   Sales for convenience where sales of new goods, wares or merchandise are made by a person engaged in selling such articles to another person engaged in selling like or similar articles:

a.     Where the primary purpose of the particular transaction of sale is to accommodate the purchaser rather than to make a sale in the ordinary course of business and the price paid is essentially the book value of the article,

b.     Where, in the particular kind of business involved, a similar manner of dealing is frequent or customary in the circumstances under which the particular sale is made, and

c.     Where goods, wares, or merchandise of like or similar kind and of substantially equivalent value to that which was sold is received in consideration;

13.   The amount of gross receipts which has been subject to a license tax paid to any other city;

14.   Any license tax or fee imposed by and previously paid under and/or all provisions of this chapter;

15.   Franchise fee paid to the City by the cable company.

C.    As to contractors and other similar businesses, “gross receipts” shall not include that portion of the receipts of a contractor which represents payments to subcontractors, provided that such subcontractors are licensed under this title, and provided the contractor furnishes the collector with the names and addresses of the subcontractors and the amounts paid to them.

D.    As to real estate brokerage, travel agencies, insurance brokerages, bail bond brokerages, and other similar businesses, “gross receipts” shall include the total gross commissions or other receipts attributable to the local office, agents, brokers and/or employees.

E.     As to accountants, architects, attorneys, chiropractors, clinical social workers, doctors, dentists, marriage, family and child counselors, optometrists, physicians’ assistants, podiatrists, psychologists, registered nurses, veterinarians and other similar licensed persons performing professional services, “gross receipts” shall include the total gross fees or other receipts attributable to the local office and/or employees, for services performed or otherwise rendered within the City. In the case of professional corporations, each shareholder or employee licensed to practice the profession in which the corporation is authorized to engage shall be included in the computation of the tax to be paid.

F.     As to other persons having a fixed place of business within the City and providing a service or plying a trade, or involved in similar businesses, “gross receipts” shall include the total fees, commissions or other receipts attributable to that local location and/or employees.

G.    As to a business established outside the City but maintaining an office within the City through an agent, broker or employee, “gross receipts” shall include the total sales or receipts attributable to the local office or facility, agent, broker or employee within the taxing jurisdiction.

H.    As to a business established outside the City but transacting and carrying on business within the City, or otherwise performing or rendering services negotiated, or contracted for within the City, whether or not by a principal or through an agent or employee, “gross receipts” shall include the total fees, commissions, or other receipts attributable to the business activity conducted within the taxing jurisdiction. (94-3)

 

4.02.280 Handicrafter.
“Handicrafter” means any person who makes or creates any tangible product or novelty and then offers that item for sale. (94-3)

 

4.02.290 Handy person.
“Handy person” means any person engaged within the City, as an independent contractor in any trade, art, calling, avocation or occupation of the building trades and not licensed as a contractor by the state. (94-3)

 

4.02.300 Hotel-motel-rooming house.
“Hotel-motel-rooming house” means a building in which there are more than six guest rooms where lodging is provided for compensation. (94-3)

 

4.02.303 Import-export.
“Import-export” means any broker or wholesaler which imports or exports merchandise, but conducts no retail operations in the City. (94-3)

 

4.02.310 Insurance agent.
“Insurance agent” means any person, including bail bond agents directly authorized by and on behalf of an insurer, to transact insurance and to bind the insurer in the execution of insurance policies. (94-3)

 

4.02.320 Insurance broker.
“Insurance broker” means any person, including bail bond brokers, who, for compensation and on behalf of another person, transact insurance other than life with, but not on behalf of, an insurer. (94-3)

 

4.02.330 Isolated transaction.
“Isolated transaction” means an activity, which if carried on as a continuing business would be subject to license under Tax Categories I, II or III, but which a person conducts in the City for no more than three days at a time, not more than twice in a calendar year. (94-3)

 

4.02.340 Itinerant merchant.
“Itinerant merchant” means any person who engages in a temporary or transient business in the City, selling or offering for sale goods, wares, merchandise, or things or articles of value, with the intention of conducting such business in the City for no more than three days at a time, not more than twice in a calendar year. (94-3)

 

4.02.350 Manufacture or process.
“Manufacture or process” mean all the activities of a commercial or industrial nature wherein labor or skill is applied, by hand or machinery, to materials so that as a result thereof a new, different or useful article of tangible personal property or substance of trade or commerce is produced and shall include the production or fabrication of specially made or custom-made articles. (94-3)

 

4.02.360 Manufacturer.
“Manufacturer” means any person, who, directly or by contracting with others for the necessary labor or mechanical services, manufactures for sale or for commercial or industrial use from his or her own materials or ingredients any articles, substances or commodities. (94-3)

 

4.02.370 Nonprofit tax-exempt organization.
“Nonprofit tax-exempt organization” means a person exempt from taxation under Subchapter F of Chapter 1 of Subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code, (Section 501 and following), as it may be amended from time to time, including educational, religious and charitable organizations, civic leagues, employee associations, chambers of commerce, recreational clubs, veterans organizations, homeowners associations, and political organizations. All other persons shall be considered for profit organizations. The term “nonprofit tax-exempt organization” shall not include any person, any portion of the net earnings of which inure to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual. (94-3)

 

4.02.380 Owner.
“Owner,” as applied to any building or land, means and includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, copartnerships of the whole or of a part of such building or land, or a person having an interest in community property as a member, or former member, of the community. (94-3)

 

4.02.390 Peddler.
“Peddler” means any person who engages in solicitation and has the same meaning as set forth in Section 4.02.550 of this chapter. (08-07)

 

4.02.400 Permit.
“Permit” means a written authorization, or permission, to conduct a business within the City, such as a business permit issued under Title 5 of this Code or a home occupation permit. A tax certificate issued pursuant to this title does not constitute a “permit.” (94-3)

 

4.02.410 Person.
“Person” means a domestic or foreign corporation, an association, a syndicate, a joint-stock corporation, a partnership of any kind, a club, business or common-law trust, a society of an individual conducting any business in the City. (94-3)

 

4.02.420 Premises.
“Premises” means all lands, structures, places, and also the personal property, equipment, and appurtenances connected or used therewith in any business. (94-3)

 

4.02.440 Professional corporation.
“Professional corporation” means any corporation organized under the California General Corporation Law which is engaged in rendering professional services in a single profession, or as hereafter amended, and which in its practice or business designates itself as a professional or other corporation as may be required by statute. (94-3)

 

4.02.450 Pushcart.
“Pushcart” means any wagon, cart, or similar wheeled container, not a “vehicle” as defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of California, from which food, beverage or product is offered for sale to the public. (94-3)

 

4.02.460 Real estate agent.
“Real estate agent” means any person licensed as such by the state and engaged wholly or in part in soliciting, transacting and carrying on the purchase, sale or rental of real estate. (94-3)

 

4.02.470 Real estate broker.
“Real estate broker” means any person licensed as such by the state and engaged wholly or in part in soliciting, transacting and carrying on the sale of real estate including soliciting or offering to buy, sell, or lease real property for others; negotiating and collecting loans for borrowers or lenders; dealing in real property sales contracts and promissory notes; receiving advance fees for real estate listings; and dealing in real estate syndicate securities. (94-3)

 

4.02.480 Real estate developer.
“Real estate developer” means any person conducting, managing, or transacting and carrying on the business of acquiring, subdividing, improving, selling, renting and otherwise dealing in and disposing of or developing real property, for commercial, industrial, residential, or nonresidential purposes including, but not limited to, one who constructs improvements upon real property for commercial, industrial, residential, or nonresidential purposes with the object of selling, renting or developing it for his or her own use. (94-3)

 

4.02.490 Rental of residential real estate.
“Rental of residential real estate” means every person leasing, managing, or renting two or more dwelling units whether attached or separate properties. (94-3)

 

4.02.500 Retail sale.
“Retail sale” means every sale of tangible personal property (including articles produced, fabricated or imprinted) other than sale to one who (1) purchases for the purpose of resale as tangible personal property in the regular course of business, or (2) purchases of the purpose of consuming the property purchased in producing for sale a new article of tangible personal property or substance, of which such property becomes an ingredient or component, or as a chemical used in processing, when the primary purpose of such chemical is to create a chemical reaction directly through contact with an ingredient of a new article being produced for sale. (94-3)

 

4.02.510 Retailer.
“Retailer” means any person engaging in the business of selling goods, wares or other merchandise to consumers or users thereof. (94-3)

 

4.02.511 Retirement home, convalescent home, skilled nursing facility, residential or community care facility.
“Retirement home, convalescent home, skilled nursing facility, residential or community care facility” means any facility place or building which is maintained and operated to provide medical or nonmedical residential care or day care including, but not limited to, a rest home, home for the aged, a retirement home, apartments for the elderly, a facility for care of developmentally disabled, physically handicapped, mentally disordered or incompetent persons. (94-3)

 

4.02.520 Revocation.
“Revocation” means the act of revoking, or the condition of being revoked; canceled; repealed. (94-3)

 

4.02.530 Sale.
“Sale” means the transfer, in any manner or by any means whatsoever, of title to property for a consideration; the serving, supplying or furnishing for a consideration of any property; and a transaction whereby the possession of property is transferred and the seller retains the title as security for the payment of the price shall likewise be deemed to exclude any transaction which is or which, in effect, results in a sale within the contemplation of law. (94-3)

 

4.02.540 Services.
“Services” means the business of providing, maintaining or performing labor for the benefit of another within the City; of supplying some general demand for the benefit of another within the City which does not produce a tangible commodity; or furnishing of services and all activities in which any person, for any other person performs any personal service. (94-3)

 

4.02.550 Solicitor.
“Solicitor” means any person, whether a resident of the City or not, traveling by foot, vehicle or any other type of conveyance who goes from house to house, business to business, from place to place or in or along any highway, street or sidewalk within the City either: (1) requesting, either directly or indirectly, money, credit, funds, contributions, personal property or anything of value; (2) taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of any goods, wares, merchandise or services of any kind, or description for future delivery or for services to be performed in the future, either in person or by distributing flyers and leaflets; and (3) selling and making immediate delivery any goods, wares, merchandise or services of any kind or description, commonly referred to as “peddling.” (08-07)

 

4.02.560 Stockbroker.
“Stockbroker” and “bond broker” mean any person engaged in the business of buying or selling federal, state, county or municipal stocks or bonds, or stocks or bonds of partnerships or other incorporated entities, or evidences of indebtedness of private persons, partnerships or of incorporated entities, for a fee or commission. (94-3 § 4, 1994)

 

4.02.570 Subcontractor.
See “contractor.” (94-3)

 

4.02.580 Tax.
“Tax” means that amount collected for the privilege of engaging in a business or occupation. (94-3)

 

4.02.590 Taxicab.
“Taxicab” means any motor vehicle used in the business of transportation of passengers for hire, where transportation is not over a fixed and definite route, but is under the control, as to the destination and/or route, of the passenger or passengers being carried therein. (94-3)

 

4.02.600 Transact and carry on.
“Transact and carry on” means to repeat, or intend to repeat, or to continue, and includes:

A.     The maintaining, operating, managing or being in control of any office, store, warehouse, factory, establishment, location or place:

1.     Having one or more telephones listed for any business activity in any classified telephone directory or in the classified section of any consolidated telephone directory;

2.     Having in use in connection with any business, one or more counters, desks, chairs, tables, filing cabinets, typewriters, adding or calculating machines, or other articles of office equipment;

3.     At, from, or in which, any processing, supervising, administration, research, sales promotion, solicitation, distributing, routing, delivery, dispatching, billing, collection, accounting, recordkeeping, or activity is conducted in connection with any business;

4.     In, or at which, one or more persons may, for any valuable consideration intended to result, or that results, in any livelihood, financial profit or commercial gain to any person, receive any instruction, advice, treatment or examination, or any service upon their person, or any repair, refinishing, renewing, cleaning, or other improvement to, or of, any personal property;

5.     In which any letter, announcement, advertisement, circular, handbill, newspaper, agreement, contract, instruction, legal instrument, financial statement, statement of account, financial record, or any other instrument or record, is written, printed, reproduced, published, prepared or kept, in connection with any business;

6.     From which any circular, handbill, newspaper, announcement, statement of account, card or letter is sent, or distributed, in writing, or any contract is made, in person or by telephone, in connection with any business;

7.     Upon any exterior side, wall, window, door, roof or other portion, or in the proximity of which, there is maintained any sign, lettering, announcement or advertisement indicating that such office or place is one in, at or from, which any article exists, or any act is performed, in connection with any business.

B.     The repeated or continuous offering, or contracting, orally or in writing, in connection with any business:

1.     To sell or rent one or more articles, or one or more rooms, apartments, portions or parcels, of any real or personal property; or

2.     To transport any person or personal property; or

3.     To perform any service.

C.    In connection with any business, the repeated or continuous:

1.     Sale or renting of one or more articles or parcels of real or personal property; or

2.     The transporting of any person or property; or

3.     The performance of any service.

D.    The performance, in connection with any business, of any single act, with intent to repeat or continue the performance of such act. (94-3)

 

4.02.610 Utility and public utility.
“Utility” and “public utility” mean any person furnishing the public with communication, water, light, heat or power, subject to regulation by the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California. (94-3)

 

4.02.620 Vehicle.
“Vehicle” means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public street or highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (94-3)

 

4.02.630 Vending machine operations.
“Vending machine operations” means any business conducted or carried on by any person engaged in the business of operating coin-operated machines or devices on the premises of another or in the business of owning, renting, leasing, lending, or otherwise distributing or supplying coin-operated machines or devices while retaining title thereto. (94-3)

 

4.02.640 Vendor.
“Vendor” means any person engaged in the conduct of business as defined by this chapter. (94-3)

 

4.02.650 Wholesale sale.
“Wholesale sale” means any sale of tangible personal property which is not a “sale at retail.” Sales otherwise classified as “retail sales” under Section 4.02.500, may, nevertheless be classified as “wholesale sales” under this section, if the vendor can establish to the satisfaction of the collector that the sale was made to a government agency, public utility, manufacturer, processor or contractor who consumed the articles in the course of its own operations and did not offer the articles for resale to the general public except as an integral part of manufacturing, construction or service. (94-3)

 

4.02.660 Wholesaler.
“Wholesaler” means any person engaging in the business of selling goods, wares, merchandise or other products for the purpose of resale and not to consumers or users thereof. (94-3)

 

4.02.670 Yard sale.
See “garage sale.” (94-3)

Chapter 4.04 BUSINESS TAX COLLECTOR
4.04.010 Collector—Duty to enforce.
It shall be the duty of the collector to enforce each and all of the provisions of this title, and the Chief of Police, the chief building official, and the chief fire official shall render such assistance in the enforcement hereof as may from time to time be required by the collector and authorized by the City Manager. Each department or division of the City which issues permits or entitlement of use shall, whenever it is appropriate, require the production of a valid unexpired tax certificate or receipt prior to the issuance of such a permit. (94-3)

 

4.04.020 Collector—Duty to keep records.
The collector shall keep full, adequate and accurate records pertaining to the issuance of tax certificates under this title and the collection of all taxes, penalties and other moneys in connection herewith. The collector shall keep in his or her office a record in which he or she shall keep the accounts of all tax certificates currently issued by him or her and remaining in full force and effect. (94-3)

 

4.04.030 Collector—Deposit of taxes, charges and penalties.
All taxes, penalties, charges and other moneys received by the collector pursuant to the provisions of this title shall be deposited in the designated fund of the City following the receipt of the same. (94-3)

 

4.04.040 Collector—Duty to determine business type or class.
The determination of which business or type of class of business a certificate holder or applicant is engaged in or about to engage in shall be an administrative function of the collector. (94-3)

 

4.04.050 Collector—Necessary rules and regulations.
In addition to all other powers conferred upon him or her, the collector shall have the power to make rules and regulations consistent with the provisions of this title as may be necessary or desirable to aid in its enforcement. (94-3)

 

4.04.060 Collector—Extension of time for filing.
The collector shall have the power, for good cause shown, to extend the time for filing any required sworn statement for a period not exceeding fifteen days, and in such case to waive any penalty that would have otherwise accrued. (94-3)

 

4.04.070 Collector—Additional power to compromise claims.
In addition to all other powers conferred upon him or her, the collector shall have the power, for good cause shown, and after preparation of written findings, to compromise any claim as to the amount of business tax due, any penalty imposed, or any charge demanded. (94-3)

 

4.04.080 Collector—Authority to suspend and revoke tax certificate.
A.     The collector shall have the authority to suspend or revoke any tax certificate granted or issued under the provisions of this title at any time for any of the following:

1.     Upon the determination by the collector that a material false statement is contained in the application for a new tax certificate or in the application for a renewal tax certificate granted or issued under the provisions of this title, or in any affidavit or statement required to be filed under the provisions of this title; or

2.     Upon the determination by the collector that the certificate holder has not paid the tax required to be paid as a condition for the issuance of the tax certificate; or

3.     Upon the determination by the collector that the certificate holder has violated any provisions of this title or committed an act or offense which would have constituted grounds for refusal to issue the certificate.

B.     Whereupon, the collector shall give a notice of suspension, which notice shall specify the grounds for suspension, and advise the certificate holder of the right to request a hearing before the collector. If the certificate holder requests a hearing within ten days after notice of suspension is given, the suspension shall be stayed pending that hearing. In the event said certificate holder fails to pay any business tax due or any other amount due pursuant to this title, or to request a hearing within ten days after notice has been given, then and in that event the collector shall give a notice of proposed revocation. The certificate holder shall be given at least ten days’ notice, which notice shall specify the grounds for revocation.

C.    In the event said certificate holder fails within the allotted ten-day period to request a hearing to show cause why his or her tax certificate should not be revoked, then and in that event the collector shall revoke said person’s tax certificate and give notice thereof to said person.

D.    In the event said certificate holder fails to file within ten working days thereafter, an appeal pursuant to Section 4.04.090 of this Code, then the collector’s action in revoking said person’s tax certificate shall be conclusive as to all matters involved, and the transacting and carrying on by any person of any business pursuant to said tax certificate shall thereafter be deemed a violation of this Code.

E.     Any person transacting and carrying on any business during any period of tax certificate suspension shall be deemed to be doing so without a tax certificate. Further, any person transacting and carrying on business during any period of tax certificate revocation or suspension shall be refused any permits or entitlement of use which requires the production of a valid unexpired tax certificate. (94-3)

 

4.04.090 Appeal of collector’s decision.
A.     Any applicant or certificate holder aggrieved by any decision of the collector regarding applicant’s business tax, including but not limited to its categorization and classification, the determination of its tax rate, the apportionment of its tax, or the suspension or revocation of its tax certificate, may appeal such decision. The appeal must be in writing, on forms provided by the collector, setting forth the appellant’s specific reasons for asserting that the decision was in error, or in violation of this title or other applicable law. It must be received in the financial services department, together with an appeal fee in the amount of twenty-five dollars, no later than twenty days after the notice of the collector’s decision is given. (Mailing of a tax certificate renewal form shall be notice of all decisions of collector with respect to the matters stated therein.) Provided, appeal of the revocation or suspension of a tax certificate must be filed within ten days after notice of such revocation or suspension is given. Such revocation or suspension shall be stayed pending the decision on the appeal by the City Manager.

B.     The City Manager or his or her designate will review the facts of the appeal and respond to the applicant not later than fifteen days from the date of submission of the appeal and payment of the appeal fee.

C.    The applicant may further appeal the matter to the City Council. The appeal must be in writing, on forms provided by the collector, setting forth the appellant’s specific reasons for asserting that the City Manager’s decision was in error, or in violation of this title or other applicable law. It must be received by the City Clerk, together with an appeal fee in the amount of twenty-five dollars, no later than ten days after the notice of the City Manager’s decision is given. Upon receipt of a timely appeal, the City Manager may order a further stay in the suspension or revocation pending council decision. If after reviewing the written appeal, and the findings and decision of the City Manager, the Council is of the opinion that no further hearing is warranted, the Council may affirm the decision of the City Manager and dismiss the appeal. If, in the opinion of council, the information presented warrants further hearing, the Council shall set a hearing for the appeal at the next available City Council meeting, unless a later date is requested by appellant. The hearing may be continued from time to time by vote of the City Council. The Council may affirm or reverse, wholly or in part, or may modify the decision of the City Manager. If significant new evidence is presented in conjunction with the appeal, the Council may refer the matter back to the City Manager or collector for further consideration and decision.

D.    The decision of the Council shall be final. (94-3)

 

4.04.100 Notice.
Except as otherwise expressly provided, notice shall be deemed given when delivered personally to the applicant or certificate holder, or to an officer, employee, or agent, or authorized agent for service of process of the applicant or certificate holder, or by leaving a copy during regular business hours at the regular place of business of the applicant with the person in apparent charge of it, or on the day it is deposited in the mail, first class postage prepaid, to the address at which the applicant or certificate holder consented to accept notice, or if none, the last known address of the applicant. (94-3)

Chapter 4.06 ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
4.06.010 Purpose of title.
This title is enacted solely to raise tax revenue for municipal purposes and is not intended for regulation. (94-3)

 

4.06.020 Payment of business tax and tax certificate required.
There is imposed upon any business, trade, profession, calling and/or occupation conducted within the City a business tax in the amount set forth in Chapter 4.18 of this title. It is unlawful for any person, whether as principal or agent, or employee, either for himself/herself or for any other person, to transact and carry on any business, trade, profession, calling or occupation within the City without first having procured a tax certificate from the City to do so, and paid the business tax therefor. Exceptions to this requirement are set forth in Chapter 4.14 of this title. (94-3)

 

4.06.030 Tax on new business—When payable.
Initial business taxes are due and payable within thirty days after commencement of business in the City. The payment of the taxes shall not in any way constitute a right or permission to begin operations of said business. (94-3)

 

4.06.040 Evidence of doing business.
When any person by use of signs, circulars, business cards, telephone book or newspapers advertises, holds out or represents that such person is conducting a business within the City, or when any person holds an active license or permit issued by a governmental agency indicating that such person is in business within the City, or when any person indicates any other evidence of transacting and carrying on business as may be defined elsewhere herein and such person fails to deny by a sworn statement given to the collector that he or she is conducting a business within the City, after being requested to do so by the collector, then the foregoing facts shall be considered prima facie evidence that such person is conducting a business within the City. (94-3)

 

4.06.050 Two or more allied businesses.
Whenever any person is engaged in two or more correlated businesses, or is carrying on two or more allied activities at the same location and under the same ownership and management then in that event the business tax shall be applied once only, and for which amount a single combined tax certificate shall be issued. Provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall be construed to relieve the payment of two or more business taxes when required, where two or more separate businesses are conducted in the same location by the same owner and management and such businesses are not construed by the collector to be correlated or allied with each other. An appropriate business tax as set forth in this title shall be paid for each business. (94-3)

 

4.06.060 Single location—Multiple businesses—Separate owners.
Nothing contained in this title shall be construed to relieve the obligation to obtain a separate tax certificate and to pay the appropriate business tax required for each business owned or conducted by a separate owner within an individual establishment or location whether or not under the same management. (94-3)

 

4.06.070 Concessions—Separate tax certificate required.
Any person who operates any business, whether upon a cost, rental or commission basis as a concession or upon rented floor space in or upon the premises of any tax certificate holder shall be required to obtain a separate and independent license pursuant to this title except as may be otherwise specified. (94-3)

 

4.06.080 Separate computation of business tax—Branch establishments.
A.     Where a business tax is imposed upon any business pursuant to this title, and such business is conducted with branch establishments or at separate fixed places, the tax shall be computed as if each such branch or place were a separate and independent business.

B.     A separate tax certificate shall be obtained for each branch establishment or location of the business and for each separate type of business at the same location. Each tax certificate shall meet the certificate holder’s obligation to have a tax certificate only for the business described therein, at the location specified in the tax certificate, and in the manner designated in such tax certificate.

C.    Warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishments. (94-3)

 

4.06.090 Association with local business.
Any person who shall associate temporarily with any local business, dealer, trader or merchant, or by conducting any temporary business in connection with, or as a part of or in the name of, any local business, dealer, trader or merchant, shall not be relieved from the provisions of this title and shall be required to pay the appropriate business tax as specified herein. (94-3)

 

4.06.100 Partnerships.
In the event that any business conducted, managed or carried on in the City is organized as a partnership or joint venture, the scheduled business tax need be paid only by the partnership or joint venture. (94-3)

 

4.06.110 Corporations—In general.
In the event that any business conducted, managed or carried on in the City is organized as a general law corporation, pursuant to the California General Corporation Law, the scheduled business tax need be paid only by the corporation. (94-3)

 

4.06.120 Professional corporations.
In the event that any business conducted, managed or carried on in the City is organized as a professional corporation, the scheduled business tax need be paid only by the corporation. (94-3)

 

4.06.130 Payment of other fees or taxes not excused.
Any person required to pay a business tax for conducting a business under this title shall not be relieved from the payment of any other permit charge, fee or tax for the privilege of conducting such business required under any other provision of this Code or any other ordinance or regulation of the City or other agency, and such person shall remain subject to all regulatory provisions. (94-3)

 

4.06.140 General contractor’s statement.
Every person acting as a general contractor, whether building for their own occupancy or not, shall file with the collector a full, true and complete written statement, signed by such person, under penalty of perjury, listing all subcontractors who have performed or shall perform any service whatsoever for such person within the City for which a tax certificate is required under the provisions of this title. Any builder-owner, general engineering contractor, specialty contractor, or subcontractor, subcontracting any work shall be deemed a general contractor for the purpose of this section. Said statement shall include the name, address, telephone number, state license number and specialty classification of each person required to have a tax certificate. (94-3)

 

4.06.150 Tax certificate—Does not permit business otherwise prohibited.
The tax certificate issued pursuant to the provisions of this title constitute a receipt for the business tax paid and shall have no other legal effect. A tax certificate is a requirement, not a permit, to transact and carry on any business activity within this City. The granting of a tax certificate for a business shall not be deemed a permit to conduct the same in an unlawful manner or on premises where such business is prohibited by law. (94-3)

 

4.06.160 Other agency review.
The collector may refer to any governmental agency any statement and all other information submitted by persons subject to the provisions of this title in connection with the conduct of a business regulated or supervised or otherwise the concern of any such agency, including agencies concerned with health regulations, zoning conformance, fire safety, police considerations, or any other safeguard of the public interest. Failure to comply with conditions required by other agency review may result in revocation of the tax certificate once granted. (94-3)

 

4.06.170 Decisions on amounts imposed.
If any business tax imposed by this title is for any reason held to be discriminatory or invalid in amount, by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of a lesser amount imposed by the collector. The City Council hereby declares that it would have imposed a business tax of some amount on the business, occupation, calling, trade, vocation or other enterprise in question, irrespective of the fact that any one or more of the business taxes imposed herein may be declared discriminatory or invalid in amount. (94-3)

 

4.06.180 Confidentiality.
It is unlawful for the collector to make known to the public in any manner whatsoever information obtained about the business affairs or operations of an applicant obtained by an investigation of records and equipment of any person required to obtain a tax certificate, or pay a business tax, or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, or any particular thereof. All gross receipts statements or estimates required by this title shall be confidential and are hereby declared not to be public records. Any unauthorized disclosure or use of such information by any officer, agent or employee of the City shall be subject to the penalty provisions of this Code in addition to any other penalties provided by law. Provided that nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent:

A.     The disclosure to, or the examination of records and equipment by, another city official, employee, or agent for collection of taxes for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing any provisions of this title, or collecting taxes imposed hereunder;

B.     The disclosure of information to, or the examination of records by, federal or state officials, or the tax officials of another city or county, if a reciprocal arrangement exists, or to a grand jury or court of law, upon subpoena;

C.    The disclosure of information and results of examination of records of particular taxpayers, to a court of law in a proceeding brought to determine the existence or amount of any business tax liability of the particular taxpayers to the City;

D.    The disclosure after the filing of a written request to that effect, to the taxpayer himself or herself, or to his or her successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, of information as to the times included in the measure of any tax paid, any unpaid tax or amounts of tax required to be collected, interest and penalties;

E.     The disclosure of the names and business addresses of persons to whom tax certificates are currently issued, and the general type or nature of their business;

F.     The disclosure by way of public meeting or otherwise of such information as may be necessary to the City Council in order to permit it to be fully advised as to the facts when a taxpayer files an appeals claim for tax-exemption, tax certificate reinstatement, refund of forfeited taxes or bonds, compromise with regard to a claim asserted against him or her by the City for business taxes, or when acting upon any other matter;

G.    The disclosure of general statistics regarding taxes collected or business done in the City. (94-3)

Chapter 4.08 APPORTIONMENT OF TAX
4.08.010 No undue burden.
None of the business taxes provided for by this title shall be so applied so as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of the Constitutions of the United States or the State of California. (94-3)

 

4.08.020 Necessary rules and regulations.
When, by reason of the provisions of the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of the State of California, the business tax imposed by the provisions of this title cannot be enforced as to any single class or set of classes of business or business activity without there being an apportionment according to the amount of business done in the City, or in the State of California, as the case may be, the collector, having first obtained the approval of the City Attorney, shall make such rules and regulations for the apportionment of the tax as are necessary or otherwise desirable to overcome the constitutional objections. (94-3)

 

4.08.030 Burden on interstate or intercity commerce—Petition for adjustment.
A.     In any case where a business tax is claimed by a certificate holder or applicant for tax certificate to place an undue burden upon interstate commerce, or intercity commerce, or be violative of the Constitutions of the United States and/or the State of California, he or she may apply to the collector for an adjustment of the tax so that it shall not be discriminatory or unreasonable as to such commerce. Such application may be made before, at or within six months after payment of the prescribed business tax. The applicant shall by affidavit and supporting testimony show his or her method of business and the gross volume or estimated gross volume of business and such other information as the collector may deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of undue burden on such commerce. The collector shall then conduct an investigation and, having first obtained the approval of the City Attorney, shall fix as the business tax for the applicant an amount that is reasonable and nondiscriminatory. If the business tax has already been paid, the collector shall order a refund of the amount over and above the business tax so fixed. In fixing the business tax to be charged, the collector may base the business tax upon a percentage of the gross receipts or any other measure which will assure that the business tax levied shall be uniform with that levied on businesses of like nature so long as the amount levied does not exceed the business tax as prescribed by this title. Should the collector determine the gross receipts measure of business tax to be the proper basis, he or she may require the applicant to submit, either at the time of termination of the applicant’s business in the City, or at the end of each twelve-month period, a verified affidavit of the gross receipts and payment of the amount of business tax therefor; provided, that no additional business tax during any one calendar year shall be required after the certificate holder has paid an amount equal to the annual business tax as prescribed in this title.

B.     The collector shall, upon proper showing contained in the verified affidavit, cause the issuance of a tax certificate to such person showing partial exemption under this section with a business tax based upon the approved reduced gross receipts.

C.    The collector after giving notice and a reasonable opportunity for hearing to a certificate holder pursuant to Section 4.04.080 of this title, shall revoke any tax certificate granted pursuant to the provisions of this section upon information that the certificate holder is not entitled to the adjustment as provided herein. (94-3)

Chapter 4.10 PAYMENT OF TAX AND ISSUANCE OF TAX CERTIFICATE
4.10.010 Business tax application.
Before any tax certificate is issued, the applicant shall make a written application to the collector, which shall contain the following information:

A.     The exact nature or kind of business, profession, show, exhibition, game, occupation or enterprise for which the tax certificate is requested.

B.     The place where such activity is to be carried on; and if the same is not to be carried on at any permanent place of business, then the residence address, identified as such, of the owners of the same, is to be used.

C.    The address where the applicant shall consent to receive mail concerning the tax certificate applied for.

D.    If amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant is measured by gross receipts, the applicant shall use its actual gross receipts for the prior calendar year. If the applicant does not have a full calendar year of gross receipts, an annualization calculation will be used. If the applicant does not have any gross receipts for the prior calendar year, an estimate of gross receipts for the licensing period is to be used to calculate the tax.

E.     Where any person contracts, sells or delivers any goods, wares or merchandise in the City for which sales or use tax is payable, the application shall set forth the appropriate California State Board of Equalization permit number.

F.     Where any person employs others in the course of such business, the application shall set forth the appropriate federal and/or state employer identification number.

G.    Where any person conducting any business is self-employed, the application shall set forth the applicant’s social security number and California driver’s license number.

H.    In the event that the application is made for the issuance of a tax certificate to a person doing business under a fictitious name, the application shall set forth the names and address of residence (post office boxes are unacceptable) of those owning said business or enterprise.

I.      In the event that the application is made for the issuance of a tax certificate to a person doing business as a state-licensed contractor, the application shall set forth the applicant’s state contractor’s license number and specialty classification.

J.     Any further information which the collector may require to enable him or her to issue the type of tax certificate applied for; and any further information which the state may require, or any further information which the collector may deem necessary to properly identify the applicant.

K.     A signed statement made under penalty of perjury that the statements therein are true and correct, which statement shall be required to be filed with the collector upon submission of any original tax certificate application, annual renewal statement, miscellaneous supplementary statement, or other return of filing.

All information specified to be set forth on any application form prescribed by the collector shall be submitted completely and accurately and the tax certificate shall be deemed based upon the information submitted and represented. The collector shall not be required to receive or consider any application, return or statement unless the signed statement required in subsection K above quoted declaration, in substantially the form hereinabove is properly executed by the applicant or the authorized agent or representative of the applicant, and it is unlawful and shall be deemed a violation of this Code in any such application, return or statement for such applicant or authorized agent or representative of the applicant to make any statement which is false. (94-3)

 

4.10.020 Statements not conclusive.
No statements or applications required hereunder shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, no shall the filing of the same preclude the City from collecting by appropriate action such sums as are actually due and payable hereunder. (94-3)

 

4.10.030 Contents of tax certificate.
All tax certificates, unless otherwise provided in this Code, shall be prepared and issued by the collector upon the payment to the City of the sum required to be paid hereunder, or upon filing of proof satisfactory to the collector of eligibility for exemption from such payment. Each tax certificate so issued shall state upon the face thereof the following:

A.     The tax certificate number of the certificate holder;

B.     The date of expiration of such certificate;

C.    The persons to whom the same is issued, or where the said persons are doing business under a fictitious name; both actual and fictitious names to whom the same is leased;

D.    The kind of business, profession, show, exhibition, game, occupation or enterprise for which the certificate is issued and the location of the same;

E.     A statement that this tax certificate is issued without verification that the certificate holder is subject to or exempt from licensing by the State of California;

F.     Any additional statement the collector may deem necessary or which the state may require. (Ord. 94-3)

 

4.10.040 Term of tax certificate—New.
The term of a first tax certificate to be issued under the provisions of this title for a business is for a twelve-month period beginning on the first day of the month in which the tax certificate application is accepted by the collector as complete (or the applicant commences business, whichever is earlier) and expiring on the last day of the same month the following year. (94-3)

 

4.10.050 Term of tax certificate—Renewal—Due date—No grace period.
The term of renewal tax certificates is for a twelve-month period beginning on the first day of the month following the expiration of the previous tax certificate. Provided, any tax certificate which expires on May 15, 1993, shall be renewed for a period of ten and one-half months, so that it expires on March 31, 1994. Subsequent renewals of such tax certificates shall be for a twelve-month period. There is no grace period during which penalties are waived for tax certificates that are not renewed prior to their expiration date. (94-3)

 

4.10.060 Tax—How and when payable—Effect of dishonored instrument.
All business taxes shall be paid in advance, in lawful money of the United States, or by check, draft or other instrument in the discretion of the collector, at the office of the collector in the financial services department of the City. No tax certificate shall be issued or renewed until the amount due and payable has been paid in full. Any tax certificate, the tax for which has been paid by an instrument such as a check, or draft which is dishonored upon presentation for payment, shall be void and of no effect from its inception. Payment of business taxes following a dishonor of such instrument upon presentation for payment, shall be void and of no effect from its inception. Payment of business taxes following a dishonor of such instrument upon presentation for payment shall thereafter be made only by cashier’s check, money order or cash, which fee shall include any applicable penalty, as well as a returned check charge. (94-3)

 

4.10.070 Tax—Application of money towards delinquent taxes.
Money received during the current year for a tax certificate shall first be applied to the payment of delinquent taxes, sums and penalties due during any preceding calendar year, any balance remaining thereafter shall be applied to the payment of the current business taxes and penalties. A tax certificate issued during any prior year to the same owner, tenant or occupant for the same place of business shall be prima facie evidence in any court or administrative proceeding that the business was continuously operated by the same person or firm from said prior year to the current year. (94-3)

 

4.10.080 Statement of tax—Mistake not conclusive.
A.     No greater or lesser amount of money shall be charged or received for any business tax other than provided for in this title. In no case shall any mistake of the collector in stating the amount of a business tax, or of penalties, accrued thereon prevent or prejudice the collection by the City of what should actually be due from any person carrying on a business subject to business tax under this title. No statement shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, nor shall the filing of the same preclude the City from collection by appropriate action such sum as is actually due and payable hereunder.

B.     Where a mistake is made in the issuance of any tax certificate with regard to the classification under which said tax certificate was issued, then a new tax certificate shall be issued in the proper classification in lieu thereof, under the date of the original tax certificate, and the certificate holder shall pay any additional amount required by such a change. (94-3)

 

4.10.090 Renewal statement—Gross receipts—Submission and filing.
In all cases where the tax certificate is based on gross receipts, the applicant shall submit to the collector, for his or her guidance in ascertaining the amount of the tax certificate to be paid by the applicant, a written statement upon a form to be provided by the collector written under penalty of perjury, setting forth such information concerning the nature, location, intended duration, and ownership of applicant’s business as well as applicant’s gross receipts during the preceding calendar year or annualized gross receipts as may be required by the collector to enable him or her to ascertain the amount of business tax to be paid by said applicant pursuant to the provisions of this title. This renewal statement shall be sent by first class United States mail by the collector no later than thirty days before the taxes are due. Failure to receive such notification shall not exempt the certificate holder from all requirements under this title. (Ord. 94-3)

 

4.10.100 Payments, statements made by mail—Effect.
A.     When the last day of the month in which the business tax is due fails on a Saturday, Sunday, or state or national holiday, payment of the business tax may be made without penalty on the first working day of the month. For the purpose of this section, post marks shall be accepted as the date of payment made, provided the transmitting envelope contains a post office cancellation indicating not later than the date due, or in the case of a weekend or holiday, not later than the first following working day.

B.     Whenever any other payment, statement, application, report or other communication received by the collector is received after the time prescribed by this title for the receipt thereof, and whenever the collector is furnished sufficient proof that the payment, statement, application, report, request or other communication was in fact deposited in the United States mail prior to the time prescribed for the receipt thereof, the collector shall regard such payment, statement, report, request or other communication as having been timely received. (94-3)

 

4.10.110 Penalties for delinquency—Application—Written agreement to satisfy indebtedness—Effect.
A.     For failure to pay a business tax when due, the collector shall add the following penalties: (1) ten percent of said tax on the past due date thereof; (2) plus an additional fifteen percent of said tax on the first day of the second month after the past due date thereof; (3) plus an additional twenty-five percent of said tax on the first day of the third month after the due date thereof; and (4) plus an additional fifty percent of said tax on the first day of the fourth month thereafter; provided, that the maximum amount shall not exceed an amount equal to one hundred percent of the amount of the business tax due.

B.     No tax certificate or sticker, decal, tag, plate or symbol shall be issued, nor shall one which has been suspended or revoked be reinstated or reissued, to any person who, at the time of applying therefor, is indebted to the City for any delinquent business tax, unless such person, with the consent of the collector, enters into a written agreement with the City, through the collector, to pay such delinquent taxes in monthly installments, or oftener, extending over a period not exceeding one year. In any agreement so entered into, such person shall acknowledge the obligation owed the City and agree that, in the event of failure to make timely payment of any installment, the whole amount unpaid shall become immediately due and payable. In the event, such person fails within a period of thirty days thereafter to render payment in full, his or her current tax certificate may be revoked by the collector. In the event legal action is brought by the City to enforce collection of any amount included in the agreement, such person shall pay all costs of suit incurred by the City or its assignee, including attorney fees. The execution penalties on unpaid balances at the rate provided hereinabove, but no penalties or additional interest shall accrue as hereinafter provided on account of fees included in the agreement after the execution of the agreement and the payment of the first installment and during such time as such person shall not be in breach of the agreement. The execution of such an agreement shall render any subsequent appeal null and void and shall constitute a waiver against future action. (94-3)

 

4.10.120 Penalties for delinquency—Added to tax.
Any penalties assessed hereunder upon attaining a combined amount equal to one hundred percent of the amount of the business tax due shall become merged with the tax payable hereunder and shall be considered as a part thereof for all purposes. (94-3)

 

4.10.130 Suspension and revocation of tax certificate.
Unless revocation is made upon conditions set forth in a written agreement executed pursuant to Section 4.10.110 of this chapter, no certificate holder’s tax certificate shall be suspended and/or revoked for failure to pay the business tax until the penalties accruing for such failure to pay equal one hundred percent of the business tax due for such tax certificate. Whereupon, the collector shall give a notice and an opportunity to be heard as provided in Section 4.04.090 of this title. (94-3)

 

4.10.140 Refunds.
Any claim for a refund of any tax, interest or penalty collected or received by the City under this chapter shall be presented in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of Title 1 of this Code. (96-04; 94-3)

 

4.10.200 Posting, public display—Keeping on person.
A.     Any certificate holder transacting and carrying on business at a fixed place of business in the City which is open to the public shall keep the tax certificate prominently posted in a conspicuous and public place upon the premises where such business is carried on. Provided further that any certificate holder transacting and carrying on business at a fixed place of business in the City which is closed to the public shall nevertheless keep the tax certificate posted in a conspicuous and accessible place upon the premises where such business is carried on.

B.     Any certificate holder transacting and carrying on business but not operating at a fixed place of business in the City shall keep the tax certificate within his or her possession.

C.    Whenever the City shall provide a special tag or plate for the identification of a vehicle for which a business tax certificate fee has been paid, such tag or plate shall be affixed to the vehicle in accordance with the pertinent regulations of the collector.

D.    Any person having a tax certificate under the provisions of this title shall produce and exhibit same whenever required to do so by any collector, or any other officer or official or employee authorized to inspect tax certificates or by any person being solicited.

E.     No person shall exhibit a revoked tax certificate.

F.     No person shall reproduce, duplicate, copy or alter an original tax certificate for the purpose of circumventing the requirement of this section by giving a false or misleading impression that any duplication of an original City tax certificate is valid and that the appropriate fee therefor has been paid. (94-3)

 

4.10.210 Nontransferable—Change of name or location.
A.     No tax certificate issued pursuant to this title shall be transferable or assignable; provided, that where a tax certificate is issued authorizing a person to conduct a business at a particular place, such certificate holder may, upon application therefor and upon paying a charge of five dollars, have the tax certificate amended to authorize the conducting of such business under said tax certificate at some other location to which the business is or is to be moved.

B.     When a person holding a tax certificate issued under the provisions of this title changes the name of the business, such person shall upon changing the name make an application to the collector and paying a charge of five dollars to have said tax certificate amended to reflect the change in name.

C.    Provided further that transfer, whether by sale or otherwise, to another person under such circumstances that the real or ultimate ownership after the transfer is substantially similar to the ownership existing before the transfer, shall not be prohibited by this section. For the purpose of this section, stockholders, bondholders, partnerships or other persons holding an interest in a corporation or other entity herein defined to be a person are regarded as having the real or ultimate ownership of such corporation or other entity. (94-3)

 

4.10.220 Duplicates.
A duplicate tax certificate may be issued to replace any tax certificate previously issued hereunder which has been lost, damaged or destroyed upon the certificate holder filing a statement of such fact, and at the time of filing such statement, paying a duplicate tax certificate charge of five dollars. (94-3)

 

4.10.230 Use of tax certificate by unlicensed person.
No person holding a tax certificate required by this title shall permit any unlicensed independent contractor, itinerant merchant or other person to use the tax certificate, the licensed premises or the certificate holder’s name for the purpose of evading payment of any tax certificate fee or of evading any other provision of this title. (94-3)

 

4.10.240 Unpaid taxes—Tax plus penalties.
No tax certificate for any succeeding, current or unexpired tax period shall knowingly be issued to any person who, at the time of application, is indebted to the City for any unpaid tax. The total indebtedness shall include the total tax due plus penalties for failure to pay the tax when due. (Ord. 94-3)

Chapter 4.12 ENFORCEMENT
4.12.010 Enforcement—Right of entry.
Any police officer or code enforcement official shall have the power and authority to enter, free of charge, and at any reasonable time, any place of business required to be licensed under this title, and demand an exhibition of its tax certificate. (94-3)

 

4.12.020 Enforcement—Final building inspection.
Final building inspection approvals shall be issued only when it is ascertained by the building division that all tax liability of the contractor and all subcontractors has been fully satisfied. (94-3)

 

4.12.030 Audit of books.
A.     The collector, or authorized agents of the City, who are hereby authorized to examine, audit, and inspect such books and records of any certificate holder or applicant for tax certificate, as may be necessary in their judgment to verify or ascertain the amount of business tax due.

B.     All persons subject to the provisions of this title shall keep complete records of business transactions, including rent collected, sales, sales tax collected and paid to the state, receipts, purchases, and other expenditures, including the number of persons employed and otherwise engaged in the business, and shall retain all such records for examination by the collector. Such records shall be maintained for a period of three complete calendar years. The collector is authorized to issue subpoena to obtain such records. Subpoenas shall specify a specific date whereby the person is required to either (1) bring the above-described records to the collector, or (2) authorize the collector (or the collector’s representatives) to examine the records at a business location within twenty-five miles of the City. No person required to keep records under this section shall, upon receipt of said subpoena, fail to comply with subpoena issued by the collector. (94-3)

 

4.12.040 Taxes a debt to City—Actions for collection of taxes.
The amount of any business tax, penalty, or interest, or any combination thereof, imposed by the provisions of this title shall be deemed a debt to the City. An action may be commenced in the name of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any delinquent business tax, penalties, interest, charges and administrative costs incurred in connection therewith, including attorneys fees. (94-3)

 

4.12.050 Penalty—Conducting business without tax certificate.
Any person who shall commence, engage, transact and carry on any trade, calling, profession, occupation or business within the City without first having procured a tax certificate from the City to do so, shall be assessed a penalty in accordance with Section 4.10.110 of this title, which amount shall be calculated for the period beginning with the calendar month in which the commencement of business activity within the City began. Provided, however, that the start of such period shall not exceed three years prior to the date of notification of violation. (94-3)

 

4.12.060 Saving clause.
Neither the adoption of this title nor its superseding any portion of any other title shall in any manner be construed to affect prosecution for violation of any title or ordinance prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any tax certificate or any penal provision applicable to any such violation, nor be construed to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit required by any ordinance to be posed, filed or deposited, and all rights and obligations thereunto appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (94-3)

 

4.12.070 Misrepresentation.
No person shall knowingly or intentionally misrepresent any material fact in applying for or paying for the tax certificate. (94-3)

 

4.12.080 Suspension or revocation of tax certificate.
The collector, or his or her designated representative, shall have the power to suspend or revoke any tax certificate whenever it appears to the collector that the holder of the tax certificate (1) has violated any of the provisions of this title, or (2) has committed any act or offense which would have constituted grounds for non-issuance of a tax certificate. Notice of such suspension or revocation and an opportunity to be heard shall be given as provided in Section 4.04.090 of this title. (94-3)

 

4.12.090 Remedies cumulative.
The conviction and fine or imprisonment of any person for engaging in any business without first obtaining a tax certificate to conduct such business shall not relieve such person from paying the business tax to conduct such business, nor shall the payment of any business tax prevent a civil action or criminal prosecution for the violation of any of the provisions of this title. All remedies prescribed hereunder shall be cumulative and the use of one or more remedies by the City shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions hereof. (94-3)

Chapter 4.14 EXEMPTIONS
4.14.010 Business activity exempt under state or federal law.
No business tax shall be required of or from the following:

A.     Any person exempt from the business tax by virtue of the constitution or any applicable statutes of the United States or the State of California;

B.     Any disabled veteran who has been honorably discharged from military service of the United States and who is exempted from the payment of business tax by statute of the state who distributes circulars, hawks, peddles, or vends any goods, wares or merchandise owned by him or her, except spirituous, malt, vinous or other intoxicating liquor;

C.    Banks, including national banking associations, federal credit unions, and financial corporations, but only to the extent that a city may not levy a business tax upon them under the provisions of Article XIII, Section 27 of the State Constitution;

D.    Insurance companies or associations engaged in the sale and servicing of insurance and their direct agents, including bail bond agents and life agents, but not including brokers or bail bond brokers or life and disability insurance analysts or insurance solicitors, but only to the extent that a city may not levy a business tax upon them under the provisions of Article XIII, Section 28 of the State Constitution;

E.     Any governmental agency or subdivision and the employees thereof, but only to the extent they are engaged in the business of such governmental agencies or subdivisions;

F.     Motor vehicle carriers, or household goods carriers operating under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California or any public transportation system in the City whose definite permanent points of origin and/or termination lie outside of the legal limits of the City but only to the extent that a city may not levy a business tax upon them pursuant to Section 4301 et seq. of the State Public Utilities Code;

G.    Any state alcoholic beverage licensee engaged in the manufacture, sale, purchase, possession, or transportation of alcoholic beverages within the state, but only to the extent that a city may not levy a business tax upon them under provisions of Article XX, Section 22 of the State Constitution;

H.    Any day care or residential facility where not more than six people are cared for on a full- or part-time basis, but only to the extent that a city may not levy a business tax upon it pursuant to Section 1523 of Section 1566.2 of the State Health and Safety Code;

I.      Any real estate auction conducted by a person whose business is solely limited to the auctioning of real estate and who does not have a permanent place of business in the City, to the extent such exemption is required by Business and Professions Code Section 16002.1. (94-3)

 

4.14.020 Other exemptions.
No business tax shall be required of or from the following:

A.     Any nonprofit tax-exempt organization, provided this exemption shall not apply to promoters hired as independent contractors by nonprofit tax-exempt organizations;

B.     Any enterprise or entertainment conducted or operated for not more than seven days during any calendar year when the receipts derived therefrom are to be appropriated to the sole benefit of a nonprofit tax-exempt organization, from which no profit is derived, either directly or indirectly, by any private person, except such persons who have a valid tax certificate covering their participation in such event;

C.    Resident farmers, poultrymen, and horticulturists selling exclusively their own produce whether to stores or from house to house. This exemption shall not apply to nurseries or to any commercial establishment, or to any person who buys goods for resale as well as selling his or her own goods;

D.    Any doctor, lawyer, architect, dentist or other professional person not having a fixed place of business within the City; provided, however, that he or she does not advertise for or solicit business within the City;

E.     Ministers engaging in their duties as such;

F.     Any person who is acting solely as an employee or as the direct representative of a business which pays the required business tax to the City and is named as certificate holder in an unrevoked tax certificate;

G.    Any person who performs manual labor only, on an hourly or other time-basis, and who furnishes only such tools and incidentals as may be required in the performance of such manual labor. This provision shall not apply to any person who also furnishes materials, whether the same are billed separately or not;

H.    Any person performing only an act required by order of a court of competent jurisdiction for performing such an act;

I.      Students of high school age or less and those persons over sixty-five engaged in part-time occupations whose income does not exceed five thousand dollars per year;

J.     Teachers of musical, artistic or educational subjects when the total income from this activity does not exceed five thousand dollars for the calendar year and one or more of the following conditions exist:

1.     The teaching is done at the residence of the teacher or at the residence of the pupil as a part-time business only,

2.     The teacher does not employ assistants, does not display an advertising sign at the residence, and does not make a general practice of selling merchandise in connection with the teaching,

3.     Upon issuance of a home occupation permit, the teacher complies with all provisions and conditions set forth in the home occupation ordinance, and has applied for and been granted approval for such permit;

K.     Yard and garage sales conducted on any property used or occupied for residential purposes and in compliance with Chapter 16.157 of the City’s municipal code;

L.     Concerts, theatrical performances, dances and similar activities conducted on any property owned or operated by a nonprofit tax-exempt organization or by a government agency. (94-3)

 

4.14.030 Tax certificate required.
Any person claiming exemption from the payment of a business tax under this chapter shall, nevertheless, apply to the collector for a tax certificate in the same manner, and at the same time as is required in this title of all other persons applying for a tax certificate and shall be subject to the same procedures for enforcement and to the same penalties as provided herein, if either of the following apply:

A.     The person has a fixed place of business within the City and employs one or more persons;

B.     The person has a fixed place of business within the City which is owned, leased or licensed by it for its exclusive use, and for which no other person has a valid business permit issued by the City. (94-3)

 

4.14.040 Burden of proof.
An institution or organization claiming a business tax exemption under this section has the burden of furnishing to the collector such information as the collector may require to support the claim or eligibility for exemption. (94-3)

 

4.14.050 Filing for exemptions.
A.     Any person claiming an exemption from payment of the business tax under this title and required to obtain a tax certificate shall file a sworn statement with the collector stating the facts upon which exemption is claimed. In the absence of such a statement substantiating the claim, such person shall be liable for the payment of the taxes imposed herein.

B.     The collector shall, upon a proper showing contained in the sworn statement, and in such supplement thereto as may be required by the collector, issue a tax certificate to the person claiming exemption under this section without payment to the City of the business tax required herein. (94-3)

 

4.14.060 Tax-exempt tax certificates—Limitations.
A.     Every tax certificate issued without payment of the usual tax shall state “Tax-Exempt” upon its face.

B.     Any tax certificate issued as tax-exempt shall be subject to suspension and revocation by the collector in the event that it is determined by the collector that the applicant is not entitled to exemption. All such suspensions and revocations shall be made after notice and right to a hearing pursuant to Chapter 4.12 of this title.

C.    Any tax certificate issued as tax-exempt shall be void and shall afford no defense in any civil or criminal prosecution if any material statement contained in the application, statement of facts or any other document or representation made to the collector in claiming the exemption is false or fraudulent.

D.    No tax-exempt tax certificate may be transferred or loaned.

E.     Upon uncertainty, for lack of information or otherwise, as to the entitlement of any organization or activity to a tax-exempt tax certificate, the collector may require the filing of a verified report of all funds received and disbursed by any certificate holder. Upon demand such certificate holder shall file said report in the form and detail as required by the collector within thirty calendar days after demand.

F.     When a business, otherwise exempt pursuant to this chapter, is conducted by a nonexempt person on behalf of such business, the exemption shall be applicable only with regard to the exempt business, and shall not be applicable with regard to the nonexempt person. (94-3)

Chapter 4.16 BUSINESS TAX CATEGORIES
4.16.010 Tax Category I—Auto dealer, auto repair, service station and food stores.
Every person engaged in the business of selling trucks and autos, the repairing of trucks and autos, gasoline service stations, grocery stores and meat, fish, fruit and vegetable markets unless otherwise expressly provided in this title is a Tax Category I business. (94-3)

 

4.16.020 Tax Category II—All other retail businesses.
Every person engaged in the business of selling goods, wares or merchandise at retail, or providing lodging unless otherwise expressly provided in this title is a Tax Category II business. Examples of such businesses include but are not limited to: apparel store, arts and crafts fair organizer, building material and hardware store, consignment sales, drugstore, dry goods store, funeral home, furniture stores, gift shop, handicrafter, hotel, jeweler, liquor store, motel, newspaper, printer, rental of residential real estate, restaurant, snack bar, theaters or any similar business. Any business not classified as part of another category shall be placed in Tax Category II. (94-3)

 

4.16.030 Tax Category III—Service.
Every person engaged in a service business unless otherwise expressly provided in this title is a Tax Category III business. Examples of such businesses include but are not limited to the following: barber or beauty shop, bookkeeper, car rentals, car wash, copy service, fortune teller, handy person, laundry, masseur, masseuse, postal centers, repair shop, self storage, secretarial services or any similar business or occupation. (94-3)

 

4.16.040 Tax Category IV—Professionals.
Every person engaged in the practice of a profession or professional business within the City unless otherwise expressly provided in this title is a Tax Category IV business. Examples of such businesses include, but are not limited to, the following: accountant, art gallery, advertising counsel, auditor, appraiser, aquarist, architect, artist, assayer, attorney, bacteriologist, business or investment counsel, brokers of all types, certified public accountant, chemist, chiropodist, chiropractor, chirothesiast, collection agent or agency, consultant, credit counselor or rater, dancing or music schools, dentist, designer or decorator, detective agency, draftsman, drugless practitioner, economist, electrologist, employment agency, engineer, engraver, entomologist, escrow agency, geologist, illustrator, insurance adjuster or claims adjuster or broker, laboratory, lithographer, manufacturers representative, oculist, optician or optometrist, osteopath, photographer, psychiatrist, psychologist, physician, real estate broker, surgeon, surveyor, taxidermist, travel agency, veterinarian, or any similar business or occupation. (94-3)

 

4.16.050 Tax Category V—Wholesale, manufacturing, import-export, branch and management offices.
Every person engaged in the business of selling goods, wares or merchandise at wholesale at a fixed place of business within the City, and every person engaged in the business of manufacturing, processing or fabricating goods, wares or merchandise, and every business defined as an import-export business, and every business defined as a branch or management office located within the City is a Tax Category V business. (94-3)

 

4.16.060 Tax Category VI—Retirement home, convalescent home, skilled nursing facility, residential or community care facility.
Every person engaged in the business of conducting or maintaining for profit or nonprofit retirement home, convalescent home, skilled nursing facility, residential or community care facility, or apartment complex for the elderly located on and within the City is a Tax Category VI business. (94-3)

 

4.16.070 Tax Category VII—Contractors and real estate developers.
Every person engaged in the business of a general contractor or specialty contractor, and every real estate developer, unless otherwise expressly provided in this title is a Tax Category VII business. Examples of such businesses include, but are not limited to, the following: air conditioning, electrical, general contractor, plumbing and heating, real estate developer, specialty contractors. (94-3)

 

4.16.080 Tax Category VIII—Rental of commercial property.
Every person engaged in renting to a tenant, offices, stores, industrial plants or any building or structure of any kind (excluding dwellings, sleeping or lodging structures) on land located in the City unless otherwise expressly provided in this title is a Tax Category VIII business. (94-3)

 

4.16.090 Tax Category IX—Recreation centers, vending machine operations and entertainment machines.
Every person engaged in operating a recreation center, a vending machine operation or making space available for game machines unless otherwise expressly provided in this title is a Tax Category IX business. Examples of recreation centers include but are not limited to the following: golf courses, tennis clubs and riding stables. (94-3)

 

4.16.100 Tax Category X—Utilities not franchised by the City.
Every person engaged as a utility or otherwise in the distribution, transportation or transmission of electricity, gas, water or communication services that is not under a franchise agreement with the City is a Tax Category X business. (94-3)

 

4.16.110 Tax Category XI—TV program service providers not franchised by City.
Every person engaged as a utility or otherwise in the distribution, transportation or transmission of TV program services that is not under a franchise agreement with the City is a Tax Category XI business. (94-3)

 

4.16.120 Tax Category XII—Flat or fixed rate classifications.
Every person engaged in the following types of businesses is a Category XII business: ambulances, arts and crafts fair, bankruptcy and going out of business sale, bus companies, circus, carnivals, concerts, dances, mobile disc jockeys (“DJs”), delivery trucks, filming, peddling, refuse services, soliciting, taxicabs, theatrical performance, catering trucks, pushcarts, trade expos, itinerant business, isolated transactions. (14-07)

Chapter 4.18 BUSINESS TAX RATES
4.18.010 Tax Category I—Auto dealer, auto repair, service station and food stores.
Seventy dollars plus twenty-five cents per one thousand dollars of gross receipts in excess of five thousand dollars. (94-3)

 

4.18.020 Tax Category II—All other retail businesses.
A tax of seventy dollars plus forty-one cents per one thousand dollars of gross receipts in excess of five thousand dollars. (94-3)

 

4.18.030 Tax Category III—Services.
A tax of seventy dollars plus one dollar per one thousand dollars of gross receipts in excess of five thousand dollars. (94-3)

 

4.18.040 Tax Category IV—Professionals.
A tax of seventy dollars plus one dollar and ten cents per thousand dollars of gross receipts in excess of five thousand dollars with a cap of two hundred fifty dollars for the first professional plus one hundred fifty dollars for each additional professional. (94-3)

 

4.18.050 Tax Category V—Wholesale, manufacturing, import-export, branch and management offices.
A tax of seventy dollars plus three dollars and fifty cents for each partner exceeding one and three dollars and fifty cents for each employee. (94-3)

 

4.18.060 Tax Category VI—Retirement home, convalescent home, residential or community care facility.
A tax of seventy dollars plus twenty-three dollars per bed or resident. (94-3)

 

4.18.070 Tax Category VII—Contractors and real estate developers.
A tax of seventy dollars plus thirty cents per one thousand dollars gross receipts in excess of five thousand dollars. (94-3)

 

4.18.080 Tax Category VIII—Rental of commercial property.
A tax of seventy dollars plus one dollar and ten cents per thousand dollars or gross receipts in excess of five thousand dollars. (94-3)

 

4.18.090 Tax Category IX—Recreation centers, vending and entertainment machines.
A tax of seventy dollars plus one dollar and twenty-five cents per one thousand dollars of gross receipts in excess of five thousand dollars. In addition, businesses making space available for game machines, whether or not such business owns or leases the machine, shall pay an annual fee of fifty dollars for each game machine. (94-3)

 

4.18.100 Tax Category X—Utility not franchised by the City.
A tax of seventy dollars plus forty-five cents per one thousand dollars gross receipts in excess of five thousand dollars. (94-3)

 

4.18.110 Tax Category XI—TV program service providers not franchised by the City.
A tax of seventy dollars plus fifty dollars per thousand dollars of gross receipts in excess of five thousand dollars. (94-3)

 

4.18.120 Tax Category XII—Flat or fixed rates.
Businesses which do not fit in above categories shall be taxed as follows:

A.     Ambulances—Sixty dollars per vehicle;

B.     Arts and crafts fair vendors, seventy-five cents per day for each vendor not already holding a tax certificate issued by the City covering the activity, provided that the arts and crafts fair organizer collects and transmits the fees on a monthly basis to the City pursuant to a written undertaking to do so. Otherwise, vendors shall be taxed as Category II businesses;

C.    Bankruptcy sales—Thirty-five dollars and seventy-five cents per day;

D.    Buses—One hundred fifty dollars per company;

E.     Catering trucks—Eleven dollars and twenty-five cents per day up to a maximum of one hundred twelve dollars and fifty cents;

F.     Circuses and carnivals—Sixty dollars for the first day and an additional fifteen dollars for each additional day;

G.    Concerts and dances—Seventy-five dollars for the first day and thirty-two dollars and fifty cents for each additional day;

H.    Deliveries—Sixty dollars per vehicle or seven dollars and fifty cents per year if gross receipts are less than five hundred dollars;

I.      Mobile disc jockeys (“Mobile DJs”)—Seventy-five dollars for the first day and thirty-two dollars and fifty cents for each additional day;

J.     Isolated transactions—Twenty-two dollars and fifty cents per day;

K.     Itinerant merchant—Twenty-two dollars and fifty cents per day;

L.     Motion picture and television filming—Three hundred dollars per day;

M.    Peddlers—Eleven dollars and twenty-five cents per day up to a maximum of one hundred twenty dollars;

N.    Pushcarts—Eleven dollars and twenty-five cents per day up to a maximum of one hundred twenty dollars;

O.    Solicitors—Eleven dollars and twenty-five cents per day up to a maximum of one hundred twelve dollars and fifty cents;

P.     Taxi cabs—One hundred fifty dollars per company;

Q.    Theatrical performances—Seventy-five dollars plus an additional thirty-seven dollars and fifty cents for each additional day. “Theatrical performance” means an event inside a building or out-of-doors where one or more persons provide a dramatization, pantomime, comedy act, vocal production, instrumental music, or similar activity before a group of spectators or listeners, whether or not such persons are compensated for their participation in the event. “Theatrical performance” does not include any City event or City-sponsored event;

R.    Utility, franchised—One hundred eighty-seven dollars and fifty cents per company. (14-07; 94-3)

 

4.18.130 Indexing of flat taxes and of caps.
All flat or fixed rate taxes and caps shall be increased or decreased, to the nearest penny, annually, based upon the Los Angeles-Anaheim-Riverside area consumer price index for the twelve-month period of January through December of the prior calendar year. This increase or decrease will become effective with renewals and new business tax certificates issued after April 1st of each year, commencing April 1, 1995. (94-3)

TITLE 5 BUSINESS REGULATION
Chapter 5.03 STATE VIDEO FRANCHISES
Chapter 5.05 REGULATION OF DISCHARGES OF FATS, OILS AND GREASE FROM FOOD FACILITIES
Chapter 5.20 BUSINESS PERMITS
Chapter 5.36 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND MASSAGE TECHNICIANS
Chapter 5.38 FORTUNETELLING
Chapter 5.40 SOLICITATION
Chapter 5.44 TAXICABS AND OTHER VEHICLES FOR HIRE
Chapter 5.45 ENTERTAINMENT
Chapter 5.46 FILMING
Chapter 5.48 ADULT BUSINESSES
Chapter 5.50 REGULATION OF SIDEWALK VENDORS
Chapter 5.52 SHARED MOBILITY PROGRAM

Chapter 5.03 STATE VIDEO FRANCHISES
5.03.010 Applicability of chapter to State video services franchisees.
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require any person or entity to obtain a franchise issued by the City, to the extent that such person or entity is authorized to provide cable service or video services under a cable franchise or video services franchise issued by another government entity under applicable law, including, but not limited to, Section 5800 et seq., of the California Public Utilities Code. The requirements and provisions of this chapter shall not apply or be enforced to the extent that they actually conflict with applicable State or Federal law. (14-07)

 

5.03.020 Regulation of State video services franchisees.
Sections 5.03.010 through 5.03.080 of this chapter are designed to regulate video service providers holding State video franchises and operating within the City. As of January 1, 2007, the State of California has the sole authority to grant State video franchises pursuant to the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006 (Act). Pursuant to the Act, the City of Claremont shall receive a franchise fee from all State video franchise holders operating within the City. Additionally, the City has the responsibility to establish and enforce penalties, consistent with State law, against all State video franchise holders operating within the City for violations of customer service standards, but the Act grants all authority to adopt customer service standards to the State. The Act leaves unchanged the City’s authority to regulate the City’s current cable franchise in accordance with this chapter and the cable franchise currently in effect, until such time as the cable franchisee no longer holds a City franchise or is no longer operating under a current or expired City franchise. (14-07)

 

5.03.030 State video franchise fee—Late payment penalty.
For any State video franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the City of Claremont, there shall be a fee (State franchise fee) paid to the City equal to five percent of the gross revenue of that State video franchise holder. Gross revenue, for the purposes of this section, shall have the definition set forth in California Public Utilities Code Section 5860. The State franchise fee shall be paid to the City quarterly, within 45 days after the end of each calendar quarter. If the State franchise fee is not paid when due, the State video franchise holder shall pay a late payment charge at a rate per year equal to the highest prime lending rate during the period of delinquency, plus one percent. (14-07)

 

5.03.040 Audit authority.
Not more than once annually, the City Manager or designee may examine and perform an audit of the business records of all holders of a State video franchise operating within the boundaries of the City of Claremont to ensure compliance with this chapter. (14-07)

 

5.03.050 Customer service penalties under State video franchises.
A.     Any holder of a State video franchise operating within the boundaries of the City of Claremont shall comply with all applicable State and Federal customer service and protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service.

B.     The City Manager shall monitor the compliance of holders of a State video franchise operating within the boundaries of the City of Claremont with respect to State and Federal customer service and protection standards. The City Manager, or designee, will provide the State video franchise holder written notice of any material breaches of applicable customer service standards, and will allow the State video franchise holder 30 days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. Material breaches not remedied within the 30-day time period will be subject to the following penalties to be imposed by the City:

1.     For the first occurrence of a violation, a fine of $500.00 shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $1,500.00 for each violation.

2.     For a second violation of the same nature within 12 months, a fine of $1,000.00 shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $3,000.00 for each violation.

3.     For a third or further violation of the same nature within 12 months, a fine of $2,500.00 shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $7,500.00 for each violation.

C.    A holder of a State video franchise operating within the boundaries of the City of Claremont may appeal a penalty assessed by the City Manager to the City Council within 60 days of the initial assessment. The City Council shall hear all evidence and relevant testimony and may uphold, modify or vacate the penalty. The City Council’s decision on the imposition of a penalty shall be final. (14-07)

 

5.03.060 City response to State video franchise applications.
A.     Applicants for State video franchises, or amendments to existing franchises, that will authorize the applicant to operate within the boundaries of the City of Claremont must concurrently provide complete copies to the City of any application or amendments to applications filed with the Public Utilities Commission. At a minimum, one complete copy must be provided to the City Manager.

B.     Within 30 days of receipt, the City Manager will provide any appropriate comments to the Public Utilities Commission regarding an application or an amendment to an application for a State video franchise. (14-07)

 

5.03.070 Notice to adjacent property owners prior to installation of video services facilities.
A.     Any holder of a State video franchise, or City-issued cable franchise, operating within the boundaries of the City of Claremont, that proposes to install above-ground facilities in the public right-of-way shall, no less than 20 days prior to installing such facilities, provide written notice to the owner of the private or public property (excluding the public right-of-way) nearest to the proposed facility. For purposes of this subsection, “above-ground facilities” shall include only those facilities that are located on the ground or on a base or pedestal that is on the ground, and shall exclude aerial or pole-mounted facilities.

B.     Any franchisee to which this section applies shall provide the City with a copy of the proposed form of notice to be used in compliance with subsection A, no less than 10 days prior to mailing or delivering the notice. The City may require the franchisee to amend the form of the notice. Once the City has approved the form of notice, the franchisee shall not be required to obtain additional approvals of notice from the City, so long as the franchisee does not materially deviate from the form of notice approved by the City. (14-07)

 

5.03.080 Encroachment permit—Application and procedures.
A.     For purposes of this section, an “encroachment permit” means any permit issued by the City relating to construction or operation of facilities for cable services or video services pursuant to this chapter.

B.     Prior to commencing any work for which an encroachment permit is required by this Municipal Code, a State video franchise holder shall obtain a permit in accordance with the provisions of this Municipal Code, including, but not limited to, Chapter 12.04. A permit application is complete when the applicant has complied with all applicable laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, all City administrative rules and regulations and all applicable requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and preparation of plans and specifications as required by City staff.

C.    City staff shall, in the exercise of reasonable discretion as permitted by State law, either approve or deny a State video franchise holder’s application for an encroachment permit within 60 days of receiving a complete permit application.

D.    If City staff denies a State video franchise holder’s application for an encroachment permit, City staff shall, at the time of notifying the applicant of the denial, provide to the applicant a detailed explanation of the reasons for the denial.

E.     A State video franchise holder may appeal any decision of City staff or any condition imposed by City staff pertaining to an encroachment permit by following the appeal procedures set forth in Chapter 16.321.

F.     Any time limit provided by this section may be extended by mutual agreement of the State video franchise holder and the City.

G.    The issuance of an encroachment permit to a State video franchise holder is not a franchise and does not grant any vested rights in any location in the public rights-of-way, or in any particular manner of placement within the public rights-of-way. A permit to place cabinets and similar appurtenances aboveground may be revoked and the permittee required to place facilities underground, upon reasonable notice to the permittee. (14-07)

Chapter 5.05 REGULATION OF DISCHARGES OF FATS, OILS AND GREASE FROM FOOD FACILITIES
5.05.010 Purpose.
It is the intent of the City Council, through adoption of this chapter, to reduce sewer system overflow incidents by: (1) developing and implementing a preventative maintenance program to assure optimum functioning of the sewer system; (2) preventing illicit discharges and obstructions to the sewer system; (3) requiring the proper design and construction of sewers and connections to it; and (4) protecting the environment by minimizing the effects of sewer discharges, which often result in pathogens being released to receiving waters on which persons depend for a variety of beneficial uses, including, but not limited to: recreation and groundwater recharge. (10-07)

 

5.05.020 Definitions.
The following are definitions of terms used in this chapter:

“Best Management Practices (BMPs)” shall mean schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to: (1) prevent or reduce the introduction of fats, oils, and grease to the sewer; and (2) to prevent and reduce sewer system overflows to the municipal storm drain system and receiving waters through preventative maintenance.

“Building Official” shall mean the Building Official of the City of Claremont or designee.

 

“Change in operations” shall mean any change in the ownership, food types, or operational procedures that have the potential to increase the amount of FOG generated and/or discharged by food facilities in an amount that alone or collectively causes or creates a potential for a sewer system overflow to occur.

“City” shall mean the City of Claremont.

“Director of Community and Human Services” shall mean the Director of Community and Human Services of the City of Claremont or his/her designee.

“Discharger” shall mean any person who discharges or causes a discharge of wastewater directly or indirectly to a public sewer. “Discharger” shall mean the same as “user.”

“Fats, oils, and grease (FOG)” shall mean any substance such as a vegetable or animal product that is used in, or is a byproduct of, the cooking or food preparation process, and that turns, or may turn, viscous or solidifies with a change in temperature or other condition.

“Food facility” shall mean any commercial or industrial operation within the boundaries of the City that may discharge FOG and/or that stores, prepares, packages, serves, vends, or otherwise provides food for human consumption at the retail level. Food facility shall also mean food facilities defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 113789 or which have any process or device that uses or produces FOG, or grease vapors, steam, fumes, smoke, or odors that are required to be removed by a Type I hood, as defined in the California Mechanical Code.

“Food grinder” shall mean any device installed in the plumbing or sewer system for the purpose of grinding food waste or food preparation by products for the purpose of disposing it in the sewer system. “Food grinder” shall also mean a “garbage disposal.”

“Grease control device” shall mean any grease interceptor, grease trap or other approved mechanism, device, or process, which attaches to, or is applied to, wastewater plumbing fixtures and lines, the purpose of which is to trap, collect or treat FOG prior to it being discharged into the sewer system.

“Grease interceptor” shall mean a multi-compartment grease control device that is constructed in different sizes and is generally required to be located, according to the current edition of the California Plumbing Code, underground between any food facility and the connection to the sewer system. These devices primarily use gravity to separate FOG from the wastewater as it moves from one compartment to the next. These devices must be cleaned, maintained and have the FOG removed and disposed of in a proper manner on regular intervals to be effective.

“Grease trap” shall mean a grease control device that is designed to retain grease from one to a maximum of four fixtures. A grease trap is located within the food facility and requires frequent maintenance depending on the amount of FOG in the wastewater.

“Infiltration” shall mean water entering a sewer system, including sewer service connections, from the ground through such means as defective pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manhole walls.

“Inflow” shall mean water entering a sewer system through a direct stormwater runoff connection to the sanitary sewer, which may cause an almost immediate increase in wastewater flows.

“Interference” shall mean any discharge which, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the City’s sewer system, treatment processes or operations, or is a cause of violation of the City’s NPDES or waste discharge requirements or prevents lawful sludge use or disposal.

“Limited food preparation food facility” shall mean a food facility that is only engaged in reheating, hot holding or assembly of ready to eat food products and as a result, there is no wastewater discharge containing a significant amount of FOG. A limited food preparation food facility does not include any operation that changes the form, flavor, or consistency of food.

“Manifest” shall mean that receipt which is retained by the generator of wastes for disposing of recyclable wastes or liquid wastes as required by the City.

“New construction” shall mean any structure planned or under construction for which a sewer connection permit has not been issued.

“NPDES” shall mean the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System and the permit issued to control the discharge of liquids or other substances or solids to surface waters of the United States as detailed in Public Law 92-500, Section 402.

“Person” shall mean any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation, or public agency, including the State of California and the United States of America.

“Regulatory agencies” shall mean those agencies having regulatory jurisdiction over the operations of the City, including, but not limited to: United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), California State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB), California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Los Angeles Region (RWQCB), South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD), and California Department of Health Services (DOHS).

“Remodeling” shall mean a physical change exceeding a cost of $50,000 to a food facility that requires a building permit, and that involves any one or a combination of the following: (1) underslab plumbing in the food processing area; (2) a 30% increase in the net public seating area; (3) a 30% increase in the size of the kitchen area; or (4) any change in the size or type of food preparation equipment.

“Sampling facilities” shall mean structure(s) provided at the user’s expense for the City or user to measure and record wastewater constituent mass, and/or concentrations, collect a representative sample or provide access to plug or terminate the discharge.

“Sample point” shall mean a location approved by the City, from which wastewater can be collected that is representative in content and consistency of the entire flow of wastewater being sampled.

“Sewer or sewer system” shall mean any and all facilities used for collecting, conveying, pumping, treating, and disposing of wastewater and sludge. This definition includes, but is not limited to: any property belonging to the City used in the treatment, reclamation, reuse, transportation, or disposal of wastewater or sludge.

“Sewer lateral” shall mean a building sewer as defined in the latest edition of the California Plumbing Code. It is the wastewater connection between the building’s wastewater facilities and a public sewer system.

“Sewer system overflow (SSO)” shall mean any overflow spill, release, discharge, or diversion of wastewater from a sanitary sewer system.

“Sludge” shall mean any solid, semisolid, or liquid decant, subnate, or supernate from a manufacturing process, utility service, or pretreatment food facility.

“Waste” shall mean sewage and any and all other waste substances, whether liquid, solid, gaseous, or radioactive, associated with human habitation or of human or animal nature, including such wastes placed within containers of whatever nature prior to and for the purpose of disposal.

“Waste hauler” shall mean any individual or business licensed by the California Department of Food and Agriculture to transport, render, and/or process used cooking oil and grease.

“Wastewater” shall mean the liquid and water-carried wastes of the community and all constituents thereof, whether treated or untreated, discharged into or permitted to enter a public sewer. (12-04; 10-07)

 

5.05.030 FOG discharge requirement.
No food facility shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the sewer system, FOG that accumulates and/or causes or contributes to blockages in the sewer system or at the sewer lateral, which connects the food facility to the sewer system. (10-07)

 

5.05.040 Enforcement.
The Director of Community and Human Services or his/her designee is responsible for enforcement of this chapter and for all determinations of compliance with it. (12-04; 10-07)

 

5.05.050 Discharge prohibitions.
The following prohibitions shall apply to all food facilities that generate FOG:

A.     The use of food grinders in the plumbing system of an existing food facility that is expected to result in the conveyance of excessive quantities of FOG to the sewer system is prohibited. Furthermore, food grinders shall be removed from existing food facilities within six months of written notification by the City.

B.     Installation of food grinders in the plumbing system of new construction of food facilities shall be prohibited.

C.    Introduction of any additives into any food facility’s wastewater system for the purpose of emulsifying FOG is prohibited.

D.    Disposal of waste cooking oil into drainage pipes is prohibited. All waste cooking oils shall be collected and stored properly in receptacles such as barrels or drums for recycling or other acceptable methods of disposal. A method of secondary containment shall be required to prevent a spill that leads to contamination of the sewer system or storm drain system. Grease barrels shall not be placed within the public right-of-way or in permanent facilities designed to house garbage bins. All grease barrels and drums shall be labeled as such with the food facility’s name and phone number.

E.     Discharge of wastewater from dishwashers to any FOG device, including but not limited to grease traps or grease interceptors, is prohibited.

F.     Discharge of wastewater with temperatures in excess of 140°F to any grease control device, including but not limited to grease traps and grease interceptors, is prohibited.

G.    The use of biological additives for grease remediation or as a supplement to interceptor maintenance is prohibited, unless prior written approval from the Director of Community and Human Services is obtained.

H.    Discharge of waste from toilets, urinals, washbasins, and other fixtures possibly containing fecal material to sewer lines intended for grease interceptor service, or vice versa, is prohibited.

I.      Discharge into the sewer system of any waste which has FOG and/or solid materials that have been removed from a grease control device is prohibited. Grease removed from grease control devices shall be waste-hauled periodically as part of the operation and maintenance requirements for grease interceptors and traps. Licensed waste haulers or an approved recycling facility must be used to dispose of FOG, including waste cooking oil. (12-04; 10-07)

 

5.05.060 FOG wastewater fees.
A.     All food facilities that are required to install a grease control device will be periodically monitored by the City to ensure the objectives of this chapter are being met. The cost for monitoring activities shall be borne by the food facility. A FOG wastewater discharge fee will be assessed annually, as set by resolution of the City Council, to offset the cost of monitoring and inspection.

B.     The annual fee for periodic monitoring shall take effect 12 months after approval and adoption of this chapter. (10-07)

 

5.05.070 FOG pretreatment for new food facilities required.
With the exception of limited preparation food facilities, all new food facilities are required to install, operate, and maintain an approved type of, and adequately sized, grease control device necessary to maintain compliance with the objectives of this chapter. Approval will be granted by the Building Official. (10-07)

 

5.05.080 FOG pretreatment for industrial and commercial facilities.
Any existing or new industrial or commercial facility, except food facilities, that discharges FOG materials that have the potential to cause blockages to the sewer system shall be required, at the discretion of the Director of Community and Human Services, to obtain an industrial waste discharge permit from the Sanitation District of Los Angeles County, but such industrial or commercial facility shall not be required to pay an annual FOG wastewater discharge fee. (12-04; 10-07)

 

5.05.090 New construction.
This chapter shall not be interpreted to allow new construction, remodeling, or a change in operations without an approved grease interceptor unless the Building Official has determined that it is unnecessary, impossible, or impracticable to install or operate a grease interceptor for the subject food facility under the provisions of this chapter. (10-07)

 

5.05.100 Additional preventative maintenance required.
The City has an ongoing preventative maintenance program that outlines the frequency with which specified lines of the sewer system are cleaned. If the City must provide additional cleaning of the sewer system to prevent blockages caused by FOG, the City’s costs for such abatement will be entirely borne by the operator of the food facility, and said cost shall constitute a debt to the City and become due and payable upon the City’s request for reimbursement of such costs. Food facilities will be billed beginning 24 months after adoption of this chapter. (10-07)

 

5.05.110 Sewer system overflows and cleanup costs.
Food facilities found to have contributed to a sewer blockage, sewer system overflow, or any sewer system interferences resulting from the discharge of wastewater or waste containing FOG, may be ordered to install and maintain a grease interceptor, and may be subject to a plan to abate the nuisance and prevent any future health hazards created by sewer line failures and blockages, SSOs or any other sewer system Interferences. SSOs may cause threat and injury to public health, safety, and welfare of life and property and are hereby declared public nuisances as defined in Section 8.16.020. Furthermore, sewer lateral failures and SSOs caused by food facilities alone or collectively are the responsibility of the food facility and individual(s) as responsible officer(s) or owner(s) of the food facility. If the City must act to contain and/or clean up an SSO caused by blockage of a private or public sewer lateral or system, or at the request of the operator of the food facility, or because of the failure of the food facility to abate the condition causing a threat to the health, safety, welfare, or property of the public, or because of an unauthorized discharge of FOG, the City’s costs for such abatement will be entirely borne by the operator of the food facility and individuals as responsible officer(s) or owner(s) of the food facility, and said cost shall constitute a debt to the City and become due and payable upon the City’s request for reimbursement of such costs. Food facilities will be billed beginning 24 months after adoption of this chapter. (10-07)

 

5.05.120 Grease interceptor requirements.
A.     One year after the adoption of this chapter, all food facilities that cannot demonstrate adequate control of FOG as determined by the City will be required to install a grease interceptor.

B.     Grease interceptors shall conform to the current edition of the California Plumbing Code and all relevant City ordinances and policies. grease interceptors shall be constructed in accordance with the design approved by the Building Official and shall have a minimum of two compartments with fittings designed for grease retention and a sampling box.

C.    The grease interceptor shall be installed at a location where it shall be at all times easily accessible for inspection, cleaning, and removal of accumulated grease.

D.    Access manholes, with a minimum diameter of 24 inches, shall be provided over each grease interceptor chamber and sanitary tee. The access manholes shall extend at least to finished grade and be designed and maintained to prevent water inflow or infiltration. The manholes shall also have readily removable covers to facilitate inspection, grease removal, and wastewater sampling activities. (10-07)

 

5.05.130 Grease interceptor maintenance requirements.
Grease interceptors shall be maintained in efficient operating condition by periodic removal of the full content of the interceptor which includes wastewater accumulated FOG, floating materials, sludge, and solids. All existing and newly installed grease interceptors shall be maintained in a manner consistent with this section. No FOG that has accumulated in a grease interceptor shall be allowed to pass into any sewer lateral, sewer system, storm drain, or public right-of-way during maintenance activities. All food facilities with grease interceptors may be required to submit data and information necessary to establish the maintenance frequency of the grease interceptors. The maintenance frequency for all food facilities with a grease interceptor shall be determined in one of the following methods:

A.     Grease interceptors shall be fully pumped out and cleaned at a frequency such that the combined FOG and solids accumulation does not exceed 25% of the total liquid depth of the grease interceptor. This is to ensure that the minimum hydraulic retention time and required available volume is maintained to effectively intercept and retain FOG discharged to the sewer system.

B.     All food facilities with a grease interceptor shall maintain their grease interceptor not less than once every 6 months. Grease interceptors shall be fully pumped out and cleaned quarterly when the frequency described in subsection A of this section has not been established. The maintenance frequency may be adjusted when sufficient data have been obtained to establish an average frequency based on the requirements described in subsection A or at any time to reflect changes in actual operating conditions. Based on the actual generation of FOG from a food facility, the maintenance frequency may increase or decrease.

C.    If the grease interceptor at any time contains FOG and solids accumulation that does not meet the requirements described in subsection A, the food facility shall be required to have the grease interceptor serviced immediately such that all fats, oils, grease, sludge, and other materials are completely removed from the grease interceptor. If deemed necessary, the Director of Community and Human Services may also increase the maintenance frequency of the grease interceptor from the current frequency. (12-04; 10-07)

 

5.05.140 Grease trap requirements.
A.     A food facility may propose the use of or may be required to install grease traps, in lieu of or in addition to installation of a grease interceptor, in the waste line leading from drains, sinks, and other fixtures or equipment where grease may be introduced into the sewer system in quantities that can cause blockages.

B.     Sizing and installation of grease traps shall conform to the current edition of the California Plumbing Code, or as required by the Building Official.

C.    Grease traps shall be maintained by removing accumulated grease on a daily basis, or as often as required to ensure efficient operating condition.

D.    Grease traps shall be maintained free of all food residues and any FOG waste removed during the cleaning and scraping process.

E.     Grease traps shall be inspected periodically by the food facility to check for leaking seams and pipes, and for effective operation of the baffles and flow-regulating device. Grease traps and their baffles shall be maintained free of all caked-on FOG and waste. Removable baffles shall be removed and cleaned during the maintenance process. Food facilities will determine a schedule to maintain this equipment adequately.

F.     Dishwashers and food grinders shall not be connected to or discharged into any grease trap.

G.    No food facility shall increase the use of water or in any other manner attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for treatment to achieve compliance with this chapter. (10-07)

 

5.05.150 Monitoring, reporting, and record keeping.
Food facilities are subject to the following compliance monitoring requirements:

A.     Food facilities, at the discretion of the Director of Community and Human Services, may be required to construct and maintain in proper operating condition flow monitoring, constituent monitoring, and/or sampling facilities at the food facility’s sole expense.

B.     The location of the monitoring or metering facilities shall be subject to approval by the Director of Community and Human Services.

C.    The City may require food facilities to provide immediate, clear, safe, and uninterrupted access to the food facility’s monitoring and metering facilities.

D.    Food facilities may also be required by the Director of Community and Human Services to submit waste analysis plans, contingency plans, and meet other necessary requirements to ensure proper operation and maintenance of the grease control device and compliance with this chapter.

E.     Food facilities shall not increase the use of water or in any other manner attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for treatment to achieve compliance with this chapter.

F.     The Director of Community and Human Services may require periodic reporting of the status of implementation of BMPs implemented at food facilities.

G.    The Director of Community and Human Services may require visual monitoring at the sole expense of a food facility which generates FOG to observe the actual conditions of any food facility’s sewer lateral and sewer lines downstream.

H.    The Director of Community and Human Services may require reports for self-monitoring of wastewater constituents and FOG characteristics of food facilities needed for determining compliance with this chapter. Failure by food facilities to perform any required monitoring, or to submit monitoring reports required by the Director of Community and Human Services, constitutes a violation of this chapter, and may be cause for the City to initiate all necessary tasks and analyses to determine the wastewater constituents and FOG characteristics for compliance with any conditions and requirements specified in this chapter. Food facilities shall be responsible for any and all expenses of the City in undertaking such monitoring analyses and preparation of reports.

I.      Other reports may be required such as compliance schedule progress reports, FOG control monitoring reports, and any other reports deemed reasonably appropriate by the Director of Community and Human Services to ensure compliance with this chapter.

J.     Food facilities are required to keep all manifests, receipts, and invoices of all cleaning, maintenance, grease removal of/from the grease control device, disposal carrier, and disposal site location for no less than four years.

K.     Food facilities shall, upon request, make the manifests, receipts, and invoices available to the Director of Community and Human Services or his/her designee. These records may include:

1.     A logbook of grease control device cleaning and maintenance practices.

2.     A record of BMPs being implemented including employee training.

3.     Copies of records and manifests of waste-hauling interceptor contents and/or waste cooking oil disposal.

4.     Records of sampling data and sludge height monitoring for FOG and solids accumulation in the grease interceptor.

5.     Any other information deemed appropriate by the Director of Community and Human Services to ensure compliance with this chapter.

L.     It shall be unlawful to make any false statement, representation, record, report, plan, or other document that is filed with the City, or to tamper with or knowingly render inoperable any grease control device, monitoring device, or method or access point required under this chapter. (12-04; 10-07)

 

5.05.160 Best management practices required.
All food facilities shall implement BMPs, in accordance with the requirements and guidelines established by the City, in its operation to minimize the discharge of FOG to the sewer system, which shall, at a minimum, include the following:

A.     Installation of Drain Screens. Drain screens shall be installed on all drainage pipes in food preparation and kitchen areas.

B.     Segregation and Collection of Waste Cooking Oil. All employees must dispose of waste cooking oil in barrels designated for storage of such oil.

C.    Disposal of Food Waste. All food waste shall be disposed of directly into the trash or garbage, and not in sinks or toilets.

D.    Food Grinders. Employees shall not pour, dispose, or place any food product, prepared or unprepared, containing FOG materials into a sink or other device equipped with a food grinder.

E.     Employee Training. Food facilities shall train all employees within 180 days of the effective date of this chapter, and twice each calendar year thereafter, on the following subjects:

1.     How to “dry wipe” pots, pans, dishware, and work areas before washing to remove grease.

2.     How to dispose properly of food waste and solids prior to disposal in trash bins or containers to prevent leaking and odors.

3.     The location and use of absorption products to clean under fryer baskets and other locations where grease may be spilled or dripped.

4.     How to dispose properly of grease or oils from cooking equipment into a grease receptacle such as a barrel or drum without spilling.

F.     Employee Training Verification. Employee training shall be documented and employee signatures retained indicating each employee’s attendance and understanding of the practices reviewed. Training records shall be available for review at any reasonable time by the Director of Community and Human Services or his/her designee.

G.    Maintenance of Kitchen Exhaust Filters. Filters shall be cleaned as frequently as necessary to be maintained in good operating condition. The wastewater generated from cleaning the exhaust filter shall be disposed of properly.

H.    Kitchen Signage. Best management and waste minimization practices shall be posted conspicuously in the food preparation and dishwashing areas at all times. (12-04; 10-07)

 

5.05.170 Inspection and sampling.
The Director of Community and Human Services may inspect or order the inspection and/or sample of the wastewater discharges of any food facility subject to this chapter to ascertain whether the intent of this chapter is being met and the food facility is complying with all requirements.

A.     Inspection of Premises. Food facilities shall allow the Director of Community and Human Services or his or her designee access to the premises, during normal business hours, for purposes of inspecting the food facility’s grease control devices or interceptor, reviewing the manifests, receipts and invoices relating to the cleaning, maintenance, and inspection of the grease control devices or interceptor.

B.     Metering and Sampling Devices. The Director of Community and Human Services shall have the right to place or order the placement on the food facility’s property or other locations as determined by the Director of Community and Human Services such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations. Where any food facility has security measures in force, the food facility shall make necessary arrangements so that representatives of the City shall be permitted to enter without delay for the purpose of performing their specific responsibilities.

C.    Sampling and Inspection Frequency. Sampling and inspection of any food facility that generates FOG shall be conducted in the time, place, manner, and frequency determined at the sole discretion of the Director of Community and Human Services or his/her designee. Any sample taken from a sample point is considered to be representative of the discharge to the public sewer.

D.    Right of Entry. No person shall interfere with, delay, resist or refuse entrance to City representatives attempting to inspect any facility involved directly or indirectly with a discharge of wastewater to the City’s sewer system. (12-04; 10-07)

 

5.05.180 Notification of spill.
In the event a food facility is unable to comply with any condition or provision of this chapter due to a breakdown of equipment, accidents, or human error or the food facility has reasonable opportunity to know that the discharge will violate the provisions of this chapter, the discharger shall immediately notify the Director of Community and Human Services by telephone. If the material discharged to the sewer has the potential to cause or result in sewer blockages or SSOs, the discharger shall immediately notify the local Health Department or County, and the City.

A.     Agency Notification. Confirmation of this notification shall be made in writing to the Director of Community and Human Services no later than five (5) working days from the date of the incident. The written notification shall state the date of the incident, the reasons for the discharge or spill, what steps were taken immediately to correct the problem, and what steps are being taken to prevent the problem from recurring.

B.     Non-Relief from Expense, Loss, Damage, or Liability. Such notification shall not relieve the food facility of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage or loss to the City or any other damage or loss to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the food facility of any fees or other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or other applicable law. (12-04; 10-07)

 

5.05.190 Penalty imposed on City by regulatory agency(ies).
Any person who discharges waste which causes or contributes to the City violating its discharge requirements established by any regulatory agency with jurisdiction over the City shall be liable for any costs or expenses incurred by the City, including regulatory fines, penalties, and assessments made by such agencies or a court. (10-07)

 

5.05.200 Criminal penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction, which upon conviction is punishable by a fine. Each violation and each day in which a violation occurs may constitute a new and separate violation of this chapter and shall be subject to administrative fines in accordance with Chapter 1.14. (10-07)

Chapter 5.20 BUSINESS PERMITS
Note
*      Prior history: Prior code §§ 12.34, 12.35, 12.36, 12.37, 12.38, 12.39, 12.40 and 12.44; Ord. Nos. 76-4, 90-3 and 93-5.

 

5.20.005 Definitions.
Terms defined in Title 4 of this Code shall have the same meaning in Title 5 unless the context clearly requires otherwise or they are otherwise defined in this title.

“Business permit” means a certificate that shall be required of any person who shall engage in or maintain any business within the City at a fixed place of business in his or her name, or as an agent for any other person. No such permit shall be issued except upon compliance with all applicable City and County codes. Provided, any business authorized by a home occupation permit is not required to obtain a business permit under this chapter.

“Officer or body required to act upon any application” means, unless otherwise specified, the financial services director, or if there is none, the City Manager or his or her designate charged with the administration of this title. It shall include anyone designated by him or her to perform all or a portion of his or her duties.

“Permit committee” or “permit and license committee” means a committee consisting of the Director of Community Development, the police chief, and the financial services director, or such person designated by any one of them to perform all or a portion of his or her duties. Provided, if the permit committee is hearing an appeal of a decision of one of its members, the City Clerk or his or her designate shall substitute for that member. (94-10)

 

5.20.010 Application—Contents.
Applications shall be filed with financial services department on forms provided by the City, the original of which shall be acknowledged in the form of an affidavit and shall include the following information:

A.     The legal name, address and phone number of the person, partnership or corporation submitting the application;

B.     The business name, address and phone number under which the business will be conducted, if applicable;

C.    The residence address and phone number of the person, partners or principal directors of the corporation making the application;

D.    The exact nature of the activity for which the permit is requested;

E.     Such other information as required by the financial services department. (94-10)

 

5.20.020 Determination standards.
A.     The officer or body required to act upon any application pursuant to this title shall issue a business or other permit, provided the applicant and the type of business proposed are consistent with established standards of the City and that the following criteria are met:

1.     Compliance with all City codes;

2.     The activity for which the permit is sought is not objectionable or detrimental to the public health, morals, safety or general welfare; and

3.     That no conflict exists with any City, state or federal law.

B.     A permit may be issued conditionally as the public interest may require. Each permit or renewal thereof shall be issued only upon payment of the amount of the business tax designated in this Code for the type of business or activity or as determined by the committee or the City Council. (94-10)

 

5.20.025 Game establishments.
A.     Whenever any person desires to engage in any of the businesses enumerated in this section in the City, such person shall petition the City Council for a permit therefor, which petition shall state the name of the applicant, the character and location of the proposed business. On consideration thereof, the City Council shall have the right to refuse any such permit if it determines that the granting of the same or the conduct of the business will be contrary to the preservation of the public peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of the City or its inhabitants. If such permit is granted, the City Council may impose such terms, conditions and restrictions upon the operations and conduct of such business, not in conflict with any paramount law, as it may deem necessary or expedient to protect the public peace, health, safety, morals or welfare. On such consideration, the City Council may refer such application for investigation to any person it may select. No license or permit shall be issued for the conduct of any such business except as ordered by the City Council. Upon order of the Council for the issuance of such license, a license fee of thirty dollars per day shall become immediately due and payable.

B.     The businesses referred to in this section shall be: athletic exhibition, show or bout, dancehall, distillery for any purpose, game establishments where games are conducted as a business, merry-go-round, penny arcade, shooting gallery, wrestling match, or any similar business or occupation. Game machines shall be regulated and taxed under Section 4.18.090 and not under this section. (94-10; 94-3; 84-4; 82-2; 81-11; 78-22; 76-4; prior code § 12.32)

 

5.20.030 Application fees.
Each applicant, at the time of filing an application for a business permit pursuant to this chapter, shall pay a fee as set forth from time to time by resolution of the City Council. (94-10)

 

5.20.090 Duration and validity of permit.
A business permit is valid for a specific business at a specific location. A business permit is not assignable or transferable. Whenever there is a change in ownership, location or nature of business a new permit is required. (94-10)

 

5.20.100 Suspension.
The right to operate any business or other activity for which a permit is required under this title may be suspended forthwith without hearing, in the event such suspension is necessary for the preservation and protection of public health, morals, safety or general welfare, if so determined by any officer charged with the responsibility of issuing permits, the permit and license committee, or the City Council; provided, however, that no suspension shall continue for more than five days unless proceedings regarding revocation have been duly instituted in accordance with the provisions of this title. (94-10)

 

5.20.110 Revocation—Basis—Granting of new permit.
A.     Any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this title may be revoked by any officer or body charged with the responsibility of issuing permits pursuant to this title, or the City Council.

B.     In the event a permit is revoked pursuant to the provisions of this title, no other permit shall be granted or issued under the provisions of this title to the same applicant or any successors in interest within one year of the date of revocation. A decision by the City Council to deny or revoke a permit shall be final and conclusive in the matter. (00-03)

 

5.20.120 Revocation—Notice required.
A permittee shall be given written notice at least five days prior to the date for the proposed revocation of the permittee’s permit. In the event that any officer or body other than the City Council revokes such permit pursuant to the provisions of this title, the applicant or permittee may appeal the decision of the officer or body pursuant to provisions of this chapter. (00-03)

 

5.20.130 Appeal of permit decision.
A.     Any person aggrieved by any determination, interpretation, decision, or similar action taken by an officer or body charged with the responsibility of issuing or revoking permits pursuant to this title may file for an appeal of such action. The appeal shall be submitted to and received by the City Clerk within ten days of the date of the notice of such action for which the appeal is made. The appeal must be in writing on forms provided by the City together with an appeal fee established by resolution of the City Council which may be amended from time to time. All appeals shall set forth the appellant’s reason for asserting the decision or action was in error, or in violation of this Code, or other applicable law. Any action appealed shall be suspended until action has been taken on the appeal. If no appeal is filed, the decision, denial, revocation, or other action, shall become effective ten days after the date of notice of such action.

B.     When a timely appeal is filed, the appeal shall be referred to the City Council at their next available meeting, or a later date if the applicant agrees, or the City Manager may appoint a hearing officer or body to conduct a hearing on the matter. The hearing officer may be the assistant City Manager, the Director of Community Development, police chief, or such person or body designated by one of them, to perform all or a portion of his or her duties. In appeals involving land use issues, the hearing body may be the Planning Commission. Except as otherwise noted above, the hearing on an appeal shall take place within 45 days of the receipt of the appeal. The hearing officer or body appointed by the City Manager shall receive relevant evidence and review all facts of the appeal. The hearing officer or body may affirm or reverse, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision, determination, or action appealed. Any action by a hearing officer or body may be appealed to the City Council pursuant to this chapter. Any action appealed shall be suspended until action has been taken on the appeal by the City Council.

C.    An appeal of any action by a hearing officer or body shall be submitted to and received by the City Clerk within ten days of the date of the notice of such action for which the appeal is made. The appeal must be in writing on forms provided by the City together with an appeal fee established by resolution of the City Council which may be amended from time to time. All appeals shall set forth the appellant’s reason for asserting the decision or action was in error, or in violation of this Code or other applicable law. The appeal shall be considered at the next available meeting of the City Council, or later date if the applicant or permittee agrees.

D.    Upon the timely filing of an appeal, the City Council shall review the written appeal and the facts of the appeal. The City Council may do one of the following:

1.     If the City Council finds that no further evidentiary hearing is warranted, after hearing such public comment as is required by law, the City Council may affirm the decision or action for which the appeal is made, and deny the appeal.

2.     If the City Council finds the information presented in the written appeal warrants further hearing, the City Council shall set a hearing for the appeal at the next available City Council meeting, or a later date if the applicant or permittee agrees. The hearing may be continued from time to time, or referred to a council subcommittee for a hearing, by a majority vote of the City Council. The City Council may affirm or reverse, wholly or in part, or may modify the decision or action for which the appeal is made.

3.     If significant new evidence is presented in conjunction with the appeal, the City Council may refer the matter back to the appropriate hearing officer or body for further consideration and decision.

E.     The decision of the City Council shall be final.

F.     Notice of an appeal hearing shall be mailed to the applicant at the address listed on the permit application and/or to the appellant at the address listed on the submitted appeal forms. (00-03)

 

5.20.140 Review of decision.
Any member of the City Council may request the City Council review of any decision made by any employee, officer, or body pursuant to this chapter which would otherwise constitute a final action. A request for a City Council review shall be made within fifteen (15) calendar days of the date of the decision. The request may be made orally or in writing to the City Clerk, who shall set the matter for a hearing. Filing for a request for a review shall suspend the effective date of any of the decision until such decision has been reviewed by the City Council. Notice shall be given of the review, and the Council may take action on the review, in the same manner as for an appeal as set forth in Section 5.20.130. (00-03)

Chapter 5.36 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND MASSAGE TECHNICIANS
Note
*      Prior history: Prior code §§ 2.41 and 12.42 as amended by Ord. Nos. 76-4, 84-4, 85-5, 94-9, 98-15, and 09-18.

 

5.36.010 Intent.
The requirements and restrictions imposed by this chapter are reasonably necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Claremont.

A.     The City of Claremont is authorized, by virtue of the State Constitution, and Section 51031 of the Government Code, to regulate massage establishments by imposing reasonable standards relative to the skill and experience of massage operators and massage technicians and reasonable conditions on the operations of the massage establishment.

B.     There is a significant risk of injury to massage clients by improperly trained and/or educated massage technicians and this chapter provides reasonable safeguards against injury and economic loss.

C.    The establishment of reasonable standards for massage establishments serves to reduce the risk of illegal activity. (15-10)

 

5.36.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and phrases defined in this section shall have the following meanings:

“Business employee” means a person employed by a massage establishment or business to provide massage services.

“California Massage Therapy Council” means the state-organized, non-profit organization created to regulate the massage industry as set forth in Chapter 10.5 of Division 2 of the California Business and Professions Code (commencing with Section 4600, as amended).

“Chief of Police” means the Chief of Police for the City of Claremont.

“Conviction” or “convicted” means a guilty plea or verdict, or a conviction following a plea of nolo contendere, where the time for appeal has elapsed or the judgment of conviction has been affirmed on appeal, irrespective of an order granting probation following that conviction, suspending the imposition of sentence, or of a subsequent order under Section 1203.4 of the Penal Code allowing the applicant to withdraw his or her plea of guilty and to enter a plea of not guilty, or dismissing the accusation or information.

“Disqualifying conduct” means the occurrence of any of the following events within ten (10) years immediately preceding the date of filing of the application in question or, in the case of non-renewal, revocation or suspension proceedings, within ten (10) years of the date of notice of hearing pursuant to Section 5.36.120 (Notice of revocation or non-renewal):

1.     A conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction of any of the following:

a.     Any infraction, misdemeanor or felony offense which relates directly to the operation of a massage establishment, or during the performance of a massage, whether as a massage establishment owner or operator, or as a massage technician or massage practitioner;

b.     Any felony, the commission of which occurred on the premises of a massage establishment;

c.     A violation of any provision of law pursuant to which a person is required to register under the provisions of Penal Code Section 290, or conduct in violation of Penal Code Section 266h, 266i, 311.6, 314, 315, 316, 318, 415, subsections (a), (b) or (d) of Penal Code Section 647, or an attempt to commit or conspiracy to commit any of the above-mentioned offenses, or any other crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, or moral turpitude or when the prosecution accepted a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a charge of a violation of Penal Code Section 415, 602 or any lesser included or related offense, in satisfaction of, or as a substitute for, any of the previously listed crimes, or any crime committed while engaged in the ownership of a massage establishment or the practice of massage;

d.     A violation of Health and Safety Code Section 11550 or any offense involving the illegal sale, distribution or possession of a controlled substance specified in the California Health and Safety Code Section 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 or 11058;

e.     Any lesser-included offense of any of the aforesaid offenses; and

f.      Any offense in a jurisdiction outside the State of California, which is the equivalent of any of the aforesaid offenses.

2.     For purposes of considering whether to renew or revoke a license, the licensee engaging in or committing any of the conduct described in California Penal Code Sections 266h, 266i, 314, 315, 316, 318, subsections (a), (b) or (d) of Penal Code Section 647, or Government Code Section 51032.

3.     The requirement to register under the provisions of California Penal Code Section 290.

4.     Becoming subject to a permanent injunction against the conducting or maintaining of a nuisance pursuant to California Penal Code Sections 11225 through 11235, or any similar provisions of law in a jurisdiction outside the State of California.

5.     Becoming subject to a permanent injunction against the conducting or maintaining of a nuisance pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Sections 11570 through 11587, or any similar provisions in a jurisdiction outside the State of California.

6.     The denial, non-renewal, suspension, or revocation of any license or permit issued by any state, county, city, or other local government within the United States for the operation of a massage establishment or for the performance of massages, except that denial of license or permit for the operation of a massage establishment shall not be considered if the sole basis for the denial was the prohibition of the use within the zoning or planning district in which the use was proposed to be located.

7.     Touching the genitals, pubic regions, anuses, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areolas, whether or not the same are covered, of oneself or of another person while providing massage services or while within view of a customer or patron of the massage establishment.

8.     Exposing the genitals, pubic regions, anuses, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola of oneself or of another person to view while providing massage services or while within view of a customer or patron of the massage establishment.

“Employee” means any owner, partner, manager, supervisor, and worker, whether paid or not, who renders personal services in any nature in the operation of a massage establishment.

“Hearing officer” means a person appointed by the City Manager or his/her designee to determine the validity of an appeal related to a City action on a massage establishment license or massage technician permit.

“Independent contractor” means a person who works freelance at a business or is self-employed.

“Manager” means the person(s) listed on the massage establishment business license or any writing submitted to the City of Claremont pursuant to Section 5.36.070(W) of this chapter to act as the representative and agent of the operator in managing day-to-day operations with the same liabilities and responsibilities. Evidence of management could include, but is not limited to, evidence that the individual has power to direct or hire and dismiss employees, control hours of operation, create policy, rules or purchase supplies. A manager may also be an owner.

“Massage” means any method of applying pressure or friction against the human body such as kneading, rubbing, or pounding, or stimulating the external parts of the human body with or without mechanical or electrical apparatus, or other aids or appliances and with or without rubbing alcohol, oils, or other similar preparations. Examples include, but are not limited to, Swedish massage, acupressure, and Shiatsu massage.

“Massage certificate” means a certificate issued pursuant to Section 4604 of the Business and Professions Code (Chapter 10.5 commencing with Section 4600, as amended).

“Massage establishment” means any establishment having a fixed place of business where any individual, person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, joint venture, limited liability company, or combination of individuals that engages in, conducts, carries on, or permits to be engaged in, conducted, or carried on for consideration, massages, baths, or health treatments involving massages or baths as regular functions.

“Massage technician,” “massage practitioner,” or “massage therapist” means any person who administers or in any way assists in administering any form of massage, bath, or health treatment involving massages or baths as the principal functions to another person for any consideration whatsoever.

“Massage technician permit” means a massage permit issued by the Claremont Police Department pursuant to this Code.

“Off premises” means any business where the services are provided at a location other than the premises listed on the application.

“Open and conspicuous place” means a place which provides an unobstructed view of the requisite information upon first entering the massage establishment or room.

“Operator/owner” means all persons who have an ownership interest in the massage establishment and/or a person who is responsible for its day-to-day operations.

“Person” means any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, or other group or combination of individuals acting as an entity.

“Police Department” means the City of Claremont Police Department.

“Sole proprietorship” means a business where the owner is the only person employed by that business to provide massage services. (15-10)

 

5.36.030 Exemptions and exceptions.
A.     Exemptions. This chapter shall not apply to the following classes of individuals, and the individuals shall be exempt from massage technician, practitioner, and establishment requirements while engaged in the performance of the duties of their respective professions:

1.     Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, acupuncturists, or osteopaths (“professionals”) duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the State of California under the provisions of the Business and Professions Code, while performing activities encompassed by such professional licenses.

If the professional’s facility is used for the purpose of nonmedical massage, the facility itself must be licensed as a massage establishment pursuant to this chapter and subject to the land use regulations in Title 16 of the Municipal Code;

2.     Registered nurses, licensed vocational nurses or physical therapists duly licensed to practice their professions in the State of California under the provisions of the Business and Professions Code, while performing activities encompassed by their respective licenses;

3.     Other health care personnel engaged in the healing arts as regulated and licensed by Division 2 of the Business and Professions Code;

4.     Barbers, cosmetologists, estheticians, and manicurists duly licensed by the State of California while performing activities encompassed by their respective licenses, except that this exemption applies solely for the massaging of the neck, face, and/or scalp of the customer or client of a barber, cosmetologist, or esthetician, or in the case of a licensed manicurist, the massaging of the forearm, hands, calves, and/or feet;

5.     Coaches and trainers employed by accredited high schools, community colleges, or universities while acting within the scope of their employment, as well as trainers of amateur, semi-professional, or professional athletes or athletic teams while acting in that capacity;

6.     Individuals practicing reflexology whose practices are limited to alternating pressure applied to the reflexes within the reflex maps of the body located on the feet, hands, and outer ears; and

7.     A massage establishment shall not include a business with a valid City-issued, non-massage establishment business license where physical therapy is performed if the massage is solely for physical therapy purposes when physical therapy is a permitted use, contained to one room, and directly tied to, without any independent business derived solely for massage purposes, the physical therapy business.

B.     Exception. Individuals administering massages or health treatment involving massages to persons participating in road races, track meets, triathlons, and similar athletic, recreational events, or City-approved events shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter, provided, that all of the following conditions are met:

1.     The massage services are made available to participants in the event.

2.     The event is open to participation by the general public or a significant segment of the public such as employees of sponsoring or participating corporations, students from the participating schools, members of participating organizations, etc.

3.     The massage services are provided at the site of the event and either during, immediately preceding, or immediately following the event.

4.     The sponsors of the event have been advised of and have approved the provision of massage services.

5.     The persons providing the massage services are not the primary sponsors of the event. (15-10)

 

5.36.040 Off-premises massage.
No massage regulated by this chapter shall be performed at a place or location other than at premises for which a valid massage establishment license has been obtained pursuant to this chapter, except in the following circumstances:

A.     A CAMTC certified massage technician may perform massage in conjunction with a valid home occupation permit pursuant to Chapter 16.327; or

B.     Massage may be performed at premises expressly exempted or excepted by Section 5.36.030 (Exemptions and exceptions), provided the massage is performed by a person exempt under Section 5.36.030(A) or a massage technician having a valid license pursuant to this chapter; and

C.    A massage technician may perform massages at a place or location other than at premises for which a valid business license has been obtained under this chapter, and other than as provided in subsection (A)(1) hereof, only when:

1.     Such massage is specifically prescribed in writing by a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, or osteopath duly licensed to practice in the State of California. No additional massage services shall be performed for any patron beyond that service which is specifically described in the writing whether or not such patron desires any additional service to be performed, and

2.     Only if the massage technician has the required education for technician license or holds a massage certificate, and only if that person also has certified proof of three (3) or more years of massage therapy experience. (15-10)

 

5.36.050 Massage technician.
A.     Permit Required. It is unlawful, and a misdemeanor, for any person to perform or administer a massage without a certificate issued pursuant to Section 4604 of the Business and Professions Code (Chapter 10.5 commencing with Section 4600, as amended), or an existing massage technician permit subject to subsection B of this section.

B.     Existing Claremont Massage Technician Permits. All persons who possess active, City-approved massage technician permits as of January 1, 2015 may, in lieu of obtaining a valid massage certificate issued pursuant to Section 4604 of the Business and Professions Code (Chapter 10.5 commencing with Section 4600, as amended), take a City-administered equivalency examination, at their own expense, prior to renewal of their City-approved massage technician permits. The equivalency examination may be taken only one time. If the applicant fails to pass the equivalency test, the applicant must obtain a valid massage certificate issued pursuant to Section 4604 of the Business and Professions Code (Chapter 10.5 commencing with Section 4600, as amended). Alternatively, if the applicant has demonstrated, to the satisfaction of the Chief of Police, competency and proficiency through continuous experience as a massage technician for two years prior to the effective date of this chapter, the Chief of Police may, in his or her discretion, waive the equivalency examination requirement for persons with existing City-approved massage technician permits. In evaluating a massage technician’s “competency and proficiency,” the Chief of Police may consider whether the massage technician has been found to have engaged in any disqualifying conduct or any other massage-related misconduct.

1.     Such City-approved massage technician permits must be renewed every two (2) years by submitting an application for renewal of permit at least ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the existing permit. The renewal application shall be submitted together with the requisite fee established by the City Council along with all the following information:

a.     Completion of California Department of Justice Live Scan Fingerprinting. Fingerprinting must be done at the Police Department ONLY. Fingerprinting is done on weekdays by appointment only. The applicant must present a valid State of California identification prior to being fingerprinted.

b.     Proof the applicant is over eighteen (18) years of age.

c.     A certified copy of the applicant’s diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized school of massage, which requires resident course of study of not less than five hundred (500) hours, along with a course description, an outline of material covered, and transcript.

d.     A certificate from a medical doctor, licensed to practice in the State of California, stating the applicant has, within thirty (30) days immediately preceding the date of the application, been examined and found to be free of communicable diseases. The certification, which may be completed on the City form, shall list the doctor’s name, address, and complete phone number.

e.     Exact address and phone number of where the applicant will be employed.

f.      Complete employment history for the past ten (10) years.

g.     Disclosure of any and all criminal convictions, infraction or misdemeanor citations received, including Municipal Code violations, and criminal or civil cases pending. The applicant shall include any cases dismissed or expunged pursuant to Penal Code Section 1203.4. Disclosure of traffic violations is not required.

h.     Full complete name and all aliases used by the applicant, along with complete home and business addresses of the applicant. A post office box will not be considered a valid home or business address.

i.      Independent contractor applicants must supply proof of membership in one of the following nationally recognized professional massage organizations: American Massage Therapy Association, Associated Bodywork and Massage Professionals, International Myomassethics, Inc., National Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork.

j.      Business employee applicants must supply proof of employer’s current/valid certificate of liability insurance as required by the City.

k.     Such other information and identification as the Chief of Police may require in order to discover the truth of the matters herein specified and as required to be set forth in the application.

2.     The Chief of Police or his/her designee shall review the application for renewal, approve or deny the application within ninety (90) days, and either issue the renewed permit or mail a written statement to the address indicated on the application via U.S. mail and certified mail return receipt requested, denying the permit and stating the reasons therefor. In cases where the City does not respond to the applicant within the ninety (90) days, the applicant shall consider his or her application denied on the ninety-first (91st) day after the application was submitted. The decision of the Chief of Police is final, unless the applicant files an appeal pursuant to Section 5.36.130 (Appeals for permits). If the application is denied and all appeal rights have been exhausted, the applicant will have to obtain a valid massage certificate pursuant to Section 4604 of the Business and Professions Code (Chapter 10.5 commencing with Section 4600, as amended). (15-10)

 

5.36.060 Massage establishment—Business license required.
A.     Business License Required. It is unlawful and a misdemeanor subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1.12.010 et seq. of this code (Violations of the Municipal Code), for any person to own, operate, manage, engage in, or permit to be conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises within the City, a massage establishment or business without a valid City of Claremont business license pursuant to Chapter 5.20 and Section 4.06.020 of this Code.

B.     Exceptions. Those businesses operating prior to January 1, 2015, employing a person as a massage technician who is in possession of a valid massage technician permit, may continue to operate and employ that individual contingent that the individual maintains a valid massage technician permit pursuant to Section 5.36.050(B) (Existing Claremont Massage Technician Permits) or obtains a California Massage Therapy Council Certificate. (15-10)

 

5.36.070 Massage establishment—Operating requirements.
No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on, or permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, any massage establishment or business, unless each of the following requirements are met:

A.     Massage operation shall be conducted within a structure located in a zone where such use is permitted.

B.     No operator/owner or manager shall employ any person as a massage technician who does not have a valid massage certificate required pursuant to this chapter or valid massage technician permit pursuant to Section 5.36.050(B) (Existing Claremont Massage Technician Permits). The operator/owner and/or the manager shall file copies or other evidence of the certificates or permits held by the persons who are providing massage services at the business with the City of Claremont Finance Department, to be maintained with the business license records, within ten (10) calendar days of the start of employment or services.

C.    Massage establishments may be open for business only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Administrative or other services for the business may extend beyond the hours of the massage business (primary or ancillary). A massage that begins any time before 10:00 p.m. must terminate no later than 10:00 p.m. The responsible manager(s), as listed on the business license application or any subsequent writing submitted to the City of Claremont pursuant to subsection V of this section, shall be on the premises at all times when the business is open. The responsible manager on the premises and operator/owner shall be responsible for a violation of this subsection. The hours of operation must be clearly displayed within a common area of the facility, or may be displayed as a form of window signage in compliance with the City of Claremont Municipal Code.

D.    A list of massage services available at the massage establishment and the cost of such services shall be clearly posted, in the English language, in an open and conspicuous place in the lobby area of the business. The posted services must be listed in large enough print to be read with the naked eye. No services shall be offered or performed other than those posted. All arrangements for services to be performed shall be made in a room that is not used for massage therapy. This posting requirement shall not apply to exempt physicians and/or surgeons who employ or retain non-exempt persons to perform massage therapy as part of licensed medical activities.

E.     The manager shall ensure that the following licenses and certificates/permits are posted as specifically provided in this section or, in the absence of a specific provision, available at the massage establishment pursuant to this chapter:

1.     A City of Claremont business license must be posted in an open and conspicuous place upon entering the establishment.

2.     The owner/operator of a massage establishment shall maintain a register of all persons employed as a massage technician and their California Massage Therapy Council certification numbers, along with all receptionists, or other employees of the massage establishment. Such register shall be provided to the City upon application of a massage establishment license and business license, and shall be updated when an employee, massage technician, or independent contractor is added or discontinues services at the massage establishment. Notification shall be provided to the City within ten (10) calendar days of the date an employee, massage technician, or independent contractor is added or discontinues service at the massage establishment. The register shall be made available for inspection by representatives of the City at any time during the massage establishment’s business hours. The register on site shall include date of employment and termination. The register shall be maintained on the premises for a period of one (1) year following termination. If the register is not made available during inspection, the massage establishment may receive an administrative citation, along with any individual, not including patrons, at the massage establishment that cannot be verified as a legal employee.

3.     CAMTC certified massage practitioners shall have his or her state-issued CAMTC identification card in his or her possession while providing massage services.

F.     No person(s) other than customers, managers, employees responsible for security, and valid massage technician permit holders or valid massage certificate holders, will be allowed by the manager beyond the front lobby during listed hours of operation. Any other person(s) found, or any person who allows person(s), beyond the front lobby during business hours will be in violation of this section. For purposes of this section, the front lobby is the area located directly inside the front door entrance to the massage establishment. Areas such as bathrooms, hallways, massage rooms, reception, business office and/or lounge areas are not considered part of the front lobby. Areas where hair, nail, and facial services are conducted in full public view from the lobby are considered part of the lobby for purposes of this section.

G.    Every massage establishment or business shall keep a written record of the dates and hours of each treatment, the complete name and full address (including street name and address number, and city) of each customer or client, the first and last name of the massage technician administering the treatment, and a description of the type of treatment rendered. These written records shall be prepared prior to administering any massage and shall be maintained on the premises for a period of one year. These written records shall be available for immediate inspection by the Police Department, upon request of a representative of such department. Any unauthorized disclosure or use of such information by any agent of the City shall constitute a misdemeanor and such agent shall be subject to the penalty of the provisions of this chapter in addition to other penalties provided by law.

H.    To assure patrons’ health, safety, sanitation, and comfort, all employees, including massage technicians, shall, at all times, be fully clothed in clean, nontransparent outer garments solidly covering the shoulders to four (4) inches or less above the knees. Under no circumstance shall these garments permit the genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or chest to be exposed. As used herein, “fully clothed” shall mean the wearing of undergarments, including bras and underpants, as well as the wearing of clothing, comparable to the clothing commonly worn by nurses and physical therapists while performing their respective professional duties.

I.      All front reception, hallway, or front exterior doors shall be unlocked during business hours, and whenever the business is in operation, staff shall be available to assure security for clients and massage staff that is behind closed/unlocked doors. No massage may be given within any cubicle, room, booth, or any area within a massage establishment that is fitted with a door capable of being locked. This subsection shall not apply to massage given by a solo massage practitioner operating ancillary, to a permitted use, as defined in Section 16.900.072. Nothing in this subsection shall require back or rear exterior doors that are used solely for employee access to remain unlocked during business hours.

J.     No massage technician or other person on the premises shall expose his or her genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, anuses, or female breasts to the view of a customer or patron of the massage establishment. All customers and patrons shall be appropriately draped with a clean, opaque cloth sufficient to cover their genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, anuses, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola when receiving such services, nor shall contact be made in the course of administering a massage with the genitals, pubic regions, mammary papilla or nipple, areola, or anus of another person.

K.     In no case shall employees wear items such as nightgowns, negligees, or bathrobes; however, customers or patrons of the massage business may wear bathrobes while receiving treatment(s) on the premises. There shall be no display, storage, or use of any instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with “sexual activities,” including, but not limited to, vibrators, dildos, or condoms, or any goods or items which are replicas of, or which simulate anatomical areas as defined in this Code, on the premises of the massage establishment. Every manager shall be held responsible to assure such items are not on the premises.

L.     Window Coverings. No massage establishment employing a massage technician shall be equipped with tinted or one-way glass in any room or office. Any windows into the lobby shall not be covered. The lobby must be clearly visible from the exterior of the business at all times.

M.    Each massage room shall be equipped with appropriate tables, mats, or chairs which are durable and easily cleaned between client visits. Mattresses and waterbeds are not permitted on the premises.

N.    No manager, operator/owner, massage technician, or other person shall engage in, conduct, or carry on the business of a massage establishment unless there is on file with the City Clerk, in full force and effect at all times, documents issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the State of California evidencing that the massage establishment or business is insured under a liability insurance policy providing minimum coverage of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for injury or death to one person arising out of the operation of any massage establishment and the administration of massage.

O.    The Chief of Police, at his/her discretion, may require the following notice be posted in the lobby, and all rooms where massages take place, within a massage establishment following any violation(s) of this code or the Penal Code:

NOTICE TO ALL PATRONS

THIS MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT AND THE MASSAGE ROOMS DO NOT

PROVIDE COMPLETE PRIVACY AND ARE SUBJECT TO INSPECTION BY THE

CLAREMONT POLICE DEPARTMENT WITHOUT PRIOR NOTICE

These notices shall be prepared and issued by the Chief of Police. The notices shall be posted in an open and conspicuous place in the front lobby and each room in which massages are provided, if so required by the Chief of Police. It shall be the responsibility of the operator/owner and/or manager to assure these signs, once posted by the Police Department, are not removed, blocked, or covered. Removal, blockage, or coverage, shall be a violation of this section.

P.     The massage establishment or any of its representatives shall not discriminate on the basis of a patron’s sex, race, religion, ancestry, national origin, or other arbitrary factor proscribed by the Unruh Civil Rights Act, Civil Code Section 51.

Q.    No massage establishment may be used as a school for teaching massage.

R.    No massage establishment shall remain open for business unless at least one massage technician holding a valid massage certificate issued pursuant to Section 4604 of the Business and Professions Code or a massage technician permit, subject to Section 5.36.050(B), is on the premises. This section relates only to those businesses with the sole purpose of providing massages.

S.     It is unlawful for any person who operates a massage establishment, or his or her agent, servant, or employee, to refuse to allow or in any way delay a lawful inspection of the premises by a representative of the Police Department at any time it is occupied or open for business.

T.     No person shall enter, be in, or remain in, any part of a massage establishment, while in possession of, consuming, using, or under the influence of, any alcoholic beverage or controlled substance. The operator/owner and manager shall be responsible to ensure that no such person shall enter or remain upon the premises. Service of alcoholic beverages shall be prohibited (exception: ancillary massage businesses that have a conditional use permit approved in compliance with Chapter 16.303 [Conditional Use Permits] and any applicable California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC) licenses). See Chapter 16.099 of Title 16 for further information.

U.    No person or persons shall be allowed to live inside the massage establishment at any time.

V.     If during the term of a business license, the license holder has any change in information submitted on the original or renewal application, including, but not limited to, the name of the manager(s) for the massage establishment or business, the permit holder shall notify the City of Claremont Finance Department of such change, in writing within fifteen (15) business days thereafter. An owner or operator is required to notify the City of Claremont Finance Department of any intention to rename, change management, or convey the business to another person.

W.    An owner or operator of a massage establishment shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees or independent contractors working on the premises of the business.

X.     All massage establishments shall be subject to revocation or suspension procedures as set forth in Section 5.36.110, if violations of Section 4609 of the Business and Professions Code (Chapter 10.5 commencing with Section 4600, as amended), or if violations of the local ordinance occur on the business premises.

Y.     No person shall give, or assist in giving, any massage or other body treatment to any other person under the age of eighteen (18) years, unless the parent or guardian of the minor person has consented thereto in writing. Written consent shall be personally presented by the parent or guardian of the minor. (15-10)

 

5.36.080 Inspections.
The Chief of Police, Director of Community Development, Code Enforcement Officers, and their authorized representatives shall have the right to enter any massage establishment from time-to-time during regular business hours, unannounced, for the purpose of making reasonable inspections to observe and enforce compliance with building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or health regulations, and to ascertain whether there is compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all laws of the City of Claremont and State of California. (15-10)

 

5.36.090 Claremont permits—Non-assignable.
No Claremont business license issued to a massage establishment, and no massage technician permit may be sold, transferred or assigned, including by operation of law, to any other person or persons, and any such sale, transfer, or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license or permit and such license or permit shall thereafter be deemed terminated and void. (15-10)

 

5.36.100 Applicability of regulations to existing businesses.
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all persons and businesses described herein, whether the described activities were established or permitted before or after the effective date of this chapter. (15-10)

 

5.36.110 Permits and licenses—Revocation or suspension.
A.     Business licenses issued for massage establishments and massage technician permits may be revoked or suspended as established in Chapter 5.20 and Section 4.12.080 of the Claremont Municipal Code, where any of the grounds stated in this chapter are determined to exist.

B.     Notwithstanding any other provision of law, if the Police Department receives notice that a massage establishment business license holder or massage technician permit holder has been arrested and charges have been filed by the appropriate prosecuting agency against the license holder or permit holder alleging a violation of any offense described in Section 5.36.020 (Definitions—“Disqualifying conduct”), the business license or massage technician permit shall be immediately suspended for up to fifteen (15) calendar days. The Police Department shall provide notice to the business license holder or massage technician permit holder within ten (10) business days that it has evidence of a valid record of arrest and charge and that the license has been suspended unless the license holder or permit holder provides evidence within fifteen (15) calendar days that the arrest or charge is either invalid or that the information is otherwise erroneous.

C.    Upon notice to the Police Department that the charges described in subsection B of this section have resulted in a conviction, the suspended business license or suspended massage technician permit shall become subject to permanent revocation. The Police Department shall provide notice to the business license holder or massage technician permit holder within ten (10) business days that it has evidence of a valid record of conviction and that the license or permit will be revoked unless the license holder or permit holder provides evidence within fifteen (15) calendar days that the conviction is either invalid or that the information is otherwise erroneous.

D.    Upon a conviction, in any competent court, for a violation of this Code, or any penal code, the City retains the right to immediately suspend or revoke any massage technician permit or massage establishment business license. Each license holder or permit holder has the right to appeal the decision of the City pursuant to Section 5.36.130 of this chapter. If the decision of the City is upheld after the license holder or permit holder has exhausted his/her appeal rights, the license holder or permit holder shall immediately cease conducting business within the City.

E.     At any time the City has reason to believe that grounds exist to revoke a license issued for a massage establishment, or revoke a permit issued to a massage technician, the City Manager or his/her designee shall cause an investigation of the licensee, permittee, and/or massage establishment to be undertaken. If, based on the result of the investigation, the City Manager or his/her designee determined that grounds to revoke the license are present, then the City Manager or his/her designee shall commence proceedings to revoke the license by providing notice of the City’s intent to revoke the license as required in Sections 5.20.120 and 4.04.080.

The license or permit may be suspended per Sections 5.20.100 and 4.04.080 for a maximum of fifteen (15) days, in lieu of revocation, if all of the following exist:

1.     The licensee or permittee has agreed in writing to take specific measures to cure or correct the violations within a period of not more than fifteen (15) calendar days;

2.     The licensee or permittee has not previously been cited for violations of this chapter within the ten (10) years prior to the date of the hearing;

3.     The violation committed by the licensee or permittee does not present an immediate threat or danger to the public health, safety, or welfare; and

4.     The licensee or permittee has not been found to have engaged in “disqualifying conduct,” as defined in Section 5.36.020 (Definitions).

F.     The business license or massage technician permit shall not be renewed to the same license holder or permit holder or his/her successors in interest within one year of the date of notice of revocation or suspension of the license or permit.

G.    Upon notice that the charges have resulted in an acquittal, or have otherwise been dismissed prior to conviction, the license or permit shall be immediately reinstated and any business or massage technician that received notice pursuant to subsection B of this section shall be notified of the reinstatement within ten (10) business days.

H.    It is unlawful for any person to conduct the business of a massage establishment or carry on the business of massage while the subject massage establishment business license remains suspended or revoked. (15-10)

 

5.36.120 Notice of revocation or non-renewal.
A.     Notice of the City’s intent to revoke or to not renew a massage establishment business license and of the revocation or non-renewal hearing shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of this section and at least five (5) days prior to the date of proposed revocation as stated in Sections 5.20.120 and 4.04.080 of the Claremont Municipal Code.

B.     Notice shall be delivered to the licensee or permittee, and other person(s) designated on the license, at the address(es) designated in the license, via U.S. mail and certified mail return receipt requested.

C.    The notice shall be in writing and shall contain all of the following:

1.     That the City intends to revoke or not renew the license;

2.     The grounds for the revocation or non-renewal;

3.     The date, time, and place of the revocation hearing, or the non-renewal hearing, and the Hearing Officer options;

4.     That the licensee may appear, be heard, examine witnesses, and present evidence in the licensee’s favor; and

5.     That the licensee’s failure to appear, be heard, and present evidence in the licensee’s favor may result in the revocation or non-renewal of the license. (15-10)

 

5.36.130 Appeals for licenses or permits.
Notwithstanding the appeal procedures established in Section 4.04.080 of this Code, all appeals pertaining to massage establishment business licenses, and massage technician permits shall be appealed as follows:

A.     Any person aggrieved by any determination, interpretation, decision, or similar action taken by an employee charged with the responsibility of issuing licenses or permits pursuant to this chapter may file an appeal of such action in accordance with this section. The appeal shall be submitted to the City Clerk within ten (10) calendar days of the date of the notice of action on which the appeal is based. The appeal shall be in writing to the City Manager, on forms provided by the City and the appeal shall be submitted with an appeal fee in the amount established by resolution of the City Council. The appellant shall set forth his or her reason(s) for asserting that a decision or action was in error, or in violation of this Code, or any other applicable law. Any decision, action, or order that is being appealed shall be suspended until a decision on the appeal has been made.

B.     When an appeal is timely filed, the City Manager shall appoint a hearing officer to review and render a decision on the appeal. The City Manager may appoint the Assistant City Manager, a department head, their designees, or any other individual with qualifications to serve as the hearing officer for an appeal under this chapter. The appeal hearing shall be held within forty-five (45) calendar days of receipt of the appeal by the City. The hearing officer shall accept and consider all relevant evidence related to the appeal. The appellant shall be provided an opportunity to present written and oral evidence in support of the appeal.

C.    Any decision of the hearing officer may be appealed to the City Council. An appeal to the City Council must be submitted to the City Clerk within ten (10) calendar days of the date of the notice of action by the hearing officer. The appeal shall be in writing on a form provided by the City and the appellant shall pay the applicable appeal fee at the time the appeal is filed. Any action appealed shall be suspended until action has been taken on the appeal by the City Council. The written appeal shall state the appellant’s reason(s) for asserting that the hearing officer’s decision was in error or in violation of this Code or any other law. The City Council shall hear the appeal based solely on the written record submitted by the appellant and the City, unless the City Council determines that further oral testimony is needed in order to render a decision. The appeal shall be heard by the City Council within forty-five (45) calendar days from the date the appeal is filed with the City Clerk. The City Council may amend, affirm, or reverse the decision of the hearing officer. The City Council’s decision shall be deemed to be the final action by the City. (15-10)

 

5.36.140 Violations and penalties.
A.     Any violation of the provisions of this chapter is punishable as a misdemeanor. Each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provisions of this Code is committed, continued, or permitted by such person and shall be punished accordingly.

B.     An operator/owner and/or a manager shall be responsible for the conduct of all massage technicians, independent contractors, and any other employees while on the premises of the massage establishment. All persons found working, helping, or in any way assisting, in the massage establishment, shall be considered employees of the operator/owner. Any act or omission of any employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator/owner for purposes of determining whether the operator/owner’s business license shall be revoked, suspended, denied, or renewed.

C.    Any operator/owner, or manager, of a massage establishment who knowingly permits any person who is not in possession of a valid massage technician permit or valid massage certificate, to work as a massage technician, or in any way assist in giving a massage within such a place of business, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

D.    Any massage establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter is unlawful and a public nuisance, and the City Attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action thereunder, commence actions or proceedings for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law, and shall take such other steps and apply to such courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such massage establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting, or maintaining a massage establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter.

E.     Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City Attorney or District Attorney may elect to prosecute violations of any provision of this chapter as an infraction as provided in Chapter 1.12 or the City may issue administrative fines or penalties. (15-10)

 

5.36.150 Fees for Claremont-issued licenses.
The City Council shall establish by resolution, and from time-to-time may amend, the fees for the administration of this chapter. If additional fees are required for further investigation of an applicant, the license shall not be issued until the additional fees are paid. Fees required by this chapter shall be in addition to any required by any other provision of this Code. (15-10)

Chapter 5.38 FORTUNETELLING
5.38.010 Purposes and findings.
A.     The practice of fortunetelling has historically been subject to abuse by certain unscrupulous practitioners using the practice to commit fraud and larceny upon clients.

B.     It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate the practice of fortunetelling in such a manner as to reduce the risk of fraud and larceny to clients while allowing fortunetellers to provide their services to clients with only minimal restrictions.

C.    The sections of this chapter will make it more difficult for an unscrupulous fortuneteller to commit fraud or larceny, but will not affect the nature of the information conveyed by the fortuneteller or the manner in which it is conveyed. These sections require only minimal expense and effort on the part of the fortuneteller and will not, therefore, impose any undue burden on the fortuneteller’s practices.

D.    Fortunetelling for entertainment purposes does not create the same risk of fraud and larceny by an unscrupulous practitioner as would the practice with an individual client because it is done with a group at a public place for the purpose of entertaining and not to deal with the private concerns of an individual. (14-07)

 

5.38.020 Fortunetelling—Definition.
“Fortunetelling” means the telling of fortunes, forecasting the future, or furnishing any information not otherwise obtainable by the ordinary process of knowledge, by means of any astrology, phrenology, chiromancy, cartomancy, psychology, crystal gazing, divination, prophecy, augury, occult or psychic powers, telepathy, clairvoyance, clairaudience, numerology, psychometry, spirits, mediumship, tea leaves or other such reading, seership, palmistry, necromancy, biochart, faculty, force, mind-reading, or any other similar craft, art, science, cards, talisman, charm, potion, magnetism, magnetized article or substance, or magic of any kind or nature. (14-07)

 

5.38.030 Fortunetelling—Permit required.
A.     No person shall conduct, engage in, carry on or practice fortunetelling for gain or pay, or operate a business establishment where the same is conducted, carried on, engaged in or practiced for gain or pay, without first obtaining a fortunetelling permit from the permit committee.

B.     At the time of application for a fortunetelling permit, applicant shall also apply for and furnish the information necessary to obtain a business license as required by Chapter 5.20 of this Code. No business permit shall be issued until a fortunetelling permit is issued according to this chapter.

C.    A fortunetelling business shall be a Tax Category III-Service business as described in Chapter 4.16 of this Code. (14-07)

 

5.38.040 Exceptions.
A.     Nothing in this chapter shall apply to any person solely by reason of the fact that he or she is engaged in the business of entertaining the public by demonstrations of fortunetelling at public places in the presence of and within the hearing of other persons, and at which no questions are answered, as part of such entertainment, except in a manner to permit all persons present at such public place to hear such answers.

B.     No person shall be required to pay any fee or take out any permit for conducting or participating in a religious ceremony or service when such person has been ordained as a minister, missionary, medium, healer, or clairvoyant, hereinafter collectively referred to as “minister,” by a bona fide church or religious association maintaining a place of worship and holding regular services and having a creed or set of religious principles that is recognized by all of like faith, provided that the fees, gratuities and proceeds shall be regularly accounted for and paid solely to or for the benefit of said church or religious association. Any individual wishing to be excepted from the requirement of a permit under this chapter pursuant to this subsection shall file with the business license official a copy of his or her certificate of ordination and provide his or her name, age, street address and phone number, and the location in the City where the activity set forth in this section is to be conducted.

C.    This chapter shall not apply to any activity or profession duly certified or licensed by the State of California or other competent licensing authority. (14-07)

 

5.38.050 Fortunetellers—Qualifications for permit.
An applicant for a permit for a fortuneteller shall provide:

A.     The applicant’s name, home and business address, home and business telephone numbers, and driver’s license number or government-issued identification card number.

B.     A copy of any fictitious business name statement under which the applicant is operating or intends to operate.

C.    The name or names under which the permittee will be identifying him or herself to the public.

D.    Written proof that the applicant is over the age of eighteen (18) years.

E.     Written statements of at least two (2) persons that the applicant is of good moral character.

F.     Applicant’s height, weight, color of eyes and hair.

G.    Two (2) portrait photographs of at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches, taken within two (2) years of the application.

H.    Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the three (3) years immediately preceding the application.

I.      Copies of business and professional licenses of the applicant, and a statement whether the applicant has had a permit or license for any business or similar activity issued by this or any other city, by the County, or by the State revoked or suspended, the reason therefor and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action or suspension or revocation.

J.     The record of all convictions for violation(s) of the law, except for minor traffic violations, and the reasons therefor. (14-07)

 

5.38.060 Employment of unlicensed fortunetellers prohibited.
No permittee or persons required by Section 5.38.020 of this chapter to obtain a permit shall hire or employ a fortuneteller unless that person possesses a valid permit under Section 5.38.020. (14-07)

 

5.38.070 Hours of operation.
No holder of a permit under this chapter shall conduct or operate a fortunetelling establishment, or engage in any activity requiring a permit under this chapter, between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any day. (14-07)

 

5.38.080 Surety bond.
If a permit is issued, it shall be issued after the payment of required fees, and after the applicant has posted a surety bond with the license clerk in the principal sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) executed as surety by a good and sufficient corporate surety authorized to do surety business in the State of California. The form of the bond shall have been approved by the City Attorney. The bond shall be to ensure good faith and fair dealing on behalf of the applicant and is a guarantee of indemnity for any and all loss, damage, theft or other unfair dealings suffered by any patron of the applicant within the City during the term of the permit. Alternatively, a cash bond may be posted. (14-07)

 

5.38.090 Approval, denial, or revocation of a permit.
A.     A fortunetelling permit under this chapter shall be approved upon provision of all information required by Section 5.38.050, unless any of the grounds for denial listed below exist.

B.     A fortunetelling permit under this chapter may, after hearing before the permit committee, be denied or revoked on any of the following grounds:

1.     The business is, or has been, a public nuisance.

2.     The applicant, the applicant’s agent or employee, or any person connected or associated with the applicant as partner, director, stockholder or manager has committed or abetted in the commission of any crime involving prostitution, fraud, theft, any offense involving the use of violence upon the person of another, an offense involving the use or possession of dangerous drugs or narcotics, or any offense involving moral turpitude.

3.     The operation as proposed by the applicant does not comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to the City’s building, zoning, health and sign regulations.

4.     The applicant has willfully made false statements on the permit application. (14-07)

 

5.38.100 Posting of permit.
A copy of the fortunetelling permit issued to the permittee shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises described in the permit. It shall contain an endorsement indicating that the City by issuing the permit neither condones nor endorses the activity of fortunetelling. (14-07)

 

5.38.110 Severability.
If any provision or clause of this chapter or any application of it to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. (14-07)

Chapter 5.40 SOLICITATION
5.40.000 Findings and purpose.
A.     This chapter is based on the following findings:

1.     The City Council finds that persons and organizations have been visiting and continue to visit private residential properties, as well as privately-owned businesses, for the purposes of soliciting goods, wares, merchandise or services.

2.     Some residents and business owners find these activities to be intrusive upon their privacy.

3.     The City Council further finds that a variety of misrepresentations and other frauds are at times employed in such activities.

4.     In recent years, residents of the City have been attacked in their homes by persons claiming to be solicitors.

5.     Unregulated door-to-door solicitation constitutes a serious concern for the City.

6.     The goal of protecting residents from fraud and crime and thereby promoting the safety and privacy of residences within the City is a legitimate, urgent and substantial governmental interest.

7.     The City has a substantial interest in preventing fraudulent or criminal activities which may result from unregulated solicitation.

8.     The City has a substantial interest in protecting individuals’ safety and privacy by reasonably limiting the hours of solicitation and requiring permits in a content neutral manner.

9.     The City has a substantial interest in allowing individuals to determine their level of comfort with privacy and whether or not they want to receive solicitation.

10.   Noncommercial speech is entitled to broader protection under the 1st Amendment to the United States Constitution than commercial speech, affording the City a greater ability to regulate commercial speech than noncommercial speech.

11.   All of these goals and interests may properly be served by this narrowly tailored regulation which requires solicitors to obtain a permit prior to soliciting within the City, reasonably limits the hours of activities and prohibits solicitation of occupants on property where residents have a posted sign prohibiting such activities.

B.     The purpose of this chapter is to balance free speech and expression with the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City. (08-07)

 

5.40.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter only, the following words and phrases shall, when used in this chapter, have the meaning respectively ascribed to them by this section:

“Charitable” means the purpose of an organization which has received a letter of determination approving tax exempt status under Title 26 of the United States Code Section 501(c)(3) or the purpose of a school club, recognized and affiliated with a public or private school, having a program with annual campaigns to support the public or private school club.

“Commercial” means the purpose of solicitation which is not noncommercial, as defined in this section.

“Corporation” means a legal entity which has a legal personality distinct from those of its members which has filed articles of incorporation with the California Secretary of State.

“Noncommercial” means the purpose of solicitation which is charitable, as defined in this section, religious or political.

“Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, league, fraternal organization, joint stock company, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group acting as a unit. The word person shall include the definition of corporation.

“Solicitation” includes the act of any person, whether a resident of the City or not, traveling by foot, vehicle or any other type of conveyance who goes from house to house, business to business, from place to place or in or along any highway, street or sidewalk within the City either: (1) requesting money, credit, funds, contributions, personal property or anything of value; (2) taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of any goods, wares, merchandise or services of any kind, or description for future delivery or for services to be performed in the future; or (3) selling and making immediate delivery of any services of any kind or description, commonly referred to as “peddling.” Notwithstanding the foregoing, the term “solicitation” does not include “sidewalk vending” in accordance with Chapter 5.50 of this Code and subject to a valid sidewalk vendor permit.

“Solicitation” shall not include the following so long as the person is not requesting money, credit, funds, contributions, personal property or anything of value: (1) a person communicating or otherwise conveying ideas, views or beliefs or otherwise disseminating oral or written information to a person willing to directly receive such information, provided that such information is of a political, religious or charitable nature; (2) a person seeking to influence the personal belief of the occupant of any residence or business in regard to any political or religious matter; (3) a person seeking to obtain, from an occupant of any residence or business, an indication of the occupant’s belief in regard to any political or religious matter; (4) a person conducting a poll, survey or petition drive in regard to any political matter; or (5) a person carrying, conveying, delivering or transporting dairy products, newspapers or other goods to regular customers on established routes or to the premises of any person who had previously ordered such products or goods and is entitled to receive the same.

“Solicitor” means any person, whether a resident of the City or not, engaged in solicitation.

“Vehicle” means the definition as set forth in the California Vehicle Code. (19-04; 14-07; 08-07)

 

5.40.020 Permit—Required.
A.     The following provisions shall apply to permits for commercial solicitation:

1.     If a person is soliciting on behalf of, or is employed to solicit by, another person (as defined in Section 5.40.010), both the person soliciting and the employer or other person upon whose behalf solicitation is being made must have valid solicitation permits as set forth in this chapter and business tax certificates as set forth in Chapter 4.10, even if such persons are exempt from payment of any license fee or business tax.

2.     All persons who engage in solicitation shall comply with the following:

a.     Carry a photo identification and a copy of a valid permit issued pursuant to this section, and if acting on behalf of another, including acting on behalf of another person (as defined in Section 5.40.010), such person shall carry written authorization to act on behalf of such third party and a copy of the permit issued to such third party; and

b.     Immediately present a solicitation permit, identification and authorization to act on behalf of a third party, if applicable, to any person approached for said solicitation and to any law enforcement official, upon their request.

3.     The permit shall contain the name, permanent residence address of the solicitor, a brief description of the solicitor and the photograph of such solicitor.

4.     Permits are not assignable.

5.     Permits and authorizations to act on behalf of third parties are not transferable.

B.     The following provisions shall apply to permits for noncommercial solicitation:

1.     If a person is soliciting on behalf of, or is employed to solicit by, another person (as defined in Section 5.40.010), only the person on whose behalf the solicitation is made shall be required to have a valid solicitation permit as set forth in this chapter.

2.     If a person is soliciting on behalf of, or is employed to solicit by, another person (as defined in Section 5.40.010), the person soliciting shall carry identification and authorization to act on behalf of the employer or other person.

C.    Children under the age of twelve (12) shall be accompanied by an adult. (08-07)

 

5.40.030 Permit—Application—Generally.
A.     The following provisions shall apply to the permit application for commercial solicitation:

1.     The application for a permit required by Section 5.40.020(A) shall be made upon a form prescribed by the City Manager, or his or her designee, available at the Police Department and shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:

a.     The name, permanent residence address of the applicant, a brief description of the applicant and a photo taken by the police department;

b.     Proof of LiveScan Fingerprinting. Fingerprinting must be done at the City Police Department. The applicant must present a valid identification card issued by a state within the United States of America prior to being printed;

c.     Complete employment history for the past ten years;

d.     Disclosure of any and all criminal convictions, infraction or misdemeanor citations received, including any municipal code violations and criminal or civil cases pending. This shall include any cases dismissed or expunged pursuant to California Penal Code Section 1203.4;

e.     A statement that the person is not currently under investigation for any crimes related to solicitation or other criminal offense including, but not limited to, violent crimes, sexual assault, possession of controlled substances, theft, fraud or burglary;

f.      Names and addresses of all affiliated persons (as defined in Section 5.40.010) who will be working on behalf of or with the applicant;

g.     Proof of insurance as required by the City;

h.     Requested time and place to solicit within the City;

i.      A copy of a completed Claremont Business Tax Certificate application; and

j.      Such other information as the Chief of Police may require in order to discover the truth of the matters herein specified and as required to be set forth in the application.

2.     The application, upon completion by the applicant, shall truly set forth all such information as shall be required by the Chief of Police.

3.     The application shall be submitted under penalty of perjury and be submitted to the police department at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to the time the solicitor requests to engage in solicitation.

4.     The application shall be submitted with any applicable fee. The permit application fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council and may be amended from time to time.

5.     The Chief of Police shall issue the permit to solicit if the following requirements have been met, subject to the criminal background check in Section 5.40.040:

a.     The applicant has properly completed and filed his or her application together with any applicable fee.

 

b.     The applicant has obtained any other license or permit that may be required under this Code.

c.     The applicant has provided all the information required on the application.

d.     The applicant has not made any misrepresentation of any fact in the application.

6.     The Chief of Police may issue the permit subject to conditions as may be necessary for the public health, safety, peace and welfare.

7.     Applicants shall at all times maintain accurate application information with the City. If there is any change or modification in the information provided in the initial application, the applicant shall give written notification of such change to the Chief of Police within two (2) weeks of the change.

B.     The following provisions shall apply to the permit application for noncommercial solicitation:

1.     The application for a permit required by Section 5.40.020(B) shall be made upon a form prescribed by the City Manager, or his or her designee, available at the police department and shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:

a.     The name, address and a brief description of the applicant; and

b.     If for charitable purposes, a letter of determination approving tax exempt status under Title 26 of the United States Code Section 501(c)(3) or a letter from a public or private school administrator acknowledging the school affiliation of the school club and its program of annual campaigns to support the public or private school club.

2.     The application shall be submitted to the police department at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to the time the solicitor requests to engage in solicitation.

3.     The Chief of Police shall issue the permit to solicit if the following requirements have been met:

a.     The applicant has properly completed and filed his or her application.

b.     The applicant has provided all the information required on the application.

c.     The applicant has not made any misrepresentation of any fact in the application.

d.     The Chief of Police may issue the permit subject to conditions as may be necessary for the public health, safety, peace and welfare.

4.     Applicants shall at all times maintain accurate application information with the City. If there is any change or modification in the information provided in the initial application, the applicant shall give written notification of such change to the Chief of Police within two (2) weeks of the change. (08-07)

 

5.40.040 Permit—Criminal background check.
A.     Section 5.40.040 shall only apply to commercial solicitation.

B.     The Chief of Police shall initiate criminal history record background checks of prospective solicitors, including those persons acting on behalf of an employer or other person (as defined in Section 5.40.010).

C.    A criminal history record background check shall not be initiated pursuant to this section without the written consent of the person. The consent required under this section shall be in the manner and form prescribed by the Chief of Police and shall include, but not be limited to, the signature, name, address and fingerprints of the person.

D.    The Chief of Police shall not certify a person subject to the provisions of this chapter who refuses to consent to or cooperate in the securing of a criminal history record background check.

E.     A person whose criminal history record background check reveals a conviction for any criminal offense including, but not limited to, violent crimes, sexual assault, possession of controlled substances, theft, fraud or burglary shall be disqualified from receiving a permit to solicit within the City, subject to the provisions in subsection I of this section.

F.     The Chief of Police is authorized to receive criminal history record information from any agency or department of the State of California or the United States government, including but not limited to the California Department of Justice and the Federal Bureau of Investigation, regarding applicants for permits to solicit within the City.

G.    The Police Department shall promptly notify a person whose criminal history record background check reveals a disqualifying criminal conviction.

H.    The person shall have thirty (30) calendar days from the receipt of that notice to petition the police department for a review and to cite reasons substantiating the review.

I.      If the person successfully challenges the accuracy of the criminal history record information or the person demonstrates affirmatively to the governing body clear and convincing evidence of rehabilitation, the Chief of Police may issue a certificate indicating the person has successfully cleared a background check. (08-07)

 

5.40.050 Permit—Expiration—Renewal—Revocation.
A.     The following provisions shall apply to permits for commercial solicitation:

1.     All permits granted under the provisions of this chapter shall be valid for up to ninety (90) days and may be renewed thereafter, unless sooner revoked.

2.     Prior to the expiration of a permit, and upon application for renewal of the permit, the Chief of Police shall determine if the applicant or solicitor has acted in compliance with the applicable provisions of this chapter and conditions of the permit.

a.     If determined to have been in substantial compliance, the permit shall be renewed upon payment of any applicable renewal fee.

b.     If the applicant or solicitor is found not to be in substantial compliance, the permit shall not be renewed, and no other permit shall be issued under the provisions of this chapter to the same applicant within one year of the date of cancellation or expiration of the permit.

3.     Renewal fees shall be established by resolution of the City Council and may be amended from time to time.

4.     The Chief of Police may revoke any permit granted under the provisions of this chapter for any of the following reasons:

a.     The applicant provided false, misleading or misrepresented information in procuring said permit;

b.     The applicant or any person (as defined in Section 5.40.010) who worked on behalf of or with the applicant failed to comply with the requirements, regulations, laws and conditions of approval applicable to the permit;

c.     The applicant or any person (as defined in Section 5.40.010) who worked on behalf of or with the applicant is convicted of violating any federal, state or local law while in the course of operating under the permit; or

d.     The activities for which the permit was granted were or are being conducted in a manner that is detrimental to the public health, safety, peace or welfare.

5.     When a permit has been revoked, no other permit shall be issued under the provisions of this chapter to the same applicant within one year of the date of revocation.

B.     The following provisions shall apply to permits for noncommercial solicitation:

1.     All permits granted under the provisions of this chapter shall be valid for up to one year and may be renewed thereafter.

2.     Upon application for renewal of the permit, an applicant claiming nonreligious, nonpolitical, charitable status shall resubmit the materials described in Section 5.40.030(B)(1)(b). (08-07)

 

5.40.060 Permit—Denial—Revocation—Appeal—Hearing officer.
A.     Any applicant aggrieved by any decision by the Chief of Police on an application for, renewal of or revocation of a permit, may appeal such decision within ten (10) calendar days after the notice is given of the decision pursuant to Chapter 5.20.

B.     The appeal shall be filed on forms provided by the City together with any applicable fee established by resolution of the City Council, which may be amended from time to time.

C.    The appeal request shall set forth the appellant’s reasons for asserting the decision was in error or in violation of this Code or other applicable law.

D.    The appeal shall be referred to the City Manager who may appoint a hearing officer or body to conduct a hearing on the matter pursuant to Chapter 5.20.

E.     The hearing officer or body may affirm, dismiss or modify the decision as set forth in Chapter 5.20.

F.     Any action by the hearing officer or body may be appealed to the City Council pursuant to Chapter 5.20. (08-07)

 

5.40.070 “Do Not Knock” Registry.
A.     The Finance Department shall prepare a list of addresses of those premises where the owner and/or occupant has notified the Finance Department that soliciting is not permitted on the premises (hereinafter referred to as the “Do Not Knock” Registry).

B.     Notification shall be by completion of a form available at City Hall during normal business hours and shall be valid for one year.

C.    The list shall be updated every thirty (30) days and shall be effective on the first day of each month.

D.    Any owner and/or occupant who has requested enlistment on the Do Not Knock Registry, pursuant to subsection A herein, shall be able to purchase from the Finance Department, for a nominal fee, a sticker or sign for display indicating enlistment on the Do Not Knock Registry.

E.     The Finance Department shall distribute the current Do Not Knock Registry to a solicitor at the time of issuance of a permit to solicit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

F.     Solicitors shall obtain an updated version of the Do Not Knock Registry on the first of each month from the Finance Department.

G.    Solicitors shall not solicit at any premises identified on the then current Do Not Knock Registry. (08-07)

 

5.40.080 Solicitation operating requirements.
A.     It is unlawful for any person to engage in solicitation within the City without a valid solicitation permit issued by the Chief of Police.

B.     It is unlawful for any person to engage in commercial solicitation within the City without both a valid solicitation permit and a valid business tax certificate issued pursuant to Chapter 4.10.

C.    Solicitors shall obtain an updated version of the Do Not Knock Registry on the first of each month, as specified in Section 5.40.070(F).

D.    It is unlawful for any person to solicit at any premises identified on the then current Do Not Knock Registry, engage in unwanted solicitations, engage in abusive solicitation, violate the sound making and sound amplification device prohibition, solicit at a prohibited location, violate the permissible hours for solicitation or solicit from a vehicle, as provided in Sections 5.40.070 and 5.40.090 through 5.40.140.

E.     A permit granted under this chapter is not an endorsement by the City of the solicitor or of any goods, wares, merchandise, services or information that may be sold or distributed by the solicitor, and it is unlawful for any person to represent that such an endorsement has been made. (08-07)

 

5.40.090 Unwanted solicitations prohibited.
A.     It is unlawful for any person to go upon, ring the bell, knock on the door of or attempt to gain admission to the premises of any residence, dwelling or apartment in the City where the owner, adult occupant or other person in control thereof has expressed his or her objection to such activity either by explicit instructions, oral or written, or by posting a sticker or sign indicating the location is listed on the City’s Do Not Knock Registry pursuant to Section 5.40.070, or by posting a sign or decal bearing the words “No Solicitation” or words of similar import, unless prior to such entry, bell ringing or knocking, such person has been requested or invited by the owner or adult occupant or other person in control of the premises to be thereupon for such purpose.

B.     Activities related to a service requested by the owner or occupant of the property and undertaken in the ordinary course of business, including but not limited to deliveries of utility notices, telephone directory deliveries, regular newspaper deliveries, work order notices and service inquiries, are presumed to be requested or invited for the purpose of this section. (08-07)

 

5.40.100 Abusive activity prohibited.
No person shall engage in abusive solicitation. Such abusive activity shall mean to do one or more of the following while soliciting or immediately thereafter:

A.     Coming closer than three (3) feet to the person solicited unless and until the person solicited indicates he or she wishes to make a purchase or otherwise receive the solicitation;

B.     Blocking or impeding the passage of the person solicited;

C.    Repeating the solicitation after the person solicited has indicated his or her objection to the solicitation;

D.    Following the person solicited by proceeding behind, ahead or alongside such person after the person has indicated his or her objection to the solicitation;

E.     Threatening the person solicited with physical harm by word or gesture;

F.     Abusing the person solicited with words which are offensive and inherently likely to provoke an immediate violent reaction; or

G.    Touching the solicited person without the solicited person’s consent. (08-07)

 

5.40.110 Sound-making and sound-amplification devices prohibited.
A.     It is unlawful for any person, while soliciting, to shout, make any outcry, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any sound device, including any loud speaking radio or sound-amplifying system upon any public streets, alleys, parks or public places of the City or upon any private property where such sound exceeds the City’s noise standards as set forth Chapter 16.154.

B.     No person who uses an automobile or other vehicle for purposes of soliciting shall operate or permit the operation of any sound amplification system which can be heard outside the automobile or other vehicle to advertise, to draw attention to the presence of the automobile or other vehicle or to communicate commercial information to the general public when such automobile or other vehicle is moving, stopped, standing or parked upon any public or private street, except to request emergency assistance or warn of a hazardous situation.

C.    This section shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles or vehicles operated by public utilities or to vehicles participating in a special event authorized by the City. (08-07)

 

5.40.120 Locations—Solicitations prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to solicit when the person solicited is in any of the following locations:

A.     A marked bus stop;

B.     Public transportation vehicles or facilities;

C.    Public parking lots or parking structures;

D.    Outdoor dining areas of restaurants or other dining establishments serving food for immediate consumption; or

E.     Within 50 feet of an automated teller machine. (08-07)

 

5.40.130 Permissible hours for soliciting.
It is unlawful for any person, while soliciting, to go upon, ring the bell, knock on the door of or attempt to gain admission to the premises of any residence, dwelling or apartment in the City thirty (30) minutes after sunset or earlier than 8:00 a.m., unless such person has been requested or invited by the owner or adult occupant of the premises to be thereupon for such purposes. (08-07)

 

5.40.140 No soliciting from vehicles.
A.     No person shall stand or park any vehicle equipped or used for solicitation on any street or public right-of-way for purposes of such solicitation without obtaining a written permit to do so from the City Engineer or as otherwise permitted pursuant to this Code.

B.     Any operator of a vehicle equipped or used for soliciting on any public or private property shall comply with the following regulations:

1.     Each operator at all times shall possess and display in conspicuous view upon each such vehicle a valid permit issued pursuant to this chapter and a business tax certificate issued pursuant to Chapter 4.10.

2.     Each operator shall display in conspicuous view the name, address and telephone number of the holder of the permit issued pursuant to this chapter and shall permanently affix the permit on both the left and right sides of the vehicle. Such information shall be in letters and numerals not less than four inches in height and shall be in contrast to the color of the background upon which the letters are placed.

3.     No operator may cause the sale or offer for sale any food item without complying with the provisions of Chapter 8.04.

4.     No vehicle shall be parked, stopped or left standing in any manner which blocks or impedes vehicular access to any driveway or restricts the free and safe movement of other vehicles or pedestrians upon a right-of-way.

5.     No soliciting from a vehicle shall be permitted except after the vehicle has been brought to a complete stop and parked in a lawful way. (14-07)

 

5.40.150 Enforcement.
A.     The applicant or solicitor shall be responsible for the conduct of all persons (as defined in Section 5.40.010) acting with or on the behalf of the applicant or solicitor while in the course of operating under the permit. All persons found working, helping, volunteering or in any way assisting in the activities for which the permit was granted shall be considered employees of the applicant or solicitor. Any act or omission of any person acting with or on the behalf of the applicant or solicitor constituting a violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the applicant or solicitor for purposes of determining whether the applicant’s or solicitor’s permit shall be granted, denied, renewed or revoked.

B.     Every act prohibited and every failure to perform an act made mandatory by this chapter shall be punishable as provided for in Chapter 1.12 of the Code and be subject to revocation of a solicitation permit and be ineligible to receive a new solicitation permit for a period of one year. (08-07)

Chapter 5.44 TAXICABS AND OTHER VEHICLES FOR HIRE
5.44.010 Definitions.
A.     For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

“License” means a business license issued by the City Clerk permitting the operation of certain specified motor vehicles for the express purpose of transporting passengers, with or without their personal belongings, for hire.

“Licensee” means the duly accredited holder of a valid business license issued by the City Clerk, permitting such holder to operate motor vehicles for the purpose of transporting passengers, with or without their personal belongings, for hire.

“Permit” means an identifying card or folder issued by the police department to each operator identified as such in the regularly presented application, or for whom there has been filed with the police department a complete dossier as specified in the aforesaid application. The permit shall have printed on its face “Not Transferable,” “Valid Only in the City of Claremont” and “Void Unless Validated for the Current Year.” A photograph not larger than one and one-quarter inch by one and one-half inch shall be attached to the permit. The right thumbprint of the operator shall be affixed to the permit and the full name of the operator shall be printed in letters not smaller than eighteen point type. Such permit shall be easily visible to passengers at all times when the vehicle is in operation. Such permit shall be signed by the Chief of Police and by the operator.

B.     State Law Definitions. Except as otherwise defined in this section, any term used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as such term is defined and described in the state Vehicle Code. (Prior code § 22.1)

 

5.44.020 General requirements—Compliance required.
The following requirements are mandatory for the lawful operation of motor vehicles for the purpose of transporting passengers for hire and for the issuance or the continuation in force of any permit issued for such operation:

A.     Each motor vehicle shall carry at all times an identifying sign securely attached to the outside of the vehicle showing the name of the licensee. Each vehicle shall be individually numbered with letters not less than two inches in height.

B.     Each motor vehicle shall be licensed in accordance with state regulations, or shall display evidence that formal application has been made for the same to the Department of Motor Vehicles before such vehicle is placed in service.

C.    No person shall be permitted or allowed to operate any motor vehicles referred to in this chapter unless all of the provisions of the application required by Section 5.44.070 are complied with.

D.    Each vehicle operator employed under the provisions of this chapter shall first obtain an operator’s permit. Before issuance of such a permit, a dossier as required by Section 5.44.070(H) shall be filed with the police department.

E.     Every person while operating a licensed “in service” motor vehicle shall have on his or her person a valid operator’s license issued to him or her by the Department of Motor Vehicles.

F.     A copy of a rate schedule in clearly legible type shall be posted in each motor vehicle in such a place and manner as to be visible to all passengers at all times when such vehicle is “in service.”

G.    The owner or operator of each motor vehicle “in service” shall carry business automobile liability insurance or equivalent form with a combined single limit of not less than one million dollars per occurrence. Such insurance shall include coverage for owned, hired and nonowned automobiles, and shall extend throughout the entire term of this agreement. (90-25; prior code § 22.2)

 

5.44.030 Permit—Display required.
Any person who operates a motor vehicle for the purpose of transporting passengers for hire and does not have displayed in a conspicuous place a valid permit issued to him or her by the Chief of Police shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 22.4)

 

5.44.040 Permit—Renewal.
No permit required by Section 5.44.030 shall be renewed for an additional year unless the holder thereof appears in person before the Chief of Police for a validation of the permit for the ensuing year. (Prior code § 22.5)

 

5.44.050 Permit—Suspension.
Any person having been issued a permit to operate a motor vehicle for the purpose of transporting passengers for hire, who subsequently violates any of the ordinances or statutes designated in Section 5.44.160, and is convicted of any of such violations, or if and when, in the discretion of the Chief of Police, it is contrary to the public welfare for such person to continue to operate such motor vehicle, then the Chief of Police may, for cause, with the approval of the City Manager, subject to appeal to the City Council, in addition to the other penalties provided, withdraw from such operator temporarily for such period as is deemed necessary or appropriate the privilege to operate a motor vehicle for the purpose of transporting passengers for hire and, upon any such revocation, the permit shall be immediately surrendered to the Chief of Police. (Prior code § 22.6)

 

5.44.060 License—Required.
Any person who operates, causes, permits or allows to be operated any motor vehicle in the City for the purpose of transporting passengers for hire shall first file an application for a license to operate such vehicle in the manner prescribed by this chapter and be issued a license therefor. (Prior code § 22.9)

 

5.44.070 License—Application—Contents.
Every person or his or her duly authorized representative applying for a license to operate one or more motor vehicles for the purpose of transporting passengers for hire shall file with the City Clerk an application in duplicate therefor, signed by him or her and setting forth the following information:

A.     The name and address of the applicant;

B.     The name and address of his or her duly authorized representative, if any;

C.    Street and number of the place where such business shall be conducted or carried on;

D.    The number of motor vehicles to be placed “in service”;

E.     The make, type and seating capacity and the state motor vehicle license number assigned to each motor vehicle to be placed “in service”;

F.     A complete schedule of local fares, showing both day and night fares if there is any variation;

G.    The name of the insurance carrier and the amount of personal and property liability carried on each motor vehicle, together with the name of the nearest representative and his or her business address;

H.    One copy of the application shall be submitted to the Chief of Police by the City Clerk, and shall include additional data which shall be held to be part of the sworn application and which shall constitute a dossier for each operator, containing the following information:

1.     The first, middle and surname,

2.     The date and place of birth,

3.     Present residence address,

4.     Serial number of his or her valid state operator’s license, together with the issuance and expiration dates. (90-25; prior code § 22.10)

 

5.44.080 License—Application—Fee.
A.     The fee for a license to operate a motor vehicle for the purpose of transporting passengers for hire shall be one hundred dollars per year for each such company operating within the City limits.

B.     Upon filing the application for a license with the City Clerk, the person for whom or by whom that application is made shall accompany the same by a certified check in an amount equal to the license fee. (Prior code § 22.14)

 

5.44.090 License—Application—Fallacious statements prohibited.
Any person or his or her duly authorized representative who files an application for a license to operate a motor vehicle for the purpose of transporting passengers for hire as required by this chapter, and makes or causes, permits or allows to be made in the application any statement that is fallacious, or any fallacious representation whatsoever as regarding any of the facts as set forth in the application, or any fallacious representation whatsoever regarding the nature of the venture as a whole, or having obtained a license by making any fallacious representation whatsoever as to services rendered or offered to be rendered, or rates charged or offered to be charged, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 22.11)

 

5.44.100 License—Application—Issuance or denial—Hearing.
Upon receipt of an application required by this chapter, the Chief of Police shall immediately make an investigation thereof and shall report his or her findings to the City Manager within ten days. The City Manager shall make a recommendation to the City Council at the next regular meeting of the City Council occurring more than fifteen days after the filing of the application. Upon receiving the recommendation of the City Manager, the City Council may examine the applicant and shall determine whether or not the public interest, convenience and necessity require the issuance of the license. The City Council shall refuse issuance of a license if it finds that the transportation facilities already available are adequate to meet the public need. If the City Council determines to issue the license, the City Council shall instruct the City Clerk to issue the license for a period of not greater than one year. If the application is denied, the reason for disapproving the application shall be stated in full and the certified check accompanying the application shall be returned to the applicant or his or her duly authorized representative. (90-25; prior code § 22.12)

 

5.44.110 License—Application—Recordkeeping.
Whether the application required by Section 5.44.070 of this Code is granted or denied as provided by Section 5.44.100, both copies of the application form shall be retained by the City, one copy to be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk, and the other copy to be kept on file in the office of the police department. (Prior code § 22.13)

 

5.44.120 License—Renewal.
Any person having been issued a license to operate a motor vehicle for the purpose of transporting passengers for hire may renew the license for an ensuing year upon payment to the City Clerk of the amount of the fixed license fee. (Prior code § 22.16)

 

5.44.130 License—Suspension or revocation.
Any person having been issued a license to operate a motor vehicle for the purpose of transporting passengers for hire who violates, causes, permits or allows to be violated, any provisions of any section of this chapter, any provision of Title 10 of this Code, the State Vehicle Code, any ordinance of the City, any law of the state or federal statute involving moral turpitude, or counseling or aiding in the Commission of any violation of the state Penal Code or state Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, and being convicted of any of the aforesaid violations, or if and when, in the discretion of the City Council, it is contrary to the public welfare for any licensed operator to continue to operate a motor vehicle for the purpose of transporting passengers for hire, the City Council, may, in addition to the other penalties provided, suspend or revoke the license. No relief from a revocation shall be obtained until a new application has been filed with the City Clerk and acted upon by the City Council in the manner prescribed in this chapter. (Prior code § 22.21)

 

5.44.140 License—Penalty for failure to file application.
Any person who operates, causes, permits or allows to be operated any motor vehicle for the purpose of transporting passengers for hire and fails, refuses or neglects to file an application with the City Clerk in the manner prescribed in this chapter, and is thereafter issued a license therefor, shall be assessed an additional one hundred percent of the fixed license fee for such business, which penalty shall be added thereto and shall be collected therewith. (Prior code § 22.18)

 

5.44.150 Statements of mechanical condition required.
Once each year, or more frequently if determined to be necessary by the Chief of Police, each licensee shall submit to the Chief of Police a sworn statement that all motor vehicles operated under terms of his or her license have been inspected by a qualified mechanic and that such vehicles are in good mechanical condition. (Prior code § 22.20)

 

5.44.160 Persons convicted of certain crimes not permitted to operate vehicles for hire.
The licensee under the provisions of this section shall not permit the operation of a motor vehicle for hire by any operator who has been convicted of the violation of any ordinance of the City, any law of the state or any federal statute involving moral turpitude. (Prior code § 22.15)

 

5.44.170 Persons under eighteen not permitted to operate vehicles for hire.
No person under the age of eighteen years shall operate a motor vehicle for the purpose of transporting passengers for hire and any person doing so shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 22.3)

 

5.44.180 Operating without approved rate schedule deemed misdemeanor.
Any person having been issued a license to operate a motor vehicle for the purpose of transporting passengers for hire who operates or causes, permits or allows such motor vehicle to be operated under a rate schedule that has not been first submitted to and approved by the City Council is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 22.7)

 

5.44.190 Collecting excess fares deemed misdemeanor.
Any person collecting or wilfully attempting to collect fares or compensation for the transporting of persons in motor vehicles for hire in excess of the rate schedule filed with the City Council is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 22.8)

Chapter 5.45 ENTERTAINMENT
5.45.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the words and phrases shall have the same meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

“Applicant” means a person applying for a new or renewal permit or required to file an application for a permit, under this chapter.

“Community Development Director” means the Community Development Director of the City of Claremont or his or her authorized representative.

“Entertainer” means under the provision of this chapter any person whose actions or presence before an audience provides entertainment, but not a café musician as defined in Section 37101.5 of the California Government Code while occupied exclusively in presenting music.

“Entertainment” means a single event, a series of events, or an ongoing activity or business occurring alone or as part of another business to which the public is invited to watch, listen, or participate or is conducted for the purposes of holding the attention or gaining the attention of or diverting or amusing guests or patrons including, but not limited to the following:

1.     Any amusement or event, or other performance which is knowingly permitted by any establishment such as live music, vocal production, instrumental music, song, dance or comedy act, dramatization, pantomime, play, concert, modeling, or any type of contest; sporting events, exhibitions, carnival, circus or acrobatic act, other demonstrations of talent or items for gift or sale; shows, reviews, and any other such activity which may be attended by members of the public which are performed by one or more persons, whether or not such person or persons are compensated for such performances, and whether or not such activity is performed inside a building or out-of-doors.

2.     Any event controlled, conducted, sponsored, encouraged, or knowingly permitted by an establishment subject to this chapter, which involves any of the activities described in the foregoing paragraphs and which is presented by members of the public, whether or not the participants in said activities are compensated by the establishment.

3.     An announcer or disc jockey that provides recorded music played on play-back machines with mixing equipment in conjunction with announcing song titles or artists’ names.

4.     Public dance.

“Entertainment venue” means any place or building where entertainment is presented.

“Police Chief” shall mean the Police Chief of the City of Claremont or his or her authorized representative.

“Public dance” means a gathering of persons in or upon any premises to which the public is admitted, where dancing is permitted, either as the main purpose for such gathering or as an incident to some other purpose. (02-03)

 

5.45.020 Permit.
A.     It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, manages, supervises, controls, or is in any way responsible for any restaurant, business, or other premises within the City to provide or permit entertainment to occur at such location, or for any person to provide entertainment at any entertainment venue within the City, whether or not for compensation, unless an entertainment permit is issued by the City to the owner or lessor of such restaurant, business, or premises pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The requirements of this chapter for an entertainment permit are separate and in addition to a business license required under Chapter 5.20 of this Code.

B.     Any entertainment for which a permit is issued pursuant to this chapter shall not include any activity for which an adult business permit or an adult entertainer permit is required pursuant to Chapter 5.48 of this Code. (02-03)

 

5.45.030 Exclusions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any of the following:

A.     Anything emanating from a radio, jukebox, television receiver, or music-recording machine operated by the owner of the establishment, provided the equipment is not used by or in conjunction with an announcer or disc jockey that announces song titles or artist names, or interjects with other dialog.

B.     Any live entertainment provided in a theater or similar use that is operating under and in compliance with a conditional use permit issued pursuant to Chapter 16.303 of this Code and where live entertainment was approved as part of the conditional use permit.

C.    Any café musician as defined in Government Code Section 37101.5 while occupied exclusively in presenting music.

D.    Any live entertainment provided at, during, and with the consent of the person in charge of any meeting, game, event, contest, picnic or outing of, and exclusively for, any nonprofit religious, fraternal, charitable, humanitarian, governmental, military, veteran, civic, youth, school, education, musical, dramatic, literary, sporting, social, service club or group, or any similar nonprofit corporation eligible under Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code.

E.     Any live entertainment provided in, and with the consent of any person in control of, any park, stadium, arena, or auditorium, or upon any educational or governmental property.

F.     Any live entertainment consisting solely of auditions. For purpose of this section, audition means any test of the quality of entertainment not in the presence of a public audience.

G.    Any entertainment provided for guests at a private party where admission is not open to the public.

H.    Any musical or live performance provided in conjunction with a retail music business that is operating in compliance with all City codes and laws.

I.      Any modeling of clothes provided in conjunction with a retail clothing business that is operating in compliance with all City codes and laws and where the clothes modeled are sold by the business.

J.     Any adult entertainment at an adult business that must comply and is in compliance with all the requirements of Chapter 5.48 of the Claremont Municipal Code. (02-03)

 

5.45.040 Application for permit.
A.     Any person desiring to obtain an entertainment permit for a restaurant, business, or other entertainment venue shall file an application on forms provided by the community development department together with the applicable fee.

B.     The application shall include the following:

1.     A detailed description of the type of entertainment for which the permit is requested, the hours the event or activities may take place, whether this will be a continuing or one-time event or activity, and the admission fee, if any, to be charged.

2.     Address and name of establishment at which the entertainment will occur.

3.     Whether or not amplification will be used and, if so, the nature of the use and type of amplification to be used.

4.     A copy of the lease or contract if the premises are being rented or leased or being purchased under contract.

5.     The names and address of the person(s) who has authority or control over the entertainment and a brief statement of the nature and extent of control.

6.     Names, resident street addresses, mailing addresses, driver’s license number, and any fictitious names used within five years preceding the date of application for the applicant, each business owner, manager, and lessor of the premises at which the entertainment will occur. If the applicant, owner, or lessor is a partnership or corporation, the application shall also include the name of the partnership or corporation, the date and place of incorporation, and all of the above information for each partner, officer, director, and stockholder owing more than ten percent of the stock of the corporation. The applicant, and each owner, manager or lessor of the premises may also be required to be fingerprinted at the police department at the discretion of the Community Development Director for identification purposes. The fee for fingerprinting shall be as established and periodically amended by resolution of the City Council.

7.     Whether or not the applicant, or any owner, manager, or lessor of the premises have been convicted of a crime and the nature of such offense.

8.     Name under which the entertainment enterprise will occur.

9.     The address at which the applicant should be sent notice.

10.   Additional information as determined necessary by the Community Development Director.

C.    The Community Development Director may require from the applicant and any persons named in the application a waiver of privilege, authorization for release of information, and/or an agreement holding harmless any persons providing information to the Director and all employees and officers of the City. The Director may also require a release from liability or damage for the use of the information by City officials in connection with any appeal of a decision on a permit.

D.    The application for a permit does not authorize the performing of entertainment until such permit has been granted. (02-03)

 

5.45.050 Fees.
The City Council shall establish by resolution, and from time to time may amend, the fees for administration of this chapter. (02-03)

 

5.45.060 Action on application.
A.     No more than 20 business days after receipt of a completed application for a permit, the Community Development Director shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application and shall give notice of the decision to the applicant.

B.     The Community Development Director may deny an application for any of the following reasons:

1.     The business for which the permit is requested or the premises at which the entertainment is to be located is not in compliance with all applicable City, state, and federal laws, ordinances and codes.

2.     The applicant made false statements in the application for an entertainment permit.

3.     The event or activity for which a permit is requested would have an adverse effect on adjacent property or other uses in the vicinity of the premises at which the event or activity is to be located because the event or activity will result in one or more of the following:

a.     Noise levels that exceed the City’s noise standards or which substantially increase the ambient noise levels in the vicinity of the entertainment venue.

b.     Inadequate and/or spillover parking into adjacent commercial areas or residential neighborhoods.

c.     Hours of operation incompatible with adjacent uses.

d.     Significant new traffic in adjacent neighborhoods.

e.     Increased criminal activity such as graffiti, littering, acts of violence, public drunkenness, public urination, and illegal drug activity in vicinity of the entertainment venue.

f.      Other similar secondary impacts.

4.     The owner or lessor of the premises, or the manager of the event or activity, has had a similar permit previously revoked for good cause, violated conditions of a previous permit, has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction within the past five years of any of the following: fraudulent business practices, selling or trafficking in stolen goods, illegal drugs activity, illegal gambling, prostitution, assault, battery, rape or other criminal sexual assault, or lewd conduct, or is required to register under Penal Code Section 290 or Health and Safety Code 11590.

5.     If the entertainment venue for which the entertainment permit is sought will be patronized by minors and the owner or lessor of the premises, or the applicant or manager of the event or activity has been convicted within the past five years of child abuse, sexual misconduct with a minor, or the illegal serving, providing, or selling of alcoholic beverages to underage persons.

C.    In addition to the above reasons for denying an application, the Director may also deny an application for an event or activity involving public dancing if the Director finds that the public dancing would constitute a menace to the public health, safety, or general welfare.

D.    In the event a permit is denied or revoked pursuant to this chapter, no other permit shall be issued to the same applicant or any successors in interest within a minimum of one year from the date that the denial or revocation is final. (02-03)

 

5.45.070 Regulations.
A.     The following requirements of this section are necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare and shall be deemed conditions of all entertainment permit approvals. Failures to comply with every such requirement shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the permit issued pursuant to this chapter.

1.     Entertainment activities on the premises are limited to only those described in the submitted application and specifically approved by the Community Development Director.

2.     Any activity characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical area as defined in Chapter 5.48 or any other activity subject to an adult business or adult entertainment permit pursuant to Chapter 5.48 is prohibited on the premises.

3.     No entertainer shall have any intentional physical contact with any patron, and no patron shall have physical contact with any entertainer during entertainment activities.

4.     No patron shall be allowed to hand tips directly to the entertainers, throw tips to entertainers, or place tips in the entertainers’ costumes. If patrons wish to tip entertainers, tips shall be placed in receptacles located at least six feet from the entertainers.

5.     A sign shall be posted inside the premises and near the entrance, where clearly visible to the public, that states the maximum occupancy of the establishment as determined by the City building official. The business owner or any manager shall not permit the number of occupants within the establishment to exceed the posted occupancy limit.

6.     No owner, manager or other person with managerial control over the entertainment venue shall allow entertainment to occur between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. The hours for entertainment may be further restricted as determined appropriate by the Community Development Director.

7.     No owner, manager or other person with managerial control over the entertainment venue shall permit entertainment that creates unreasonable noise or constitutes a public nuisance. Unreasonable noise shall mean any noise that exceeds the applicable noise standards in Chapter 16.154 of this Code.

8.     No owner, manager or other person with managerial control over the entertainment venue shall permit any intoxicated, boisterous, or disorderly person to enter, be in or remain in or around such entertainment venue or restaurant including the parking or other areas within the reasonable control of the entertainment venue.

9.     No owner, manager or other person with managerial control over the entertainment venue shall permit or allow any dance activities characterized by violent physical contact between and among patrons or activities where patrons are suspended above the shoulders of a person for the purpose of maneuvering such patrons from one person to another or activities characterized by having patrons or performers diving or leaping into a crowd of persons. These prohibited activities are commonly known as mosh or slam-dancing, crowd or body surfing, and stage dancing.

10.   Security measures shall be provided when needed as determined by the Community Development Director to deter unlawful conduct on the part of employees or patrons or to promote the safe and orderly assembly and movement of persons and vehicles or to prevent disturbance of the neighborhood by excessive noise created by patrons entering or leaving the establishment where the entertainment occurs.

11.   Where the Community Development Director and Police Chief determine that the staging of the permitted activity will result in the need for increased City services for public safety, traffic management, trash collection, etc., the applicant may be required to make payment to the City in an amount equal to the projected cost of the increased City services attributed to the permitted activity.

12.   At the discretion of the Community Development Director and Police Chief the applicant may be required to post a bond with the City. The purpose of the bond shall be to provide for security for extraordinary law enforcement or public safety services provided to the business owner resulting from the entertainment activity for which the permit is granted. The bond may be drawn upon in an amount not to exceed the actual and reasonable cost to provide such extraordinary service. The business owner shall be notified in writing of any reduction in the bond and the requirement to replenish the bond in the amount determined by the Director. Failure to replenish the bond within ten calendar days of the notice shall result in automatic revocation of the permit with no further action by the City necessary. Extraordinary law enforcement or public safety services for purposes of this chapter shall mean services provided by the City which require more than two police officers to respond to the situation, or cause two or more repeated police responses within any 24-hour period or the issuance of two or more “repeat disturbance response” notices within any 30-day period, or that are beyond the course and scope of the services routinely provided to other businesses and citizens and stretch the resources of the police department beyond those normally available for response.

B.     The Community Development Director may impose additional appropriate conditions on a permit as may be necessary to protect the public peace, health, safety or general welfare should particular facts or circumstances of a proposed entertainment so justify. (02-03)

 

5.45.080 Permit expiration and renewals.
A.     Entertainment permits shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance or for a shorter period if designated by the Community Development Director. Such permits may be renewed for additional periods up to one year upon approval of the Director. Applications for renewal shall be filed with the Community Development Department no later than 30 calendar days prior to the permit expiration date and shall be accompanied by the applicable fee.

B.     The Community Development Director shall approve or conditionally approve the renewal application if there are no proposed changes to the nature of the entertainment and the business for which the entertainment permit was granted is being operated in compliance with all conditions of approval for the permit, the requirements of the permit pursuant to this chapter, and all applicable laws, ordinances and codes. (02-03)

 

5.45.090 Modifications to information submitted with application.
Whenever any change occurs to the information submitted pursuant to Section 5.45.40, the applicant or permittee shall give notification of such change to the Community Development Director within 10 days after the change. (02-03)

 

5.45.100 Suspension or revocation.
The Community Development Director shall have the right to suspend or revoke any permit granted under this chapter pursuant to the procedures of Chapter 5.20 of this Code. The decision to suspend or revoke a permit shall be based on one or more of the following:

A.     Circumstances related to the permit meet the criteria for denial of a permit as set forth in Section 5.45.060.

B.     The event or activity for which the permit was issued violates one or more conditions imposed upon the issuance of such permit or requirements of the permit pursuant to this chapter.

C.    The permit is being used to conduct an event or activity different from that for which the permit was granted.

D.    Guests and/or patrons of the entertainment venue repeatedly disturb the peace and create disturbances either on the premises or in the near vicinity of the premises after leaving the venue.

E.     Extraordinary law enforcement or public safety services have been required as a result of activities at the establishment to which the permit was issued to the extent that they create an unreasonable burden on the City. Extraordinary law enforcement or public safety services for purposes of this chapter shall mean services provided by the City which require more than two police officers to respond to the situation, or cause two or more repeated police responses within any 24-hour period or the issuance of two or more “repeat disturbance response” notices within any 30-day period, or that are beyond the course and scope of the services routinely provided to other businesses and citizens and stretch the resources of the police department beyond those normally available for response. (02-03)

 

5.45.110 Application to existing entertainment.
All persons engaged in providing entertainment in the City within the meaning of this chapter or is the holder of an entertainment permit issued by the City prior to October 10, 2002 shall apply for a new permit pursuant to this chapter within six months of October 10, 2002 or 30 days prior to the scheduled expiration date of the existing permit, whichever occurs first. Such persons may continue to provide entertainment of the same nature as previously, provided it is in conformity with all other applicable City, state, and federal laws until the submitted application has been acted upon and the decision on the application has become final. (02-03)

 

5.45.120 Appeal of Director’s decision.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Community Development Director on an application for a new entertainment permit or the renewal, suspension, or revocation of permit may file an appeal of such action pursuant to Chapter 5.20 of this title. (02-03)

 

5.45.130 Permits nontransferable.
A.     Any permit granted pursuant to this chapter is nontransferable, separate and distinct. No person shall exercise the privileges granted under this chapter except the person(s), firm, or corporation to whom the permit was issued. Any new owner or lessor of an entertainment venue shall be required to submit a new application and obtain a new permit pursuant to this chapter.

B.     Any permit granted pursuant to this chapter is specific to the location for which it is applied. Any relocation of the permitted activity or major alteration to the existing facility shall require a new permit. (02-03)

Chapter 5.46 FILMING
5.46.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter the following words shall have the following meanings:

“Charitable films” means motion picture or television photography produced by a nonprofit organization which qualifies under Internal Revenue Code Section 501(c)(3) as a charitable organization, for which no person, directly or indirectly, receives a profit from the marketing, production, or display of the work.

“Motion picture and television photography” means all activity attendant to the staging or shooting of commercial motion pictures, television programs and advertisements.

“News coverage” means filming or videotaping by individuals in the employ of newspapers, news services, and similar entities of on-the-spot, current coverage of news events concerning persons, scenes and occurrences which are in the news of the general public interest.

“Student films” means motion picture or television photography produced as part of the instructional program of an accredited school or college. (88-12)

 

5.46.020 Permit required.
A.     No person shall use any public or private property, facility, or residence for motion picture or television photography without first obtaining a filming permit from and paying a permit issuance fee to the City. Provided, no permit issuance fee shall be required for charitable films, student films, or local access productions, and further provided that no permit or permit issuance fee shall be required for news coverage.

B.     The permit issuance fee shall be determined from time to time by resolution of the City Council. Such permit issuance fee shall not exceed the reasonable cost of issuing the permit, and shall be in addition to any fee payable for the use of public property for such purposes. (88-12)

 

5.46.030 Fire permit.
An applicant must notify the Los Angeles County fire department prior to commencing any filming activity. The fire department may require that a safety officer be present during the filming. (88-12)

 

5.46.040 Permit applications.
A.     Applications shall be filed at least ten working days before the day filming is to begin. Provided, upon payment of an expedited permit issuance fee to cover the increased costs of special handling, an applicant may request a permit to issue in fewer than ten working days.

B.     Applications shall be filed with the City Manager or the official designated by the City Manager as film permit coordinator.

C.    Applications shall include:

1.     The name, address, and telephone number of the person or persons in charge of the filming activity;

2.     The name, address, and telephone number of the property or properties at which the activity will take place;

3.     The specific location at each property at which the activity will take place;

4.     The hours and dates at which the activity will take place;

5.     A general statement of the character or nature of the proposed activity;

6.     The number of personnel to be involved;

7.     The nature of any planned use of animals or pyrotechnics;

8.     The number and type of vehicles and equipment to be used. (88-12)

 

5.46.070 Payment for special City services.
The applicant shall pay the City for any special personnel provided or required (e.g., to control traffic, close streets, superintend special utility arrangements) at the rates established for such services by resolution of the City Council. (88-12)

 

5.46.080 Permit modification.
If there is any substantial change in the production from that described in the permit application, an amended application shall be filed, an amended permit shall be obtained and permit issuance fee paid before commencing any activity regulated by this chapter. (88-12)

 

5.46.090 Rules and regulations.
The City Manager or the City Manager’s designate is hereby authorized and directed to promulgate rules and regulations, subject to approval by resolution of the City Council, governing the form, time and location of any motion picture or television photography within the City, and procedures for issuing permits. Such rules shall take into consideration the health and safety of all persons, the avoidance of undue disruption of persons by filming activity, the safety of property within the City, and the avoidance of excessive traffic congestion. (88-12)

 

5.46.100 Liability provisions.
A.     Liability Insurance. Before a permit is issued, the applicant shall provide the City with a certificate of insurance, or copies of policies if requested, of general commercial liability insurance in the amount of one million dollars naming the City as a coinsured for the protection against claims of third persons for personal injuries, wrongful deaths, and property damage. The City officers and employees shall be named as additional insureds. The certificate shall not be subject to cancellation or modification until after thirty days’ written notice to the City.

B.     Workers’ Compensation Insurance. An applicant shall provide a certificate of insurance, or copies of policies if requested, evidencing compliance with all applicable requirements for workers’ compensation insurance for all persons operating under a permit.

C.    Hold Harmless Agreement. An applicant shall execute a hold harmless agreement as provided by the City prior to the issuance of a permit under this chapter.

D.    Faithful Performance Bond. To ensure cleanup and restoration of the site, an applicant may be required to post a refundable faithful performance bond in an amount not to exceed the estimated reasonable cost of ensuring cleanup and restoration as determined by the City Manager at the time application is submitted. Upon completion of filming and inspection of the site by the City, the bond may be returned to the applicant. (88-12)

 

5.46.110 Failure to obtain a permit or abide by its terms.
Failure to comply with the terms of a permit shall constitute grounds for its revocation by the City Manager. Violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute an infraction punishable as provided in Section 1.12.030 of this Code. (88-12)

Chapter 5.48 ADULT BUSINESSES
5.48.010 Legislative purpose.
The regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply specifically to adult businesses. It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate adult businesses in order to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City.

Adult businesses, unless closely regulated, tend to have serious negative secondary effects on the community, including, but not limited to, the depreciation of property values and increases in vacancies in residential and commercial areas in the vicinity of adult businesses; interference with residential property owners’ enjoyment of their property when such property is located in the vicinity of adult businesses as a result of increases in crime, litter, noise and vandalism; blighting conditions such as low-level maintenance of commercial premises and parking lots, which thereby have a deleterious effect upon adjacent areas. Special regulation of adult businesses is necessary to prevent these adverse effects and the blighting or degradation of the neighborhoods in the vicinity of the adult businesses.

The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including adult-oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to adult-oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of adult businesses and adult-oriented entertainment to their intended market.

Nothing in this chapter is intended to authorize, legalize or permit the establishment, operation or maintenance of any business, building or use which violates any City ordinance or any statute of the State of California regarding public nuisances, unlawful or indecent exposure, sexual conduct, lewdness or obscene or harmful matter or the exhibition or public display thereof. (02-01)

 

5.48.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the words and phrases shall have the same meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

“Adult arcade” means a business establishment to which the public is permitted or invited, that on a regular and substantial basis or course of conduct and/or regularly features, with the use of image-producing devices, such as still or motion picture machines, projectors, videos, holograms, virtual reality devices, whether operated by mechanical, electronic or electrical means, the display of images that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”

“Adult bookstore/adult video store/adult novelty store” means any establishment which on a regular and substantial basis, sells or rents, offers for sale or rental, for any form of consideration, any one or more of the following:

1.     Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, sculptures, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other visual representations, which are characterized by an emphasis on material depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas.

2.     Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities, including goods which are replicas of, or which simulate specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities, and goods which are designed to be placed on or in specified anatomical areas.

“Adult business” means a business which is conducted for the patronage of adults and as to which minors are specifically excluded from patronage, either by law and/or by the operators of such business, and which is characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas. “Adult business” also means and includes any adult arcade, adult bookstore/adult video store/adult novelty store, adult cabaret, adult dance studio, adult hotel/motel, adult motion picture theatre, adult theatre, sexual encounter establishment, nude modeling studio, adult tanning salon, sex supermarket, sex mini-mall, and any other business or establishment that regularly features and/or on a regular and substantial basis offers its patrons, entertainment or services which involve, depict, describe or relate to specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas.

“Adult business operator” (hereinafter “operator”) means a person who supervises, manages, inspects, directs, organizes, controls or in any other way is responsible for or in charge of the premises of an adult business or the conduct or activities occurring on the premises thereof.

“Adult cabaret” means a nightclub, restaurant, or similar business establishment which regularly features: (1) live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display or description of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities; and/or (2) performances by persons who appear semi-nude; and/or (3) the showing of films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

“Adult dance studio” means any business or commercial establishment that provides for members of the public a partner for dance where the partner, or the dance, is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter involving, depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas.

“Adult entertainer” means any person who, with or without any compensation or other form of consideration, provides performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities; and/or (2) persons who appear semi-nude.

“Adult hotel/motel” means a hotel or motel or similar business establishment offering public accommodations for any form of consideration which on a regular and substantial basis that (1) provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction, description, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and/or (2) rents, leases, or lets any room for less than a ten (10) hour period, or rents, leases, or lets any single room more than twice in a 24-hour period.

“Adult motion picture theater” means a business establishment where, for any form of consideration, regularly features the showing of films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

“Adult nude modeling studio” means a business which provides, for pecuniary compensation, monetary or other consideration, hire or reward, figure models who, for the purposes of sexual stimulation of patrons, display specified anatomical areas to be observed, sketched, photographed, painted, sculpted or otherwise depicted by persons paying such consideration. “Adult nude modeling studio” does not include schools maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education, or any classroom of any school licensed under state law to provide art education while such classroom is being used in a manner consistent with such state license. “Adult nude modeling studio” further does not include a studio or similar facility owned, operated, or maintained by an individual artist or group of artists, and which does not provide, permit, or make available specified sexual activities.

“Adult or adult-oriented material” means the same as sexual or sexually-oriented material or material depicting, describing or relating to specified anatomical areas and/or specified sexual activities.

“Adult tanning salon” means a business where patrons receive tanning services in groups of two or more and where patrons or employees of the establishment are nude or expose specified anatomical areas. An adult tanning salon shall also include a business establishment where the employees thereof are nude or expose specified anatomical areas for any form of consideration.

“Adult theater” means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar establishment which, for any form of consideration regularly features live performances which are distinguishable or characterized by an emphasis on the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.

“Advertise” means public notice or announcement of items or services through the use of newspaper, handbills, radio, television, or other means of public communication.

“Applicant” means a person who is required to file an application for a permit under this chapter, including an individual owner, managing partner, officer of a corporation, or any other operator, manager, employee, or agent of an adult business, or an adult entertainer.

“Distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon” means and refers to the dominant or essential theme of the object described by such phrase. For instance, when the phrase refers to performances “which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon” the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, the performances so described are those whose dominant or predominant character and theme are the depiction of the specified sexual activities or anatomical areas. See Pringle v. City of Covina, 115 Cal.App.3 151 (1981).

“Employee of an adult business” means a person who works or performs, as an employee or as an independent contractor, in and/or for an adult business, regardless of whether said person is paid a salary, wage, or other compensation by the business.

“Escort” means any person, for consideration, who agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. “Escort” shall not include any person hired by a state licensed school for purposes of modeling in any art education class while such a person acts in that capacity or any federal, state and/or City licensed limousine or taxi service.

“Escort agency” means a person or business entity which furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes, for any form of consideration.

“Figure model” means any person who, for pecuniary compensation, consideration, hire or reward, poses in a modeling studio to be observed, sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed or otherwise depicted.

“Live entertainment” means the performance, enactment, or execution of an action participated in by one or more persons, including, but not limited to, a play, dramatization, pantomime, revue, modeling, burlesque, dance, recital, concert, vocal production, show, or disrobing, with or without music, band, or orchestra accompany.

“Notice” means written notice given by personal service upon the addressee, or given by the United States mail, postage paid, addressed to the person to be notified at his or her last known address. Service of such notice shall be effective upon the completion of personal service, upon placing the same in the custody of the United States Postal Service.

“Nudity or a state of nudity” means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the areola, or the showing of the covered genitals in a discernable turgid state.

“Off-premises” means any business where the primary services or entertainment are provided at a location or locations other than the premises of the subject business.

“Operate an adult business” means the supervising, managing, inspecting, directing, organizing, controlling or in any way being responsible for or in charge of the conduct of activities of an adult business or activities within an adult business.

“Operator of an adult business” means the owner, permittee, custodian, manager, operator, or person in charge of any adult business.

“Park” means a playground, swimming pool, athletic field, picnic area, or other open space area designated and/or designed for active and passive recreational use which is under the control, operation, or management of the City of Claremont Unified School District, the Claremont Colleges, or other public or non-profit agency/entity.

“Permittee” means the person to whom a permit is issued pursuant to this chapter.

“Person” means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, association, joint stock company, corporation, or combination of the above in whatever form or character.

“Police Chief” means the Police Chief of the City of Claremont or the authorized representatives thereof.

“Private viewing area” means an area or areas in an adult business of less than 150 square feet that is designed or used for purposes of viewing or watching a performance, picture, show, film, videotape, slide, movie, or other presentation.

“Public nudity” means nudity that occurs in a business open to the public, whether or not a fee is charged for admission to such business.

“Regular and substantial basis/course of conduct” means an activity, performance or condition that constitutes more than fifteen percent (15%) of the total performance time, stock-in-trade, revenue, floor space, advertisements, or similar element of the business. For purposes of this definition, revenue shall include gross revenue generated by the business, including revenue received by entertainers and others who work as independent contractors. For purposes of this definition, the floor space shall include areas devoted to a regulated activity, including, but not limited to, display areas, sales areas, performance areas, viewing areas, dressing rooms, and all aisles and pathways between and within such areas.

“Regularly features with” means on a regular and substantial basis or course of conduct and/or that which occurs on two or more occasions within a 30-day period; three or more occasions within a 60-day period; or four or more occasions within a 180-day period.

“Religious institution” means a structure that is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities, including, but not limited to, a church, chapel or similar place of worship.

“Residential use or zoning district” means single-family dwelling, duplex, townhouse, multiple-family dwelling, or mixed residential/commercial development, and/or property which is zoned primarily for residential use. Residential use shall not include a caretaker’s/security dwelling in the Business/Industrial Park (B/IP) District.

“School” means any child or day care facility, or any institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, offering instruction in those courses of study required by the California Education Code and maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education, or any undergraduate or junior level college. This definition includes a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, middle or junior high school, senior high school, undergraduate or junior college, or any special institution of education, but it does not include a commercial, vocational or trade institution of higher education, or any graduate level university, or non-profit research institution.

“Semi-nude” means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, buttocks, areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.

“Sex supermarket/sex mini-mall” means the establishment of more than one adult business or use, as defined in this chapter, within the same single building, or within the same commercial complex or center where each adult business is not located more than 150 feet from another adult business.

“Sexual encounter establishment” means a business or commercial enterprise that offers, for any form of consideration, a place where two or more persons may congregate, associate or consort in connection with specified sexual activities and/or the exposure of specified anatomical areas. This definition does not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist or similar professional person is licensed by the State to engage in sexual therapy.

“Sexual material” means material depicting, describing or relating to specified anatomical areas and/or specified sexual activities.

“Specified anatomical areas” means less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, and/or human male genitals in a discernible turgid state even if completely covered.

“Specified sexual activities” means and includes any of the following, whether performed directly or indirectly through clothing or other covering:

1.     The fondling or other intentional or erotic touching of specified anatomical areas;

2.     Sex acts, actual or simulated, including coitus, masturbation, oral/anal copulation, bestiality, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship;

3.     Sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence of human genitals;

4.     Ejaculation of human or animal semen, actual or simulated; or

5.     Excretory functions, urination, vaginal or anal irrigation as part of or in connection with any of the other activities described in paragraphs 1 through 4 of this definition.

“Transfer of ownership or control of an adult business” means the sale, lease, or sublease of an adult business; the transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; and/or the establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers ownership or control of the business, except for transfer or other operation of law upon the death of a person possessing the ownership or control. (02-01)

 

5.48.030 Permits required.
A.     It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises in the City of Claremont, the operation of an adult business unless the person first obtains and continues to maintain in full force and effect an adult business permit from the City of Claremont as required by this chapter. A separate adult business permit is required for each location in the City at which an adult business is to be established. The requirements of this chapter for an adult business permit are separate and in addition to a business license required under Chapter 5.20 of this title.

B.     It shall be unlawful for a person to perform as an adult entertainer at an adult business in the City of Claremont unless the person first obtains and continues to maintain in full force and effect an adult entertainer permit from the City of Claremont.

C.    The fact that an applicant possesses other types of state or City permits or licenses does not exempt the applicant from the requirement of obtaining an adult business permit. (02-01)

 

5.48.040 Adult business permit required.
A.     Every person who proposes to establish, maintain, operate or conduct an adult business in the City of Claremont shall file an application with the Police Chief upon a form provided by the City. The applicant shall attach a copy of the receipt indicating that the requisite fees were paid to the Finance Division of the City of Claremont. The fees paid shall not be refunded if substantial investigation has already been done on the application.

B.     Adult business permits are nontransferable, except in accordance with Section 5.48.100.

C.    All applications shall include the following information:

1.     A detailed description of the type of adult business for which the permit requested, including reference to definitions in this chapter, and the proposed address where the adult business will operate, plus the names and addresses of the owners and lessors of the adult business site. In the event the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, the application must be accompanied by a notarized acknowledgement from the owner of the property that an adult business will be operated on his/her property.

2.     If the applicant is an individual, the individual shall state his or her legal name, including any aliases, address, and submit satisfactory written proof that he or she is at least eighteen (18) years of age.

3.     If the applicant is a partnership, the partners shall state the partnership’s complete name, address, the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and attach a copy of the partnership agreement, if any.

4.     If the applicant is a corporation, the corporation shall provide its complete corporate name, the date and state of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of California, the names and capacity of all officers and directors, and principal stockholders (with 10 percent or more of all outstanding shares of stock), the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of process.

D.    If the applicant is an individual, he or she shall sign the application. If the applicant is other than an individual, an officer of the business entity or an individual with a ten (10) percent or greater interest in the business entity shall sign the application.

E.     If the applicant intends to operate the adult business under a name other than that of the applicant, the applicant shall file the fictitious name of the adult business and show proof of registration of the fictitious name.

F.     The application shall include the following information about each and every officer, director, partner, employee of the adult business, and any independent contractor and any other person who will work at the adult business:

1.     Name, current residential address, telephone number.

2.     Date of birth.

3.     Social Security number and any state or federally issued tax identification number.

4.     Height, weight, color of hair and eyes.

5.     Driver’s license number.

6.     Stage name (if applicable) and other aliases used within the previous two (2) years.

7.     Two recent photographs, passport-quality.

8.     Fingerprints for purposes of identification at the discretion of the Police Chief.

9.     Complete employment history for the past ten (10) years.

10.   Disclosure of whether, within five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application for permit, such person has been convicted, pleaded guilty or pleaded nolo contendere of a misdemeanor or felony which is classified by the State as an offense involving sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape, kidnapping, distribution of obscene material or material harmful to minors, prostitution or pandering, including, but not necessarily limited to, the violation of any crime requiring the registration under California Penal Code Section 290, or any violation of Penal Code Sections 243.4, 261, 261.5, 264.1, 266, 266a through 266k, inclusive, 267, 286, 286.5, 288, 288a, 311 through 311.10, inclusive, 314, 316, or 647, or the equivalent of the aforesaid offenses outside the State of California, and the date and places of such convictions.

G.    The application must also list whether, preceding the date of application, the applicant or any officer, director, partner, employee, independent contractor, and other persons who will work at the adult business has:

1.     Had a previous permit under this chapter denied, revoked, or suspended, and the date of such denial, revocation, or suspension;

2.     Been a partner in partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation whose permit under this chapter has been denied, revoked, or suspended and the date of such denial, revocation, or suspension;

3.     Had an adult business license, pursuant to regulations of another city or county which was denied, suspended, or revoked, and if so, the name and location of such adult business and the date of such denial, suspension or revocation; or

4.     Currently holds, or is a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation that currently holds other permits issued pursuant to this chapter, or other adult business permits/licenses issued from another city or county, and if so, the names and addresses of such adult businesses, and the permitting jurisdiction.

H.    The application shall also include the following:

1.     A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within thirty (30) days prior to application depicting the building and the portion thereof to be occupied by the adult business, and the surrounding area within a 300-foot radius of such building in a manner that clearly establishes compliance with the minimum proximity standards for adult businesses set forth in Chapter 16.097 of the Claremont Municipal Code.

2.     A sketch or diagram showing the interior configuration of the premises, including a statement of the total floor area occupied by the adult business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches (6″).

3.     A blueline print showing all four elevations of any proposed structures and signing, and listing proposed exterior building materials. Elevations shall be colored or a materials board shall be submitted. In the case of existing buildings where a change of use is proposed and no structural changes or exterior modifications are proposed, photographs may be accepted in lieu of elevation drawings if they show a front and rear elevation of the structure.

4.     A diagram of the off-street parking areas and premises entries of the adult business showing the location of the lighting system required by subsection 5.48.140.I. (02-01)

 

5.48.050 Adult entertainer permit required.
A.     Every person who intends to perform as an adult entertainer shall file an application with the Police Chief upon a form provided by the City. The applicant shall attach a copy of the receipt indicating the requisite fees were paid to the Finance Division. The fees shall not be refunded.

B.     The applicant shall provide the following information with the application:

1.     Name, current resident address, telephone number.

2.     Date of birth.

3.     Social Security number.

4.     Height, weight, color of hair and eyes.

5.     Driver’s license number.

6.     Stage name (if applicable) and other aliases used within the previous two (2) years.

7.     Two recent photographs, passport-quality.

8.     Fingerprints for purposes of identification at the discretion of the Police Chief.

9.     Complete employment history for the past ten (10) years.

10.   Disclosure of whether, within five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, the applicant has been convicted, pleaded guilty or pleaded nolo contendere of a misdemeanor or felony which is classified by the State as an offense involving sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape, kidnapping, distribution of obscene material or material harmful to minors, prostitution or pandering, including, but not necessarily limited to, the violation of any crime requiring registration under California Penal Code Section 290, or any violation of Penal Code Sections 243.4, 261, 261.5, 264.1, 266, 266a through 266k, inclusive, 267, 286, 286.5, 288, 288a, 311 through 311.10, inclusive, 314, 316, or 647, or the equivalent of the aforesaid offenses outside the State of California, and the date and places of such convictions.

11.   Name and location of business at which the applicant will perform or appear. (02-01)

 

5.48.060 Applications.
A.     The Police Chief shall be responsible for the granting, denying, revoking, renewing, suspending, and canceling of adult business permits for proposed or existing businesses. The Police Chief shall also be responsible for ascertaining whether a proposed adult business for which a permit is being considered complies with all applicable zoning laws and/or regulations. In connection with this review, if the Police Chief determines that the applicant has completed the application improperly, or otherwise deems the application to be incomplete, the Police Chief shall, within ten (10) business days of receipt of the original application, notify the applicant of such fact and on the request of the applicant, grant the applicant an extension of time of ten (10) business days or less to complete the application properly. The applicant may also request that the application be tolled for a maximum period of ninety (90) days so the application can be resubmitted at a later date without being denied. The time period for granting or denying a permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is granted an extension of time or the application is tolled.

B.     By applying for a permit under this chapter, the applicant shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this chapter, and to the authority by the Police Chief, the Director of Community Development and all other City employees and agencies charged with enforcing the laws, ordinances, and codes applicable in the City, of their respective responsibilities.

C.    The applicant shall provide a notice address, which shall be the address to which notice of action on the application is to be mailed. The applicant shall also provide the name, address and phone number of the person who is responsible for providing access to the proposed site for inspection purposes.

D.    The applicant for a permit under this chapter or a permittee shall have a continuing duty to promptly supplement any information required by this chapter in the event said information changes in any way from what was stated in previous submittals. The failure to comply within fourteen (14) business days from the date of such changes, by supplementing the application on file with the Police Chief shall be grounds for suspension of a permit.

E.     The City deems confidential all information about employees of adult businesses, adult entertainers, and independent contractors required by this chapter and submitted to the City in conjunction with an application or permit. Absent an order from a court of competent jurisdiction, the City shall not disclose for public review this information except as required by the California Public Records Act. (02-01)

 

5.48.070 Investigation and action on application.
A.     Upon receipt of a completed application required by this chapter and payment of the requisite application and permit fees, the Police Chief shall immediately stamp the date on which the application was received and promptly investigate the information contained in the application to determine whether the applicant shall be issued a permit.

B.     Upon receipt of an application, the Police Chief shall immediately send photocopies of the application of the Director of Community Development, County Fire Department, and any other city or county agencies responsible for enforcement of health, fire and building codes and laws. Each such department or agency shall promptly conduct an investigation of the application and proposed adult business in accordance with its responsibilities under law and as set forth in this chapter. At the conclusion of its investigation, each department or agency shall indicate on the photocopy of the application whether the adult business will be in violation of any provision of any statute, code, ordinance, regulation or other law in effect in the City, state reasons for approval or denial of the permit as appropriate, sign it, and immediately return the photocopy to the Police Chief.

C.    Within twenty (20) business days of receipt of the completed application, the Police Chief shall complete the investigation, grant or deny the application in accordance with the provisions of this section, and so notify the applicant as follows:

1.     The Police Chief shall write or stamp “Granted” or “Denied” on the application and date and sign such notification.

2.     The Police Chief shall grant the application and issue the permit, unless the application is denied for one or more of the reasons set forth below in Section 5.48.080.

3.     If the application is granted, the Police Chief shall attach the requested permit to the application.

4.     If the application is denied, the Police Chief shall attach to the application a statement of the reasons for denial.

5.     A copy of the application as granted or denied and the permit, if any, shall be placed in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to the notice address that was stated in the application.

6.     The permit, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, and the expiration date. The permit shall also indicate that the permit is subject to prohibitions against public nudity and indecency pursuant to the United States Supreme Court decision in Barnes v. Glen Theater, Inc. (1991) 501 U.S. 560 and any applicable local, state or federal law.

D.    Upon written request of the applicant, an extension of time of no more than twenty (20) business days may be added to the above time period for the Police Chief to act on an application.

E.     The Police Chief shall provide each adult entertainer that is issued a permit pursuant to this chapter, an identification card containing the name, address, photograph and permit number of such entertainer. An adult entertainer shall have such card available for inspection at all times during which such person is on the premises of the adult business.

F.     If the Police Chief neither grants nor denies the completed application within twenty (20) business days after it is stamped as received (except as provided in subsection D of this section), the applicant may begin operating the adult business or perform as an adult entertainer for which the permit was sought, subject to strict compliance with the requirements of this Code.

G.    Any decision by the Police Chief to issue or deny an application under this chapter may be appealed in accordance with Section 5.48.130. (02-01)

 

5.48.080 Permit denial.
A.     The Police Chief shall deny the application for any of the following reasons:

1.     The building, structure, equipment and/or location to be used by the business for which the permit is required, does not, or cannot, be corrected to comply with the applicable zoning, land use, development, health, fire, and safety laws of the City and State of California.

2.     The applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, shareholder or manager has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for a permit required by this chapter or in any report or record required to be filed in connection with the application.

3.     The applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.

4.     The required permit application fee has not been paid.

5.     The applicant failed to submit a complete application after being notified by the Police Chief that the application was incomplete.

6.     The applicant or the applicant’s adult business is in violation of, or is not in compliance with, and provisions of this chapter related to establishment and maintenance of an adult business.

7.     Within five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application for permit under this chapter, the applicant, manager, partner, agent, director, officer, stockholder, or employee has been convicted of a misdemeanor or felony which is classified by the State as an offense involving sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape, kidnapping, distribution of obscene material or material harmful to minors, prostitution or pandering, including, but not necessarily limited to, the violation of any crime requiring the registration under California Penal Code Section 290, or any violation of Penal Code Sections 243.4, 261, 261.6, 264.1, 266, 266a through 266k, inclusive, 267, 286, 286.5, 288, 288a, 311 through 311.10, inclusive, 314, 316, or 647, or the equivalent of the aforesaid offenses outside the State of California. The fact that a conviction is being appealed will have no effect on disqualification of the applicant.

8.     The applicant, manager, partner, agent, director, officer, stockholder, or employee has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any crime in conjunction with or as a result of operation of an adult business prior to the filing of the application. The fact that a conviction is being appealed will have no effect on disqualification of application.

9.     The applicant, manager, partner, agent, director, officer, or stockholder has had any type of adult business permit suspended or revoked by any city, county or state within the last two (2) years immediately preceding the date of application, because of failure to comply with regulations, standards or conditions of the regulatory agency.

10.   The granting of the permit would violate a statute, ordinance, or court order.

B.     If the application is denied and all appeal rights have been exhausted, the applicant shall be ineligible to apply for any adult business permit in the City of Claremont for a minimum of one year from the date the application was denied. If, subsequent to denial, the Police Chief finds the basis for denial of the permit has been corrected, the applicant shall be granted a permit if at least ninety (90) days has elapsed since the date the denial became final.

C.    After any final denial of a permit under this chapter, the applicant may seek prompt judicial review of such decision in a court of competent jurisdiction as provided by law, pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 et seq., and pursuant to the expedited judicial review set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. (02-01)

 

5.48.090 Permit renewals.
Adult business and adult entertainment permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for twelve (12) months from the date of issuance, unless earlier revoked or suspended. Such permits must be renewed on an annual basis by submitting an application for renewal of permit together with the requisite fee at least twenty (20) business days prior to the expiration of the existing permit. The new application shall include all the same information as would be required for a new application by this chapter. Such renewals shall be acted on as provided for new applications and shall be contingent upon satisfactory compliance with all the provisions of this chapter. When a renewal application is made less than twenty (20) business before the expiration date of a permit, the expiration of the permit shall not be stayed. (02-01)

 

5.48.100 Transfer of adult business permits.
A.     A permittee shall not operate an adult business under the authority of an adult business permit at any place other than the address of the adult business stated in the application for the permit and for which the permit was granted.

B.     A permittee shall not transfer ownership or control of an adult business or transfer an adult business permit to another person unless and until the transferee obtains an amendment to the permit from the Police Chief stating that the transferee is now the permittee. Such an amendment may be obtained only if the transferee files an application with the Police Chief in accordance with Sections 5.48.040 and 5.48.060, accompanies the application with a copy of a receipt indicating the requisite fees were paid to the Finance Division of the City, and the Police Chief determines in accordance with Sections 5.48.070 and 5.48.080 that the transferee would be entitled to the issuance of an original permit.

C.    No permit may be transferred when the Police Chief has notified the permittee that the permit has been or may be suspended or revoked.

D.    Any attempt to transfer a permit either directly or indirectly in violation of this section is hereby declared void, and the permit shall be deemed revoked. (02-01)

 

5.48.110 Registration of new employees.
A.     As a further condition of approval of every adult business permit issued pursuant to this chapter, every owner or operator shall register every new employee, officer, director, partner, independent contractor and any other person who works or will work at the adult business with the Police Chief within fourteen (14) business days of the commencement of such person’s period of employment at the adult business. For each person registered, the permittee shall submit to the Police Chief a copy of a receipt indicating the requisite fees were paid to the Finance Division of the City.

B.     As part of the registration process, the following information about each new employee, officer, director, partner, independent contractor and any other person who works or will work at the adult business shall be provided to the Police Chief on a form provided by the Police Department:

1.     Name, current resident address, telephone number.

2.     Date of birth.

3.     Social Security number or any state or federally issued tax identification number.

4.     Height, weight, color of eyes and hair.

5.     Driver’s license number.

6.     Stage name (if applicable) and other aliases used within the previous two (2) years.

7.     Two recent photographs, passport-quality.

8.     Fingerprints for purposes of identification at the discretion of the Police Chief.

9.     Complete employment history for the past ten (10) years.

10.   Disclosure of whether, within five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application for permit, such person has been convicted, pleaded guilty or pleaded nolo contendere of a misdemeanor or felony which is classified by the State as an offense involving sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape, kidnapping, distribution of obscene material or material harmful to minors, prostitution or pandering, including, but not necessarily limited to, the violation of any crime requiring the registration under California Penal Code Section 290, or any violation of Penal Code Sections 243.4, 261, 261.5, 264.1, 266, 266a through 266k, inclusive, 267, 286, 286.5, 288, 288a, 311 through 311.10, inclusive, 314, 316, or 647, or the equivalent of the aforesaid offenses outside the State of California, and the date and places of such convictions.

C.    Each owner or operator of an adult business shall maintain a current register of the names of all employees currently employed by the adult business, and shall disclose such registration for inspection by any police officer for purposes of determining compliance with the requirements of this section.

D.    Failure to register each new employee within fourteen (14) days of the commencement of employment, or to maintain a current register of the names of all employees shall be deemed a violation of the conditions of the permit and may be considered grounds for suspension or revocation of the permit. (02-01)

 

5.48.120 Suspension or revocation of permits.
A.     A permittee may be subject to suspension or revocation of his/her/its permit, or be subject to other appropriate remedial action, including the imposition of additional conditions, for any of the following causes arising from the acts or omissions of the permittee, or an employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder, operator, or manager of an adult business:

1.     The permittee, employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder, operator, or manager has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material facts in the application for a permit, or in any report or record required to be filed with the City.

2.     The permittee, employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder, operator, or manager failed to disclose the conviction of an act for which denial of a permit would have been required pursuant to this chapter.

3.     The permittee, employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder, operator, or manager refused to allow an inspection of the premises of the adult business as authorized by this chapter.

4.     The permittee, employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder, operator, or manager operated the adult business in violation of the hours of operation as set forth in this chapter.

5.     The permittee, employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder, operator, or manager operated the adult business in violation of a federal, state, or local building, fire, health, or zoning statue, code ordinance or regulation, applicable in the City of Claremont, based on the investigation by the City or other agency responsible for the enforcement of said rules of law.

6.     The permittee, employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder, operator, or manager of an adult business has knowingly allowed or permitted, and has failed to make a reasonable effort to prevent the occurrence of any of the following on the premises of the adult business:

a.     Any act of unlawful sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation.

b.     Use of the establishment as a place where unlawful solicitations for sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation openly occur.

c.     Any conduct constituting a criminal offense which requires registration under Section 290 of the California Penal Code.

d.     The occurrence of acts of lewdness, assignation, or prostitution including any conduct constituting violations of Sections 315, 316, or 318 or Subdivision b of Section 647 of the Penal Code.

e.     Any act constituting a violation of provisions in the California Penal Code relating to obscene matter of distribution of harmful matter to minors, including, but not limited to, Sections 311 through 313.4.

f.      Any other conduct prohibited by this chapter, or any code or law effective in the City of Claremont.

g.     Gambling by any persons on the premises.

h.     The possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises.

7.     The permittee, employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder, operator, or manager failed to abide by any action previously imposed by an appropriate officer of the City or other agency responsible for the enforcement of this chapter and other county and state codes and laws.

B.     On determining that grounds for permit revocation exist, the Police Chief shall furnish written notice of the proposed suspension or revocation to the permittee. Such notice shall set forth the time and place of a hearing by the Police Chief, and the ground or grounds upon which the hearing is based, the pertinent code sections, and a brief statement of the factual matters in support thereof. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to the last known address of the permittee, or shall be delivered to the permittee personally, at least ten (10) business days prior to the hearing date. Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the City, but at a minimum shall include the following:

1.     All parties involved shall have a right to offer testimonial, documentary, and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; and may be represented by counsel.

2.     Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs.

3.     Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness.

C.    After holding the hearing in accordance with the provisions of this section, if the Police Chief finds and determines that there are grounds for action, the Police Chief shall impose one of the following:

1.     Warning.

2.     Suspension of the permit for a specified period not to exceed six (6) months.

3.     Revocation of the permit.

D.    The Police Chief’s decision may be appealed in accordance with Section 5.48.130.

E.     If any decision of the Police Chief to revoke a permit is upheld after the permittee has exhausted his/her appeal rights, the permittee shall cease conducting business in the City of Claremont. A revoked permit shall not be renewed and no other permit shall be issued to the same permittee or his or her successors in interest within one (1) year of the date revocation became effective. (02-01)

 

5.48.130 Appeal of denial, suspension or revocation.
A.     After denial of an application for an adult business permit, or after denial of renewal of a permit, or suspension or revocation of a permit, the applicant or permittee may appeal such administrative action in accordance with the provisions of this section.

B.     The appeal of an administrative action shall be submitted to and received by the City Clerk within ten (10) days of the date of such action for which the appeal is made. The appeal must be in writing on forms provided by the City together with an appeal fee established by resolution of the City Council, which may be amended from time to time. All appeals shall set forth the appellant’s reason for asserting the action was in error, or in violation of this Code, or other applicable law. Any action appealed shall be suspended until action has been taken on the appeal.

C.    When a timely appeal is filed, the City Manager shall appoint a hearing officer or body to conduct a hearing on the matter. The hearing officer may be the Assistant City Manager, the Director of Community Development, or such person or body designated by one of them to perform all or a portion of his or her duties, or may be another official or body from another city or agency, or other person qualified to conduct a review of the matter. The hearing for an appeal of a denial or denial of a renewal of a permit shall take place within ten (10) business days of the receipt of the appeal; the hearing for an appeal for suspension or revocation of a permit shall take place within twenty (20) business days of the date of the receipt of the appeal. All parties involved shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; and may be represented by counsel. Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness.

D.    The hearing officer or body shall render a written decision on the matter within five (5) days of the close of the hearing on the appeal.

E.     All decisions made by the appointed hearing officer regarding the denial, denial of renewal, suspension or revocation of a permit, shall be final. If the denial, denial of renewal, suspension or revocation of a permit is affirmed on review by the appointed hearing officer, the applicant or permittee may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action in a court of competent jurisdiction as provided by law, pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 et seq. The City shall make all reasonable efforts to expedite judicial review in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. Any action under judicial review shall be suspended pending final administrative determination. (02-01)

 

5.48.140 Adult business development and performance standards.
All adult businesses shall comply with the following requirements, and the following applicable requirements of this section shall be deemed conditions of all adult business permit approvals. Failure to comply with every such requirement shall be grounds for revocation of the permit issued pursuant to this chapter.

A.     The establishment of an adult business shall comply with all applicable City site development standards of the district, or area in which the adult business is located, the building and construction codes, maximum occupancy loads, fire codes, and health and safety regulations in effect in the City. Maximum occupancy load, fire exits, aisles and fire equipment shall be regulated, designed and provided in accordance with the fire and building regulations and standards adopted by the City of Claremont.

B.     An adult business shall comply with the applicable City permit and inspection procedures.

C.    Each adult business shall have a business entrance separate from any other non-adult business located in the same building.

D.    No adult business shall be operated in any manner that permits the observation of any material or activities depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or instruments, devices or paraphernalia designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities from any public way or from any location outside the building or area of such establishment. This provision shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening.

E.     No exterior door or window on the premises shall be propped or kept open at any time while the business is open, and all building openings, entries, and windows shall be located, covered, or screened to prevent viewing of the interior from any exterior area.

F.     All exterior areas of any adult business, including building, landscaping, and parking areas, shall be maintained in a clean and orderly manner free of trash, weeds and debris.

G.    All building entrances to an adult business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that persons under eighteen (18) years of age are precluded from entering the premises. Said notice shall consist of letters no less than one inch in height and shall be constructed and posted to the satisfaction of the Director of Community Development. No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be permitted within the premises at any time. It shall be unlawful for any employee, owner, operator, manager or permittee of an adult business to allow any person below the age of eighteen (18) years upon the premises or within the confines of any adult business if no alcoholic beverages are served, or under the age of twenty-one (21) if alcoholic beverages are served.

H.    A parking plan providing for adequate parking for the intended use shall be submitted to the Department of Community Development for review and approval. Required parking shall be as follows:

1.     Retail Sales, Office Use. One parking space shall be provided per each 400 square feet of gross floor area.

2.     Restaurant, Theaters, Arcades. Studios and Places of Assembly. One parking space shall be provided for each three persons permitted to occupy the establishment by the occupancy provisions of the Building Code.

3.     Hotels, Motels. One parking space shall be provided for each unit.

I.      All off-street parking areas and building entries of the adult business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation with a lighting system that provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of not less than one footcandle of light and a minimum horizontal illumination of not less than one footcandle of light on all parking surfaces and walkways. The required lighting level is established in order to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the adult business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and criminal conduct. A lighting plan prepared by a licensed lighting engineer shall be submitted to the Department of Community Development for review and approval.

J.     The parking areas and entrances/exits for patrons shall be visible from the public right-of-way. This view shall not be obstructed by landscaping or any fence, wall or other barrier.

K.     No exterior sign shall be placed, constructed, erected, altered, repaired, improved, converted or painted, except in compliance with Title 18 of the Claremont Municipal Code. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to take down, remove, or alter signs on the premises so as to comply with this section.

L.     The premises within which the adult business is located shall provide sufficient sound-absorbing insulation so that noise generated inside said premises shall not be audible anywhere on any adjacent property or right-of-way, or within any other building or other separate unit within the same building. No loudspeaker or sound equipment audible to persons in any public exterior area shall be used in connection with an adult business, and the business shall be so conducted that sounds associated with the business are not emitted to any public exterior area.

M.    An adult business shall be open or operating for business only between the hours of 10:00 a.m. on any particular day and 2:00 a.m. of the following morning. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter to cause an adult business to be operated or to allow such business to remain open for business, or permit any employee and/or independent contractor to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale of solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a service, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. of any particular day.

N.    An adult business shall display at all times during business hours the permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for an adult business in a conspicuous place so that the permit may be readily seen by all persons entering the adult business.

O.    No employee, contractor, or other person who works at the adult business, shall have physical contact with any patron and no patron shall have physical contact with any employee, contractor, or person who works at the adult business. This subsection shall only apply to physical contact on the premises of the adult business.

P.     No owner or other person with managerial control over an adult business shall permit any employee, independent contractor, or any other person on the premises of the adult business to engage in the exposure of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque coverage, the female breast with less than a fully opaque coverage over any part of the nipple or areola, and/or the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. This provision may not be complied with by applying an opaque covering, simulating the appearance of the specified anatomical part required to be covered.

Q.    No adult business may conduct any massage, acupuncture, body wrapping, tattooing, acupressure or escort services on the premises.

R.    Every adult business shall have a manager on duty on the premises during all times the business is open to the public. At least one manager’s station shall be provided within the adult business for the purpose of monitoring and supervising activities within the business. The manager shall endeavor to have the manager’s station occupied at all times the business is open to the public. The occupant of the manager’s station shall not act as a door person, ticket seller, ticket taker, admittance person or security guard. All indoor areas of the adult business within which patrons are permitted, or within which viewing is permitted by patrons or the public, except restrooms, shall be open to view by the manager at all times. The view area shall remain unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials at all times. No patron shall be permitted access to any area of the premises that has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted. If the premises have two or more manager’s stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is unobstructed view of each area of the premises from at least one of the manager’s stations.

S.     A diagram of the premises shall be provided to the Police Chief specifying the location of one or more manager stations and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. No alteration in the configuration or locating of a manager’s station shall be made without the prior written approval of the Police Chief.

T.     The adult business shall provide and maintain separate restroom facilities for male patrons, male employees, female patrons, and female employees. Male patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the restroom(s) for females, and female patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the restroom(s) for males, and patrons shall be prohibited from using the restroom(s) for employees, and employees shall be prohibited from using the restroom(s) for patrons, except to carry out duties of repair, maintenance and cleaning of the restroom facilities. The restrooms shall be free from any adult material. Restrooms shall not contain television monitors or other motion picture or video projection, recording or reproduction equipment. The foregoing provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to an adult business which deals exclusively with sale or rental of adult material which is not used or consumed on the premises, such as an adult bookstore or adult video store, and which does not provide restroom facilities to its patrons or the general public.

U.    An on-site security program shall be prepared, implemented and maintained including the following items:

1.     An interior lighting plan to provide illumination of all areas of the adult business as provided below. The lighting shall be designed and operated to provide the minimum maintained foot-candle levels listed below for specific uses/areas, evenly distributed at ground level:

 

Area

Footcandles

 

Bookstores and other retail establishments

20

 

Theaters and cabarets

5 (except during performances, at which times lighting shall be at least 1.25 foot candles)

 

Arcades

10

 

Motels/Hotels

20 (in public areas)

 

Modeling Studios

20

 

2.     A video camera surveillance system shall be installed, utilized and maintained in good working order in the adult business to record both the interior building and parking lot area. Such system shall provide continuous video coverage and recordation during all business hours. The location of the surveillance camera shall be approved by the Police Chief. The surveillance tape shall be saved by the manager for a length of time specified by the Police Chief and made available to the Police Chief upon request. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment.

3.     Security guards shall be employed to maintain the public peace and safety, based upon the following standards:

a.     Adult businesses such as adult motion picture theatres, adult video stores, nude modeling studios, sexual encounter establishments, adult theaters and adult cabarets, or any adult business which features entertainment (live or motion picture viewed from booths) whose dominant or predominant character and theme is the depiction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons, shall provide at least one guard for every 50 occupants permitted by the City’s Building Code, at all times while the business is open, and in no case shall there be less than two (2) guards. One guard shall be stationed outside during all business hours. For businesses where the maximum building fire capacity is 50 or less, video monitoring of the parking lot may be approved by the Police Chief in lieu of having a guard stationed outside, subject to the submission and approval of a video security monitoring plan.

b.     Security guards for other adult businesses may be required if it is determined by the Police Chief that their presence is necessary in order to prevent any of the conduct listed in Section 5.48.120(A)(6).

c.     Security guards shall be charged with preventing violations of laws and enforcing compliance by patrons of the requirements of these regulations. Security guards shall be uniformed in such a manner so as to be readily identifiable as a security guard by the public and shall be duly licensed by the state as security guards. No security guard required pursuant to this subsection shall act as a door person, ticket seller, ticket taker, admittance person or sole occupant of the manager’s station while acting as a security guard.

4.     An annual review for adequacy of security will be conducted to ascertain if there has been an increase in calls for emergency services.

V.     No owner or other person with managerial control over an adult business shall permit any employee, independent contractor, or any other person on the premises of the adult business to engage in a live showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque coverage, and/or the female breast with less than a fully opaque coverage over any part of the areola.

W.    In addition to the above development and performance standards, the following development and performance standards shall apply to any adult business, other than adult motel or hotel, with a private viewing area, room or booth of less than 150 square feet of floor area, which exhibits on the premises or features for observation by patrons, motion pictures, film, video, slides or other visual reproduction that depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. This subsection does not apply to an auditorium or seating area of an adult theater.

1.     No private viewing area, room or booth may be occupied by more than one person at any one time.

2.     All viewing areas, rooms and booths shall be open to view from the manager’s station on at least one side. The view from the manager’s station shall remain unobstructed by any doors, walls, furniture or fixtures, merchandise, display racks, or other material at all times.

3.     The walls or partitions between viewing rooms or booths shall be designed, maintained, and regularly inspected so as not to allow viewing of any kind from one booth to another through holes or openings between any two such rooms, or through the use of windows, mirrors, television monitors or other projection or reproduction equipment, or any other method, and so as not to allow physical contact of any kind between the occupants of any two such booths or rooms.

4.     Customers, patrons or visitors shall not be allowed to stand idly by in the vicinity of any such video booths, or from remaining in the common area of such business, other than the restrooms, who are not actively engaged in shopping for or reviewing the products available on display for purchaser viewing. Signs prohibiting loitering shall be posted in prominent places, in and near the video booths.

5.     The floors, seats, walls and other interior portions of all video booths shall be maintained clean and free from waste and bodily secretions. Presence of human excrement, urine, semen or saliva in any such booths shall be evidence of improper maintenance and inadequate sanitary controls; repeated instances of such conditions may justify suspension or revocation of the owner and operator’s permit to conduct the adult business.

X.     If an adult business contains an auditorium or hall shall comply with each of the following additional provisions:

1.     The auditorium or hall shall have individual, separate seats (not couches, benches or the like) to accommodate the maximum number of persons who are permitted to occupy (maximum occupancy) the auditorium or hall;

2.     The area shall have a continuous main aisle along the seating area(s) in order that each person seated in the auditorium or hall shall be visible from the aisle at all times; and

3.     A sign shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near each entrance to the auditorium or hall area which lists the maximum occupancy of the auditorium or hall, the occupancy of which shall not exceed the number of seats within the auditorium or hall.

Y.     Adult businesses providing live entertainment involving, depicting, describing or relating to specified anatomical areas and/or involving specified sexual activities shall also comply with the following additional standards and provisions:

1.     No person shall perform live entertainment for patrons of an adult business except upon a stage at least eighteen (18) inches above the level of the floor which is separated by a distance of at least ten (10) feet from the nearest area occupied by patrons and surrounded with a stationary rail, or at least six (6) feet from the nearest area occupied by patrons and surrounded by a solid barrier, which rail or barrier must be at least thirty (30) inches in height, establishing the separations between entertainers and patrons. No patron shall be permitted within the area of the stage established by the barrier (ten feet with a rail or six feet with a solid barrier) while the stage is occupied by an entertainer.

2.     The adult business shall provide separate dressing room facilities for entertainers that are exclusively dedicated to the adult entertainers’ use. No patron is permitted access to the dressing room facilities. The dressing room facilities shall not contain television monitors or other motion picture or video projection, recording or reproduction equipment.

3.     The adult business shall provide access for adult entertainers between the stage and the dressing rooms which is completely separated from the patrons. If such separate access is not physically feasible, the adult business shall provide a minimum three (3) foot wide walk aisle for entertainers between the dressing room area and the stage, with a railing, fence or other barrier separating the patrons and the entertainers capable of (and which actually results in) preventing any physical contact between patrons and entertainers.

4.     The adult business shall provide an entrance/exit for adult entertainers, which is separate from the entrance/exit used by patrons.

5.     While on the premises, no adult entertainer, either before, during or after performances, shall have physical contact with any patron and no patron shall have physical contact with any entertainer while on the premises either before, during or after performances by such entertainer. Patrons shall not, and shall not be allowed to, directly touch, fondle or caress (as those terms are defined in Kev, Inc. v. Kitsap County (9th Cir., 1986) 793 F. 2d 1053) the entertainers while they are performing. Patrons shall be advised of the separation and no touching requirements by signs placed on the barrier between entertainers and patrons, and if necessary by employees of the establishment. This prohibition does not extend to incidental touching.

6.     No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any adult entertainer and no adult entertainer shall solicit or accept any pay or gratuity from any patron. Patrons shall not throw payment or tips to entertainers, hand tips directly to entertainers, or place tips in the entertainers’ costumes. If patrons wish to pay or tip entertainers, payment or tips shall be placed in receptacles which shall be located at least ten (10) feet (or six feet, where a solid barrier has been installed) from the stage.

7.     No owner or other person with managerial control over an adult business shall permit any person on the premises of the adult business to engage in the exposure of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque coverage, and/or the female breast with less than a fully opaque coverage over any part of the areola. (02-01)

 

5.48.150 Register of adult entertainers.
Every permittee of an adult business which has adult entertainers or provides live entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities must maintain a register of all persons so performing on the premises and copies of the adult entertainment permits required by this chapter. Such register shall be available for inspection during regular business hours by any representative of the Police Department, Department of Community Development, or other City department. (02-01)

 

5.48.160 Display of permit.
Every adult business shall display at all time during business hours the permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for such adult business in a conspicuous place so that the same may be readily seen by all persons entering the adult business. (02-01)

 

5.48.170 Employment of and services rendered to persons under the age of eighteen years prohibited.
A.     It shall be unlawful for any permittee, operator, or other person in charge of any adult business to employ, or provide any service for which it requires such permit, to any person who is not at least eighteen (18) years of age.

B.     It shall be unlawful for any permittee, operator or other person in charge of any adult business to permit to enter, or remain within the adult business, any person who is not at least eighteen years of age, or allow the purchase of goods at an adult business by a person who is not at least eighteen (18) years of age.

C.    Signs shall be conspicuously posted on all entrances restricting entrance of minors as required by Section 5.48.140(G).

D.    The interior of the premises shall not be visible to a minor pursuant to the standards set forth in Sections 5.48.140(D) and (E). (02-01)

 

5.48.180 Inspection.
An applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the City Police Department, City Community Development Department, Los Angeles County Fire Department, or other City departments or County agencies to inspect the premises of an adult business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law and the development and performance standards applicable to adult businesses, at any time it is occupied or opened for business. A person who operates an adult business or his or her agent or employee is in violation of the provisions of this section if he or she refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or open for business. Such inspections shall be conducted in a reasonable manner. (02-01)

 

5.48.190 Regulations nonexclusive.
The provisions of this article regulating adult businesses are not intended to be exclusive and compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any other regulations pertaining to the operation of businesses as adopted by the City Council of the City of Claremont. (02-01)

 

5.48.200 Fees.
The City Council shall establish by resolution, and from time to time may amend, the fees for administration of this chapter. If additional fees are required for further investigation of an applicant, the permit shall not be issued until the additional fees are paid to the Finance Division. Fees required by this chapter shall be in addition to any fees required by other City code or ordinance. (02-01)

 

5.48.210 Violations and penalties.
A.     It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult business or perform as an adult entertainer at an adult business in the City of Claremont without a valid permit issued by the Police Chief pursuant to this chapter.

B.     Violation of any of the provisions of subsection A of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. Each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provisions of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted by such person. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City Attorney may elect to prosecute violations of any provision of this chapter as an infraction as provided for in Chapter 1.14.

C.    Violation of any requirement of this chapter applicable to an adult business permit or adult entertainer permit pursuant to this chapter shall constitute grounds for revocation of such permit. A permittee shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees, independent contractors, or other persons who work at his/her/its adult business, and his/her/its permit may be subject to revocation for any violations of this chapter arising from the acts or omissions by any such employees, independent contractors, or other persons who work at the adult business. (02-01)

Chapter 5.50 REGULATION OF SIDEWALK VENDORS
5.50.000 Purpose.
A.     The purpose of this chapter is to establish a permitting and regulatory program for sidewalk vendors that complies with Senate Bill 946 (Chapter 459, Statutes 2018, codified in Chapter 6.2 of Part 1 of Division 1 of Title 5 of the California Government Code, commencing at Section 51306). The provisions of this chapter allow the City to encourage small business activities by removing total prohibitions on portable food stands and certain forms of solicitation while still permitting regulation and enforcement of unpermitted sidewalk vending activities to protect the public’s health, safety and welfare.

B.     The City Council hereby finds that to promote the public’s health, safety and welfare, restrictions on sidewalk vending are necessary to:

1.     Ensure no unreasonable interference with the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic including ingress into, or egress from, any residence, public building, or place of business, or from the street to the sidewalk, by persons exiting or entering parked or standing vehicles; and

2.     Provide reasonable access for the use and maintenance of sidewalks, pathways, poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, firefighting apparatus, mailboxes, as well as access to locations used for public transportation services; and

3.     Reduce exposure to the City for personal injury or property damage claims and litigation; and

4.     Ensure sidewalk vending activities occur only in locations where such activities would not restrict sidewalk and pathway access and enjoyment to individuals with disabilities. (19-04)

 

5.50.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this part, unless the context in which they are used clearly requires otherwise. If a term or phrase is not defined in this part, or elsewhere in this Code, the most common dictionary definition is presumed to be correct.

“Alcohol” and “alcoholic beverage” shall have the same meaning as defined in Section 9.23.010 of this Code, or any successor section.

“Certified farmers’ market” means a location operated in accordance with Chapter 10.5 (commencing with Section 47000) of Division 17 of the Food and Agricultural Code and any regulations adopted pursuant to that chapter, or any successor chapter.

“Curb face” means the vertical or sloping surface on the roadway side of the curb.

“Emergency vehicle access” means the roadway path or other surface that provides police or fire safety vehicular access from the dispatched point of origin to a facility, building, parcel, park or portion thereof. Emergency vehicle access includes, but is not limited to, fire lanes, public and private streets, parking lot lanes, access roadways, and walkways.

“Food” means any item provided in Health and Safety Code Section 113781, or any successor section.

“Hearing officer” means an impartial individual designated by the Community Development Director, or designee, to determine appeals pursuant to and in accordance with Section 5.50.070.

“Heating element” means any device used to create heat for food preparation.

“Marijuana” means the substances defined in Section 9.72.020 of this Code, or any successor section.

“Merchandise” means any item(s) that can be sold and immediately obtained from a sidewalk vendor which is not considered food. Items for rent shall not be considered merchandise.

“Park” means any area dedicated or established as a public park.

“Pathway” means a paved path or walkway for pedestrian travel, other than a sidewalk.

“Person” means and includes all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, business or common law trusts, societies, and individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the City.

“Pocket park” means any park located in urban or commercial areas surrounded by commercial buildings or houses on small lots with few places for people to gather, relax, or enjoy the outdoors that is smaller than or equal to 35,000 square feet.

“Public property” means all property owned or controlled by the City, including, but not limited to, alleys, parks, pathways, streets, parking lots, sidewalks, and walking trails.

“Residential” means any area zoned exclusively as residential in Title 16 of this Code, including, without limitation, RS, HC, RR, H, RM, HDR, and AV zoning districts and specific plan areas.

“Roaming sidewalk vendor” means a sidewalk vendor who moves from place to place and stops only to complete a transaction.

“Sidewalk” means that portion of a highway, other than the roadway, set apart by curbs, barriers, markings or other delineation for pedestrian travel.

“Sidewalk vending receptacle” means a pushcart, stand, display, wagon, showcase, rack, or non-motorized conveyance used for sidewalk vending activities. “Sidewalk vending receptacle” shall not include pedal driven carts.

“Sidewalk vendor” or “vendor” means a person(s) who sells food or merchandise from a sidewalk vending receptacle or from one’s person, upon a public sidewalk or pathway.

“Sidewalk vendor activities” or “sidewalk vending” or “sidewalk vending activities” mean actions that qualify a person as a sidewalk vendor or actions done in anticipation of becoming a sidewalk vendor, such as, but not limited to, installation, placement, or maintenance of any sidewalk vendor receptacles.

“Special event” means any temporary permitted event approved by the City, including, but not limited to, noncommercial solicitation permits for charitable, political, and religious solicitation.

“Stationary sidewalk vendor” means a sidewalk vendor who vends from a fixed location.

“Street” means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.

“Swap meet” means a location operated in accordance with Article 6 (commencing with Section 21660) of Chapter 9 of Division 8 of the Business and Professions Code, and any regulations adopted pursuant to that chapter, or any successor chapter. (19-04)

 

5.50.020 Permit required.
A.     Permit Required. No person, either for himself/herself or any other person, shall engage in any sidewalk vendor activities within the City without first applying for and receiving a permit from the Community Development Director, or designee, in accordance with Sections 5.40.020 and 5.40.030 of this Code and the provisions of this chapter. If any portion of the Section 5.40.020 and/or Section 5.40.030 conflict with the requirements of this section, the provisions of this section shall apply.

B.     Application. A written application for a sidewalk vendor permit shall be filed with the Community Development Director, or designee, on a form provided by the City and shall contain the following information:

1.     The name, address, and telephone number of the person applying to become a sidewalk vendor;

2.     The California driver’s license or identification number, individual taxpayer identification number, or municipal identification number (which shall not be available to the public for inspection, is confidential, and shall not be disclosed except as required to administer the permit or comply with a state law or state or federal court order);

3.     The name, address, and telephone number of the person who will be in charge of any roaming sidewalk vendors, sidewalk vending activity and/or be responsible for the person(s) working at the sidewalk vending receptacle;

4.     The name, address, and telephone number of all persons that will be employed as roaming sidewalk vendors or at a sidewalk vending receptacle;

5.     The number of sidewalk vending receptacles the sidewalk vendor will operate within the City under the permit;

6.     Whether the vendor intends to operate as a stationary sidewalk vendor or a roaming sidewalk vendor;

7.     The day(s) and hours of operation the stationary sidewalk vendor intends to operate at such location(s);

8.     The location(s) in the City where the stationary sidewalk vendor intends to operate;

9.     The dimensions of the sidewalk vendor’s sidewalk vending receptacle(s), including a picture of each sidewalk vending receptacle operating under the permit;

10.   Whether the sidewalk vendor will be selling food, merchandise, or both;

11.   If the sidewalk vendor is selling food, a description of the type of food to be sold, whether such foods are prepared on site, and whether the vendor requires a heating element to prepare the food;

12.   If the vendor is selling merchandise, a description of the merchandise to be sold;

13.   A copy of the health permit required for any sidewalk vendors selling food;

14.   Proof of his or her possession of a valid California Department of Tax and Fee Administration seller’s permit, which shall be maintained during the pendency of the sidewalk vendor’s permit;

15.   An acknowledgment that the sidewalk vendor will comply with all other generally applicable local, state, and federal laws;

16.   A certification that, that to his or her knowledge and belief, the information contained within the application is true and correct;

17.   An agreement by the sidewalk vendor to defend, indemnify, release and hold harmless the City, its City Council, boards, commissions, officers and employees from and against any and all claims, demands, obligations, damages, actions, causes of action, suits, losses, judgments, fines, penalties, liabilities, costs and expenses (including without limitation, attorneys’ fees, disbursements and court costs) of every kind and nature whatsoever which may arise from or in any manner relate (directly or indirectly) to the permit or the vendor’s sidewalk vending activities. This indemnification shall include, but not be limited to, damages awarded against the City, if any, costs of suit, attorneys’ fees, and other expenses incurred in connection with such claim, action, or proceeding whether incurred by the permittee, City, and/or the parties initiating or bringing such proceeding;

18.   An acknowledgement that the sidewalk vendor’s use of public property is at their own risk, the City does not take any steps to ensure public property is safe or conducive to the sidewalk vending activities, and the sidewalk vendor uses public property at his or her own risk;

19.   An acknowledgment by the sidewalk vendor that he or she will obtain and, at all times during the duration of the permit, maintain any insurance of such types and in such amounts as required by the Assistant City Manager; and

20.   Any other relevant information required by the Community Development Director or designee.

C.    Application and Permit Fees. Each application for a sidewalk vendor permit shall be accompanied by an application fee as established by resolution of the City Council. The application and permit are only applicable to the individual(s) named on the application. If the permit is approved, it shall not be necessary for the permittee to obtain a City business license to carry on the activities authorized by said permit, unless such permittee maintains a permanent place of business within the City. (19-04)

 

5.50.030 Issuance of permit.
A.     Within 30 calendar days of receiving a complete application, the Community Development Director, or designee, may issue a sidewalk vendor permit, with appropriate conditions, as provided for herein, if he or she finds based on all of the relevant information that:

1.     The conduct of the sidewalk vendor will not unduly interfere with traffic or pedestrian movement, or tend to interfere with or endanger the public peace or rights of nearby residents to the quiet and peaceable enjoyment of their property, or otherwise be detrimental to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare;

2.     The conduct of the sidewalk vendor will not unduly interfere with normal governmental or City operations, threaten to result in damage or detriment to public property, or result in the City incurring costs or expenditures in either money or personnel not reimbursed in advance by the vendor;

3.     The conduct of such sidewalk vending activity will not constitute a fire hazard, and all proper safety precautions will be taken;

4.     The conduct of such sidewalk vending activity will not require the diversion of police officers to properly police the area of such activity as to interfere with normal police protection for other areas of the City;

5.     The sidewalk vendor has paid all previous administrative fines, completed all community service, and completed any other alternative disposition associated in any way with a previous violation of this chapter;

6.     The sidewalk vendor has not had a permit revoked within the same calendar year;

7.     The sidewalk vendor’s application contains all required information;

8.     The sidewalk vendor has not made a materially false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of fact to the City in the application process;

9.     The sidewalk vendor has satisfied all the requirements of this chapter;

10.   The sidewalk vendor has paid all applicable fees as set by City Council resolution;

11.   The sidewalk vendor’s sidewalk vending receptacle and proposed activities conform to the requirements of this chapter;

12.   The sidewalk vendor has adequate insurance to protect the City from liability associated with the sidewalk vendor’s activities, including the naming of the City as an additional insured, as determined by the City’s Risk Manager; and

13.   The vendor has satisfactorily provided all information requested by the Community Development Director, or designee, to consider the vendor’s application.

B.     A sidewalk vendor permit is nontransferable. Any change in ownership or operation of a sidewalk vendor or sidewalk vending receptacle requires a new permit under this chapter.

C.    All permits issued under this chapter, regardless of when issued, expire one year from the date on which they were issued. (19-04)

 

5.50.040 Operating conditions.
All sidewalk vendors are subject to the following operating conditions when conducting sidewalk vending activities:

A.     All food and merchandise shall be stored either inside or affixed to the sidewalk vendor receptacle or carried by the sidewalk vendor. Food and merchandise shall not be stored, placed, or kept on any public property. If affixed to the sidewalk vendor receptacle, the overall space taken up by the sidewalk vendor receptacle shall not exceed the size requirements provided in this section. Sidewalk vendors shall not set up, maintain, or permit the use of any additional table, crate, carton, rack, or any other device to increase the selling or display capacity of their stand where such terms have not been described by their application.

B.     The sidewalk vendor permit shall always be displayed conspicuously on the sidewalk vending receptacle or the sidewalk vendor’s person. If multiple sidewalk vendors are staffing a sidewalk vendor receptacle or working as roaming sidewalk vendors, each person shall wear their permit on their person in a conspicuous manner.

C.    Sidewalk vendors shall not leave their sidewalk vending receptacle unattended to solicit business for their sidewalk vending activities. Sidewalk vending receptacles shall not be stored on public property and shall be removed when not in active use by a vendor.

D.    All sidewalk vendors shall allow a City police officer, firefighter, or Community Improvement Coordinator, at any time, to inspect their sidewalk vending receptacle for compliance with the size requirements of this chapter and to ensure the safe operation of any heating elements used to prepare food.

E.     Sidewalk vending receptacles shall not exceed a total height of three feet, a total width of three feet, and a total length of three feet.

F.     No sidewalk vending receptacle shall be motorized or pedal-driven.

G.    If a sidewalk vending receptacle requires more than one person to conduct the sidewalk vending activity, all sidewalk vendors associated with the sidewalk vending receptacle shall be within five feet of the sidewalk vending receptacle when conducting sidewalk vending activities.

H.    Sidewalk vendors that sell food shall maintain a trash container in or on their sidewalk vending receptacle and shall not empty their trash into public trashcans. The size of the vendor’s trash container shall be considered when assessing the total size limit of a sidewalk vending receptacle. Sidewalk vendors serving food that are not considered shelf stable (e.g., commercially bagged potato chips, commercially bagged candy) shall have access to hot and cold water on their vending receptacles. Sidewalk vendors shall not leave any location without first picking up, removing, and disposing of all trash or refuse from their operation.

I.      Sidewalk vendors shall maintain a minimum four-foot clear accessible path free from obstructions, including sidewalk vending receptacles and customer queuing area.

J.     Sidewalk vendors shall comply with the following noise standards:

1.     It is unlawful for any sidewalk vendor to shout, make any outcry, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any sound device, including any loud speaking radio or sound-amplifying system while vending where such sound exceeds the City’s noise standards as set forth Chapter 16.154.

2.     No sidewalk vendor shall operate or permit the operation of any sound amplification system to advertise, to draw attention to the presence of the sidewalk vendor or to communicate commercial information to the general public, except to request emergency assistance or warn of a hazardous situation.

K.     Sidewalk vendors shall not approach persons to sell food or merchandise and shall not interfere in any way with anyone engaged in an activity to sell food or merchandise.

L.     Sidewalk vendors shall not vend to or otherwise conduct transactions with persons in moving vehicles or vehicles illegally parked or stopped.

M.    Sidewalk vendors shall immediately clean up any food, grease or other fluid or item related to sidewalk vending activities that falls on public property. (19-04)

 

5.50.050 Prohibited activities and locations.
A.     Sidewalk vendors shall comply with all operating conditions, including those conditions set forth in Section 5.50.040.

B.     Sidewalk vendors shall not engage in any of the following activities:

1.     Renting merchandise to customers;

2.     Displaying merchandise or food that is not available for immediate sale;

3.     Selling of adult-oriented material, marijuana, or alcohol;

4.     Using an open flame on or within any sidewalk vending receptacle;

5.     All sidewalk vendors, regardless of whether a roaming sidewalk vendor or stationary sidewalk vendor, are prohibited from conducting sidewalk vending activities between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. daily or consistent with the hours of operation of the businesses on the same street. In residential areas, all stationary sidewalk vending is prohibited. In residential areas, roaming sidewalk vending activity is prohibited between the hours of 6:00 p.m. or sunset, whichever is earlier, and 9:00 a.m. of the following day, Monday through Saturday, inclusive, and all day on Sundays and federal holidays;

6.     Continuing to offer food or merchandise for sale, following, or accompanying any person who has been offered food or merchandise after the person has asked the vendor to leave or after the person has declined the offer to purchase food or merchandise;

7.     Knowingly making false statements or misrepresentations during the course of offering food or merchandise for sale;

8.     Blocking or impeding the path of the person(s) being offered food or merchandise to purchase;

9.     Making any statements, gesture, or other communication which a reasonable person in the situation of the person(s) being offered food or merchandise to purchase would perceive to be a threat and which has a reasonable likelihood to produce in the person(s) a fear that the threat will be carried out; and

10.   Touching the person(s) being offered to purchase food or merchandise without that person(s)’ consent.

C.    Sidewalk vendors shall not engage in sidewalk vending activities at the following locations:

1.     Within 12 inches of any curb face on all roads;

2.     Within 15 feet of any entrance or exit to a building, structure or facility;

3.     On any designated emergency vehicle access way;

4.     On any public property that does not meet the definition of a sidewalk or pathway including without limitation any alley, park, street, roadway or parking lot;

5.     Within the immediate vicinity of an area designated for a temporary special permit issued by the City, during the limited duration of the temporary special permit. If the City provides any notice, business interruption mitigation, or other rights to affected businesses or property owners under the City’s temporary special permit, such notice will also be provided to any sidewalk vendors specifically permitted to operate in the area, if applicable;

6.     On any private property without the express written consent of the owner or lessee of the property;

7.     Within 50 feet of another sidewalk vendor;

8.     Within 100 feet of a school, a place of worship, or a child day-care facility;

9.     Within 200 feet of a permitted certified farmers’ market or swap meet during the limited operating hours of that certified farmers’ market or swap meet;

10.   Stationary sidewalk vending activities shall only occur on sidewalks or pathways with a minimum width of eight feet or larger;

11.   Within 25 feet of a:

a.     Fire hydrant,

b.     Curb which has been designated as yellow or red zone, or a bus zone,

c.     Automated teller machine,

d.     Driveway, alley, or street corner,

e.     Trash or recycling receptacles, bike racks, benches, bus stops or similar public use items, and

f.      Public art objects, items, and displays;

12.   Sidewalk vendors shall not engage in sidewalk vending activities that would violate provisions of this Code relating to visibility requirements for streets, alleys, driveways, and intersections;

13.   Stationary sidewalk vendors shall not sell food or merchandise or engage in any sidewalk vending activities at any park where the City has signed an agreement for concessions that exclusively permits the sale of food or merchandise by a concessionaire;

14.   Sidewalk vendors shall not vend in pocket parks, including but not limited to, Shelton Park. These parks are situated in urban areas or commercial districts and serve to provide a respite for residents and visitors. These parks are small by design and any vending or commercial activity in these pocket parks shall prevent the public from enjoying the natural resources and recreational opportunities in the pocket parks. A prohibition on sidewalk (and all other) vending in these pocket parks will prevent an undue concentration of commercial activity that unreasonably interferes with the scenic and natural character of the park. Due to their small size, sidewalk vending in these pocket parks will result in an undue concentration of activity, resulting in health, safety, and welfare concerns;

15.   Sidewalk vendors shall not vend in Memorial Park. Such restriction is necessary to ensure the public’s use and enjoyment of the natural resources and recreational activities provided by this historical park. Visitors use this park as an escape from commercial activity, and sidewalk vending activities will cause congestion and commercial activity in direct contravention of the park’s purpose. This restriction is necessary to prevent an undue concentration of commercial activity that unreasonably interferes with the scenic and natural character of Memorial Park;

16.   On any sidewalk with a gradient in excess of 10%;

17.   Within 200 feet of any public safety facility, including without limitation police stations, and fire stations;

18.   Within 24 inches of a parallel parking space;

19.   On any sidewalk not adjacent to a state highway where vending equipment and queuing patrons would reduce clearance to less than four feet;

20.   On any sidewalk adjacent to a state highway where vending equipment and queuing patrons would reduce clearance to less than five feet, with temporary restrictions of no less than three feet;

21.   On any sidewalk where vending equipment and queuing patrons would restrict access requirements under the Americans with Disabilities Act; and

22.   On any sidewalk where vending equipment and queuing patrons would jeopardize the safety of any person.

D.    Sidewalk vending receptacles shall not touch, lean against or be affixed at any time to any building or structure including, but not limited to lampposts, parking meters, mailboxes, traffic signals, fire hydrants, benches, bus shelters, newsstands, trashcans, or traffic barriers. (19-04)

 

5.50.060 Penalties.
A.     Violations of this chapter shall not be prosecuted as infractions or misdemeanors and shall only be punished by the following administrative fine and rescission provisions:

B.     Any violation of this chapter may be punished by:

1.     An administrative fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation;

2.     An administrative fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation within one year of the first violation; and

3.     An administrative fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional violation within one year of the first violation.

C.    If a sidewalk vendor violates any portion of this chapter and cannot present the citing officer with a proof of a valid permit, the sidewalk vendor may be punished by:

1.     An administrative fine not exceeding $250.00 for a first violation;

2.     An administrative fine not exceeding $500.00 for a second violation within one year of the first violation; and

3.     An administrative fine not exceeding $1,000.00 for each additional violation within one year of the first violation.

D.    Upon proof of a valid permit issued by the City, the administrative fines set forth in subsection C shall be reduced to the administrative fines set forth in subsection B, or any successor sections.

E.     The Community Development Director, or designee, may rescind a permit issued to a sidewalk vendor for the term of that permit upon the fourth violation or subsequent violations. (19-04)

 

5.50.070 Appeals.
A.     Decisions to deny an application for a permit or to impose administrative fines may be appealed by any interested person. Appeals shall be heard and determined by the hearing officer.

B.     Appeals shall be initiated in writing within 15 calendar days of the decision or imposition of administrative fine. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a person appealing an administrative fine shall pay the administrative fine as a prerequisite to filing an appeal or request an advance deposit hardship waiver pursuant to Claremont Municipal Code Section 1.14.070.

C.    Appeals of decisions or administrative fines shall be made in writing to the hearing officer on forms provided by the City. The appeal shall state the facts and basis for the appeal.

D.    Appeals of a decision to deny an application for a permit shall be accompanied by a fee as established by resolution of the City Council.

E.     Decisions regarding administrative fines that are appealed shall not become effective until the appeal is resolved.

F.     The person requesting the hearing shall be notified of the time and place set for the hearing at least 10 calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. The hearing shall be set for a date that is not less than 15 calendar days from the date that a completed request for administrative hearing is filed in accordance with the above provisions.

G.    No hearing shall be held unless and until the fine or penalty has been deposited with the City Clerk or an advance deposit hardship waiver has been issued.

H.    The hearing officer shall give notice in writing to the appellant of the time and location of the appeal hearing. At the hearing, the hearing officer shall review the record of the decision or administrative fine and hear testimony of the appellant, if any, the applicant and any other interested party. The appeal shall be reviewed and determined on a de novo basis.

1.     If an administrative fine is the subject of an appeal, the hearing officer shall take into consideration the person’s ability to pay the fine. The hearing officer shall provide the person with notice of his or her right to request an ability-to-pay determination and shall make available instructions or other materials for requesting an ability-to-pay determination. The person may request an ability-to-pay determination at or before the hearing or while the administrative fine remains unpaid.

2.     If the person meets the criteria described in subdivision (a) or (b) of Government Code Section 68632, or any successor section, the hearing officer shall accept, in full satisfaction, 20% of the administrative fine imposed pursuant to this chapter.

3.     The hearing officer may allow the person to complete community service in lieu of paying the total administrative fine, may waive the administrative fine, or may offer an alternative disposition.

I.      After the hearing, the hearing officer shall affirm, modify or reverse the original decision or administrative fine. When a decision or administrative fine is modified or reversed, the hearing officer shall state the specific reasons for modification or reversal. Decisions on appeals shall be rendered within 30 calendar days of the close of the hearing. The hearing officer shall mail notice of a decision to the appellant. Such notice shall be mailed within five working days after the date of the decision to the appellant. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. If the person contesting an administrative citation prevails in a challenge to the citation, the City shall within 30 calendar days refund the full amount of the fine or penalty deposited. (19-04)

Chapter 5.52 SHARED MOBILITY PROGRAM
5.52.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this shared mobility program is to enhance mobility and access, ease traffic congestion, promote sustainability, and ensure the protection of public health and safety, including the safety of the public traveling by foot, bicycle, wheelchair, or any vehicle on public sidewalks, streets, other public rights-of-way and adjacent private property. (20-04)

 

5.52.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and phrases defined in this section shall have the following meanings:

“Abandon” means leaving any mobility device unattended in a public area without the City’s permission for any length of time.

“City Manager” means the City Manager or designee.

“Director” means the Community Development Director or designee.

“Mobility device” means any device by which a person can be transported, propelled, moved, or drawn, such as an electric bicycle, a standard bicycle, or an electric scooter.

“Operator” means a person or business entity that has obtained the City’s approval and a license from the City to rent, locate, display, offer, or place for rent shared mobility devices in any public area in accordance with this shared mobility program and any related administrative regulations.

“Prohibited mobility device” means any shared mobility device that has not been approved by City staff in accordance with this shared mobility program and any corresponding administrative regulations.

“Public area” means any outdoor area that is open to the public for public use, and owned or operated by the City, including, without limitation, the public right-of-way.

“Public right-of-way” means any alley, parkway, transportation path, roadway, sidewalk, trail, pathway, or street that is owned, dedicated by easement, operated, or controlled by the City.

“Restricted areas” means any areas within the City that the City has designated as off limits to the use or placement of shared mobility devices.

“Shared mobility device” means any mobility device that is rented or offered for rent in any public area. “Shared mobility device” does not include:

1.     Any mobility device that is owned by the person using it;

2.     Any mobility device that is being used with the owner’s permission, free of charge;

3.     A rental car;

4.     A taxicab;

5.     Any mobility device for people with disabilities, such as a wheelchair; or

6.     Any other device excluded pursuant to the City’s administrative regulations.

“Shared mobility program” means the program set forth in this chapter allowing one or more operator(s) to place shared mobility devices in public areas within City boundaries so the shared mobility devices may be rented by members of the public. (20-04)

 

5.52.030 Administrative regulations.
A.     The Director may adopt administrative regulations to implement the provisions of this chapter, which may include regulations relating to lawful conduct, prohibited conduct, public safety, data sharing, data privacy, and/or the timely removal of hazards. Any administrative regulations shall be published on the City’s website and available upon request at City Hall.

B.     Violation of any administrative regulation issued pursuant to this chapter shall constitute a violation of this Code and shall subject the violator to the penalties set forth in this Code. (20-04)

 

5.52.040 Prohibited conduct.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, persons (including operators) shall not:

A.     Rent or offer for rent any mobility device in any public area without an operator’s license issued pursuant to this chapter.

B.     Deploy, drop, abandon, leave, dock, park, or otherwise place (for any length of time) any mobility device in any public area in a manner that:

1.     Obstructs or blocks access to a path of travel, including, without limitation, a sidewalk, curb ramp, crosswalk, or doorway;

2.     Violates disability access laws, requirements, and/or regulations, such as the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and its implementing regulations;

3.     Poses a public safety hazard or nuisance; or

4.     Is otherwise prohibited by applicable local, state or federal laws or the City’s administrative regulations.

C.    Operate any mobility device at a speed that exceeds the limits set forth in the California Vehicle Code and the Claremont Municipal Code, including Claremont Municipal Code Sections 10.48.010 (Speed limits for certain streets) and 11.02.100 (Speed limits for public parks).

D.    Deploy, drop, abandon, leave, dock, park, or otherwise place (for any length of time) or use, rent, or offer for rent any prohibited mobility device in any public area.

E.     Deploy, drop, abandon, leave, dock, park, or otherwise place (for any length of time) or use, rent, or offer for rent any shared mobility device or prohibited mobility device in any restricted area. (20-04)

 

5.52.050 Operator license, fees, and other requirements.
A.     Operator’s License. An operator’s license is required to use any public area to rent out or offer for rent any mobility device.

B.     Application Processing. An application for an operator’s license shall be made on forms provided by the Director and shall be submitted with an application fee. The application shall include all information needed to determine compliance with this chapter and any administrative regulations. The application fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council. The Director shall have the authority to approve, conditionally approve, or deny an application for an operator’s license.

C.    Approval Criteria. An operator’s license shall not be approved or conditionally approved unless all of the following findings can be made:

1.     The operator’s shared mobility devices are safe, legal, clean, and well-maintained.

2.     The number of shared mobility devices the operator seeks to rent or offer for rent will not result in an oversaturation of shared mobility devices in the City or otherwise have an adverse impact on the public health, safety and welfare.

3.     The operator has rules, protocols, and staffing to ensure its shared mobility devices will not be used in restricted areas.

4.     The operator has rules, protocols, and staffing to ensure its shared mobility devices will not be used or abandoned in public areas in a manner that interferes with pedestrian or vehicular travel or disability access, or otherwise creates a safety hazard or public nuisance.

5.     The operator has one or more representatives that will be responsive to City concerns twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week.

6.     The operator has agreed to uphold the indemnification requirements set forth in this chapter and has provided proof of the insurance required by this chapter.

7.     The operator has obtained or has concurrently applied for a tax certificate in accordance with Chapter 4.10 of this Code and, if necessary, a business permit in accordance with Chapter 5.20 of this Code.

8.     The Director has approved a finding of similar use pursuant to Chapter 16.339 of this Code.

D.    Ongoing Operator’s License Fees. The City Council may establish license fees by resolution, which shall both defray the City’s costs of administering and enforcing the provisions of this chapter and compensate the City for allowing an operator to use public areas to rent, locate, display, offer, or place for rent shared mobility devices.

E.     Term and Renewals of Operator’s License. The term of an operator’s license shall not exceed one year. The Director may create a streamlined application process for requests to renew an operator’s license.

F.     Revocation or Suspension of Operator’s License. Failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter (including the approval criteria listed above), any administrative regulations issued pursuant to this chapter, or any federal, state, or local law shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of an operator’s license. The Director shall provide the operator with written notice of the revocation or suspension that set forth the basis for his or her decision.

G.    Appeals. An applicant for or holder of an operator’s license may appeal a Director decision regarding issuance, denial, revocation, or suspension of an operator’s license to the City Council. Appeals must be submitted to the City Clerk within ten calendar days of the decision on which the appeal is based. The appeal shall be in writing and the appeal shall be submitted with an appeal fee in the amount established by resolution of the City Council. The appellant shall set forth his or her reason(s) for asserting that a decision or action was in error, or in violation of this Code, or any other applicable law. Unless the Director determines the public health or safety requires otherwise, any decision that is being appealed shall be suspended until a decision on the appeal has been made. (20-04)

 

5.52.060 Operator indemnity and insurance requirements.
A.     By accepting an operator’s license and/or renting or offering to rent shared mobility devices in the City, an operator shall indemnify, defend (at operator’s sole cost and expense with counsel of the City’s choosing), and hold harmless the City, and its officers, officials, employees, representatives, and agents from any and all claims, damages, injuries, liabilities or losses which arise out of, or in any way relate to, the City’s issuance of the operator’s license or the operator’s activities and operations in the City, including, without limitation, any alleged violation of any federal, state or local laws by the operator or by the users of the operator’s shared mobility devices, and any and all claims, damages, injuries, liabilities or losses to claimed by the users of operator’s shared mobility devices or any third party, arising out of, or in any way related to, operator’s activities and operations. The City and operator may enter into an indemnification agreement to refine the scope and terms of this indemnification obligation, which agreement must be approved by the City Manager in a form acceptable to the City Attorney. The lack of an indemnification agreement does not relieve an operator of the indemnification obligations set for this section.

B.     An operator shall maintain insurance at coverage limits, and with conditions thereon, as determined by the Director as necessary and appropriate. The operator’s insurance policies shall name the City of Claremont as an additional insured. Prior to commencing operations, the operator shall provide proof of insurance to the Director. The operator shall notify the City within ten days if its insurance coverage is reduced or terminated. Failure to maintain adequate insurance coverage shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of an operator’s license. The insurance coverage required by this paragraph shall not in any way limit an operator’s indemnification obligations set forth in the previous subsection. (20-04)

 

5.52.070 Impoundment of mobility devices.
A.     Mobility devices that are deployed, dropped, abandoned, left, docked, parked, or otherwise placed (for any length of time) or used, rented, or offered for rent, in any manner that violate this chapter constitute a public nuisance are shall be subject to immediate impoundment by the City.

B.     The City Council may adopt impound fees by resolution, which shall not exceed the costs of enforcement, investigation, administration, storage, and impoundment.

C.    No person shall retrieve any impounded mobility device except upon demonstrating proper proof of ownership of the device and payment of applicable impound fees.

D.    Any mobility device not retrieved from impound after more than thirty calendar days shall be deemed abandoned and may, in the City Manager’s discretion, be destroyed or auctioned in accordance with applicable state law. (20-04)

 

5.52.080 Docking stations, bike racks, or other parking facilities for mobility devices.
A.     Advance approval of the Director is required to place a docking station, bike rack, or any other kind of parking facility for shared mobility devices in a public area. The City may immediately remove and impound an unauthorized docking station, bike rack, or parking facility from a public area.

B.     The City Council may adopt impound fees by resolution, which shall not exceed the costs of enforcement, investigation, administration, storage, and impoundment.

C.    No person shall retrieve any impounded docking station, bike rack, or parking facility except upon demonstrating proper proof of ownership and payment of applicable impound fees and any costs the City incurred restoring the public area to its original condition.

D.    Any docking station, bike rack, or parking facility not retrieved from impound after more than thirty calendar days shall be deemed abandoned and may, in the City Manager’s discretion, be destroyed or auctioned in accordance with applicable state law. (20-04)

 

5.52.090 Enforcement and remedies.
A.     Criminal Fines and Penalties. Any person responsible for violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction or a misdemeanor at the discretion of the City Attorney and/or district attorney. Upon conviction, the person shall be punished as prescribed in Chapter 1.12.

B.     Administrative Fines and Penalties. Whenever an officer charged with the enforcement of any provision of this Municipal Code determines that a violation of this chapter has occurred, the officer shall have the authority to issue an administrative citation to any person responsible for the violation in accordance with Chapter 1.14.

C.    Public Nuisance. Any use or condition caused, or permitted to exist, in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be, and is hereby declared to be, a public nuisance and may be summarily abated by the City pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 731 or any other remedy available at law.

D.    Civil Action. In addition to any other enforcement permitted by the City’s Municipal Code, the City Attorney may bring a civil action for injunctive relief and civil penalties against any person who violates any provision of this chapter. In any civil action that is brought pursuant to this chapter, a court of competent jurisdiction may award civil penalties and costs to the prevailing party.

E.     License Revocation. Any violation of this chapter may result in revocation of an operator’s license in accordance with Section 5.52.050. (20-04)

 

5.52.100 Term of pilot program.
This chapter is originally adopted as a temporary pilot program that the City Council may suspend or terminate at any time. This chapter shall be automatically repealed in its entirety on August 6, 2023 unless the City Council amends the Municipal Code to remove this section. (20-04)

TITLE 6 ANIMALS
Chapter 6.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 6.08 SHELTERMASTER
Chapter 6.12 DOGS AND CATS
Chapter 6.16 RABIES CONTROL
Chapter 6.20 LIVESTOCK, FOWL AND OTHER ANIMALS
Chapter 6.24 VECTOR CONTROL AND MANAGEMENT

Chapter 6.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
6.04.010 Purpose of title.
A.     The purpose of this title is to:

1.     Provide for the orderly regulation of dogs, cats, other common pets, domesticated animals and wild animals, when such animals are used for noncommercial uses (commercial uses are dealt with in the zoning ordinances on file in the City Clerk’s office);

2.     Provide for humane care and treatment of all animals; and

3.     Provide for the protection of the general public from unwarranted intrusions into their lives by nuisances caused by animals or their owners.

B.     In general, the intent and direction of this title is to discourage the keeping of wild animals and domestic animals which are not normally compatible with urban living, and to encourage the protection of animals and the rights of citizens by providing strict controls upon the proliferation of strays. (Prior code § 4.1)

 

6.04.020 Animals—Humane treatment required.
To ensure the humane and reasonable treatment of animals, it is unlawful for any person owning any animal, or having custody of any animal to fail to observe the following rules concerning the management and care of such animal:

A.     All animals shall be supplied with sufficient good and wholesome food and water as the feeding habits of such animals require;

B.     Proper shelter and protection from the weather shall be provided for all animals at all times. The quarters in which the animals are kept must be clean, and adequately ventilated with the proper size and temperature maintained according to needs of the species;

C.    Animals shall not be without attention for a period of time in excess of eighteen consecutive hours;

D.    Every reasonable precaution shall be used to insure that animals are not teased or abused, mistreated, annoyed, tormented or made to suffer;

E.     Humane society officers are authorized by other provisions of this chapter to enter private property for the purpose of investigating and enforcing all provisions of this chapter. (98-03)

Chapter 6.08 SHELTERMASTER
6.08.010 Responsibility to City Manager—Deputization authority.
The sheltermaster shall be responsible to the City Manager or persons authorized by him or her in all matters of enforcing the provisions of this title. The sheltermaster, the animal license collector and the animal control officer may be the same person. The sheltermaster may deputize persons to act for him or her in carrying out provisions of this title. (98-03; prior code § 4.2)

 

6.08.020 Duties generally.
The sheltermaster shall be in charge of the City shelter and shall keep a record of all animals licensed, permitted, impounded, redeemed, disposed of or sold. (98-03; prior code § 4.4)

 

6.08.030 Citation authority.
The sheltermaster or his or her deputies are empowered with the authority to issue citations for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. (98-03; prior code § 4.3)

 

6.08.040 Right of entry.
The sheltermaster, for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this title relative to the impounding of animals, shall have the right of entry, exclusive of a residential dwelling, upon any premises upon which any animal is kept or harbored, to investigate complaints relative to provisions of this title and/or to demand the exhibition by the person owning or having charge or control of any such animal of any license, permit or tag for such animal for the current year. Further, he or she may enter upon any premises while in the active pursuit of stray animals. (98-03; prior code § 4.6)

 

6.08.050 Surrender of strays to poundmaster.
Any person taking up a stray domestic animal, other than a dog or cat, shall surrender such animal to the sheltermaster and if such animal is not claimed within three days (seventy-two hours) from such ensheltering, it shall become the property of the sheltermaster. (98-03; prior code § 4.7)

 

6.08.060 Interference with poundmaster prohibited.
No person shall rescue, or attempt to rescue, any animal, domestic or otherwise, from the possession of the sheltermaster. Possession includes conveyance to the shelter as well as confinement in the shelter. No person shall interfere in any manner whatsoever with the sheltermaster, a police officer or other officer deputized by the Chief of Police, while carrying out any provision of this title. (98-03; prior code § 4.5)

Chapter 6.12 DOGS AND CATS
6.12.010 Definitions.
“Cat” means a feline more than four months of age.

“Dog” means a canine more than four months of age.

“Kennel” means any lot, building, structure, enclosure or premises wherein four or more dogs or four or more cats are kept, whether for commercial, noncommercial or veterinary purposes, including places where dogs or cats are boarded, kept for sale or kept for hire.

“Service animal” means any dog that is individually trained to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability, including a physical, sensory, psychiatric, intellectual, or other mental disability. Other species of animals, whether wild or domestic, trained or untrained, are not service animals for the purposes of this definition. The work or tasks performed by a service animal must be directly related to the individual’s disability. Examples of work or tasks include, but are not limited to, assisting individuals who are blind or have low vision with navigation and other tasks, alerting individuals who are deaf or hard of hearing to the presence of people or sounds, providing non-violent protection or rescue work, pulling a wheelchair, assisting an individual during a seizure, alerting individuals to the presence of allergens, retrieving items such as medicine or the telephone, providing physical support and assistance with balance and stability to individuals with mobility disabilities, and helping persons with psychiatric and neurological disabilities by preventing or interrupting impulsive or destructive behaviors. The crime deterrent effects of an animal’s presence and the provision of emotional support, well-being, comfort, or companionship do not constitute work or tasks for the purposes of this definition. (14-07; prior code § 4.8)

 

6.12.020 Dog license—Application—Vaccination certificate required.
A.     Every person owning or having custody or control of any dog over the age of four months shall pay an annual license fee for each dog.

B.     Every person applying for a dog license, whether to the contracting shelter service of the City or to the City Clerk, must exhibit a certificate issued by a person licensed by this state, or any other state or nation, to practice veterinary medicine, which certificate shall show that dog for which the license shall be issued has been vaccinated in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.16.010. A kennel license may be issued (See Section 6.12.250); provided, however, no dog may be sold or removed from such kennel without complying with the provisions of this title relating to vaccination, contained in Section 6.16.010. (98-03; prior code § 4.14)

 

6.12.030 Dog license fees—Exemption from requirements—Service dogs.
A.     A service dog, also known as a service animal, owned by a person with a disability or a dog owned by a law enforcement agency as a police service dog shall be exempt from the license fee requirements of this title; provided, that the animal license collector is shown some proof that such dog has been vaccinated as required by this title.

B.     A police service dog is exempt from the license fee requirements and leashing requirements of this chapter when engaged in law enforcement related operations. (14-07)

 

6.12.040 Dog license—Animal license collector—Duties.
The animal license collector shall be responsible for collecting dog licenses, permit fees, redemption fees, disposal fees and proceeds from the sale of dogs or cats, if any. An appropriate receipt shall be given to all persons paying the license fees required by this chapter. (Prior code § 4.13)

 

6.12.050 Dog license—Animal license collector—Responsibility.
The animal license collector shall be responsible to the City Manager. (Prior code § 4.12)

 

6.12.060 Dog license—Fee—Council determination.
The City Council may by resolution determine, fix and establish fees or charges to be paid for licensing dogs. (75-12; prior code § 4.16)

 

6.12.070 Dog license—Initial.
An initial license shall be purchased for a dog by its owner within thirty days after the dog reaches four months of age, or within thirty days after the dog is brought into the City, whichever is later. A one-year license shall expire twelve months after issuance. A two-year license shall expire twenty-four months after issuance. (84-18; 83-6; prior code § 4.17)

 

6.12.075 Dog license renewal.
Dog licenses shall be renewed by the dog’s owner within thirty days after expiration of the previous license. One-year renewal licenses shall expire twelve months after the expiration date of the previous license. Two-year renewal licenses shall expire twenty-four months after the expiration date of the previous license. (84-18; 83-6)

 

6.12.080 Penalties.
If timely purchase of an initial dog license is not made, or if a renewal license is not purchased within thirty days after the expiration of the previous license, a penalty fee shall be due before the issuance of a new license. The amount of the penalty shall be determined by a resolution of the City Council. (83-6; 81-16; 76-9; prior code § 4.18)

 

6.12.090 Dog license—Tag—Issuance.
Upon the payment of a fee for a dog license, the animal license collector shall issue a consecutively numbered tag, which bears the date of expiration and the words “City of Claremont.” (Prior code § 4.19)

 

6.12.100 Dog license—Tag—Recordkeeping.
The animal license collector shall keep a register of each dog tag issued with the name and address of the owner, a description of the dog and the date of issuance. (Prior code § 4.20)

 

6.12.110 Dog license—Tag—Wearing regulations.
The tag issued by the animal license collector for an individual dog shall be securely affixed to a collar, harness or other device which shall be worn by such dog at all times, except when such dog remains indoors or in an enclosed yard or pen. (Prior code § 4.21)

 

6.12.120 Dog license—Tag—Duplicate issuance.
The animal license collector may issue a duplicate or new license tag in the event the original license tag is lost or destroyed, upon payment therefor of the sum of one dollar. (Prior code § 4.22)

 

6.12.130 Dog license—Tag—Counterfeit prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to attach to or keep on, or cause or permit to be attached or kept upon any dog, any counterfeit or imitation tag except that tag issued under the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 4.23)

 

6.12.140 Dog license—Tag—Unauthorized removal prohibited.
No unauthorized person shall remove from any dog, any tag, collar, harness or other device to which is attached a dog tag for the current year. (Prior code § 4.24)

 

6.12.150 Dog license—Tag—Exhibition on demand.
A person, upon whom any demand is made under authority of this chapter for the exhibition of any license or tag, shall exhibit such tag to the authority. (Prior code § 4.25)

 

6.12.160 Cat license—Voluntary—Fee—Issuance.
Owners of cats may license their cats on a voluntary basis by paying an annual license fee of three dollars. The animal license collector shall then issue a numbered license tag to the owners. This section is designed to provide the cat owner with a means of registering his or her cat in the event that the cat is lost or stolen, so that a return of the cat to the owner is made easier. This section is not intended nor shall it be construed to mean the requiring of licenses for cats. (Prior code § 4.26)

 

6.12.170 Dogs—Humane treatment required.
To ensure the humane and reasonable treatment of dogs it is unlawful for any person owning a dog or having custody of a dog to fail to observe the following rules concerning the management and care of such animal:

A.     All dogs shall be supplied with sufficient good and wholesome food and water as the feeding habits of such dog require;

B.     Proper shelter and protection from the weather shall be provided for dogs at all times and they shall not be exposed to excessive heat or cold. The quarters in which dogs are kept must be clean, and adequately ventilated and draft-free, with the proper temperature maintained for dogs;

C.    Dogs not within entirely closed shelter between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. may be impounded by the humane society officer or police officer who may enter private property for such purpose if such dog is reported to be a nuisance by a neighbor and the occupant of the premises is either not in attendance on the property or who, after being given notice by the humane society officer or police officer, does not immediately put the dog in an entirely closed shelter. Dogs so impounded by the humane society may be returned to the owner upon payment of the boarding costs of such dog during the time it was impounded. If the dog is so impounded, notice thereof will be given by mail within twenty-four hours to the address the dog was taken of such impounding, and notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises in the absence of the owner;

D.    Dogs shall not be without attention for a period of time in excess of eighteen consecutive hours;

E.     Every reasonable precaution shall be used to insure that dogs are not teased or abused, mistreated, annoyed, tormented or made to suffer;

F.     Humane society officers are authorized by other provisions of this chapter to enter private property for the purpose of investigating and enforcing all provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 4.50)

 

6.12.180 Dogs and service animals—Leashing requirements.
A.     Dogs—Leashing Requirements. No person owning or having charge, care, custody or control of any dog shall cause, permit or allow the same to be at large or to run upon any highway, street, lane, alley or other public place or upon any private property or premises other than those of the person owning or having charge, care, custody or control in the City, unless such dog is controlled by a harness, leash, or other tether and is in the charge, care, custody or control of a competent person. Provided, dogs may be off-leash in designated off-leash areas in a City park or other designated public areas.

B.     Service Animals—Leashing Requirements. A service animal, as defined in this chapter, shall be under the control of its handler. A service animal shall have a harness, leash, or other tether, unless either the handler is unable because of a disability to use a harness, leash, or other tether, or the use of a harness, leash, or other tether would interfere with the service animal’s safe, effective performance of work or tasks, in which case the service animal must be otherwise under the handler’s control (e.g., voice control, signals, or other effective means).

C.    Police Service Dogs—Exemption. A police service dog is exempt from the leashing requirements of this chapter when engaged in law enforcement activities. (14-07)

 

6.12.190 Barking dogs—Deemed nuisance.
A dog which barks in a substantially continuous manner in the daytime or nighttime to the annoyance of people in the neighborhood is declared to be a nuisance which may be abated by the procedures provided in this chapter. (Prior code § 4.10)

 

6.12.200 Barking dogs—Declaration of complaint.
Declarations under penalty of perjury must be filed with the sheltermaster by two (2) declarants living in separate households. Both declarations shall be filed within the same sixty (60) day period and shall state in detail all of the following:

A.     That the declarant is a resident of a residential neighborhood located within two hundred (200) yards of the boundaries of the premises where the dog is located;

B.     Within the past month the declarant has heard the dog bark for a substantially long period to the extreme annoyance of the declarant; and

C.    That the declarant has mailed a copy of the declaration, by certified mail, to the owner of the dog. (98-03)

 

6.12.210 Barking dogs—Humane society.
Upon receipt of two (2) such declarations, the City’s sheltermaster shall assign an officer to investigate the complaint. The officer shall personally interview both complainants and the dog owner. The officer shall determine if the declarations have merit. If they do have merit, the officer shall instruct the dog owner to abate the nuisance created by the barking dog. (98-03; prior code § 4.10-2)

 

6.12.220 Barking dogs—Hearing—Notice.
A.     If any further complaint in the form of a declaration satisfying the requirements of Section 6.12.200 is received by the sheltermaster concerning the same dog, within a six (6) month period from the date of the last initial declaration, the sheltermaster may take action by notifying the dog owner or the person having custody of the dog by certified mail, return receipt requested, that an administrative hearing is to be held at least ten days from the date the notice is received, concerning the nuisance created by the dog.

B.     At the time and place of the hearing, each complaining witness and the sheltermaster officer or designee must be present. If any of these parties are not present, the hearing may be continued to a time and place convenient to the hearing officer and those present. If the complaining parties who filed written complaints and the sheltermaster or his or her designee are not present on the continued date, all proceedings shall terminate.

C.    The hearing officer shall hear all facts and testimony which he or she deems pertinent. Such facts and testimony may include all evidence relevant to the nature of the complaint. The hearing officer shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the dog, or the person having custody of the dog, may present a written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility, with reasons for such denial. In the case of a barking dog, such reasons for denial might include barking to protect the residence on the property from trespassers, other animals on the property, or that the barking is in response to sirens or other unusual noises.

D.    The hearing officer may impose such conditions and take such other action as deemed appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purposes of this chapter. For example, in the case of a barking dog, the hearing officer may give the dog owner or the person having custody of the dog, more time to control the dog’s barking, if it is the officer’s opinion that the circumstances so justify. At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer may find that the dog constitutes a public nuisance and can order that the nuisance be abated by among other things removing the dog from the dog owner’s property and/or disposing of the dog as provided in this chapter and state law. The hearing officer’s order shall state the costs assessed against the dog owner or the person controlling the dog, and determine the administrative costs and costs of removal to be charged against the owner of the dog or person who has custody of the dog.

E.     The hearing officer’s order shall inform the dog owner or the person in control of the dog of their right to appeal the order in accordance with Section 6.12.230. The decision of the hearing officer shall become final after written notice thereof is mailed to the owner of the dog or the person having custody of the dog, unless an appeal to the appellate hearing officer is filed. (98-03; prior code § 4.10-3)

 

6.12.230 Appeal to the appellate hearing officer.
A.     The dog owner or person having custody of the dog, may appeal the final order of the hearing officer finding and ordering the abatement of the public nuisance created by the dog to an appellate hearing officer appointed by the Chief of Police. Said appeal must be in writing and must be filed with the appellate hearing officer no later than fourteen (14) days from the date of the original hearing officer’s order. After fourteen (14) days of the original hearing officer’s order, the order is deemed final and may no longer be appealed.

B.     All written appeals shall be filed in triplicate with the City Clerk and shall state the grounds for such appeal and the specific factual and/or legal errors committed by the original hearing officer in issuing the order finding and ordering the abatement of the public nuisance.

C.    The appeal must contain:

1.     A specific identification of the dog and the owner’s subject property on which the dog resides;

2.     The names and addresses of all appellants;

3.     A statement of appellant’s legal interest in the dog;

4.     A statement, in ordinary and concise language, of the specific order or action protested and the grounds for appeal, together with all supporting material facts;

5.     The date and signatures of all appellants; and

6.     The verification of at least one appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal.

 

D.    The City Clerk shall then transmit one copy each of the written appeal to the City Manager, sheltermaster and the Chief of Police.

E.     No later than twenty-one (21) days from the date of the City Clerk’s receipt of the written appeal, he/she shall obtain from the sheltermaster and transmit to the City Council the records of all hearings and copies of all papers submitted, and orders given. The sheltermaster shall also submit a written report, stating the factual and legal basis upon which the original hearing officer reached his/her decision.

F.     Within forty-five (45) days from the date of the City Clerk’s receipt of the written appeal, the appellate hearing officer shall notify the dog owner or the person having custody of the dog by certified mail, return receipt requested, that an administrative appeal hearing is to be held at least ten (10) days from the date the notice is received, concerning the nuisance created by the dog.

G.    At the time and place of the appellate hearing, each appellant and the sheltermaster officer or designee must be present. If any of these parties are not present, the hearing may be continued to a time and place convenient to the appellate hearing officer and those present, or the appellate hearing officer may arrange, pursuant to his or her sole discretion, to hear from the various parties at different times. The dog owner or the person having custody of the dog shall have the right to be present at any such hearing, to ask questions of any party submitting oral testimony to the appellate hearing officer, and to present any relevant oral testimony to the appellate hearing officer. If the appellant(s) fail to appear on the continued hearing date, the appellate hearing officer shall determine that the orders of the original hearing officer shall stand and shall be final.

H.    The appellate hearing officer shall hear all facts and testimony which he or she deems pertinent. Such facts and testimony may include all evidence relevant to the nature of the complaint. The hearing officer shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the dog, or the person having custody of the dog, may not present any written statement other than the written appeal.

I.      After hearing all facts and testimony which he or she deems pertinent and reviewing the entire record, the sheltermaster’s report, and appellant’s written appeal, the appellate hearing officer shall issue a resolution affirming, reversing, or modifying, in whole or in part, either the order finding and ordering the abatement of a public nuisance or the order determining the cost of abatement. Such resolution shall be served within ten (10) days of the date of the hearing upon the owners, or other appellants, and shall inform the appellants of their right to file a judicial action to appeal said decision within thirty (30) days. The decision of the appellate hearing officer shall be final.

J.     On the date a written appeal is filed under this section, all proceedings in furtherance of the order appealed from shall be stayed until the final determination by the appellate hearing officer of the appeal, unless the Chief of Police finds, in accordance with this chapter and state law, that the dog constitutes an immediate threat to the health, safety or welfare of persons or property and must be abated immediately. (98-03; prior code § 4.10-4)

 

6.12.235 Enforcement alternatives.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the appellate hearing officer from ordering the City Attorney or requesting that the district attorney commence a civil or criminal proceeding to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (93-08)

 

6.12.240 Barking dogs—Disposition.
The dog shall be kept by the humane society for at least ten days after notice of the decision is given by certified mail to the owner that the dog has been declared a nuisance. The owner shall be notified of such time period the dog will be held to allow the owner the opportunity to obtain judicial remedy if desired. If no court order is issued after such period preventing it, the humane society shall make every effort to place such dog for adoption in a rural area where it will not be a disturbance to any surrounding neighborhood. (Prior code § 4.10-5)

 

6.12.245 Assessment of costs.
If a dog is determined to be a public nuisance, the dog owner or the person having custody of the dog, will be charged with the administrative costs of the hearing and any costs of the abatement of the nuisance which may include the removal of the dog pursuant to this chapter. If the costs and charges stated herein are not paid within thirty (30) days after the date of the order, or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom:

A.     Such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land where the dog is/was kept, pursuant to the provisions of Section 38773.5 of the Government Code of the State and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. Such assessment shall have the same priority as other City taxes; or,

B.     If the dog’s owner, or the person in whose custody the dog is, is not the owner of the parcel of land on which the dog was kept, such costs and charges may be collected from the dog owner, or the person having custody of the dog is, in a civil action commenced by the City in a court of competent jurisdiction over the matter. (98-03)

 

6.12.250 Kennel—License required.
Any person owning, conducting, managing or operating any kennel engaged in the business of raising, breeding, boarding or housing dogs or cats shall pay for a regular business license in lieu of any individual dog license as required under Section 6.12.020. (Prior code § 4.11)

 

6.12.260 Kennels—Where permitted.
A kennel may be maintained or constructed within the City district only as permitted by the Claremont Municipal Code. (87-12; prior code § 4.11)

 

6.12.270 Number of dogs and cats permitted in households.
It is unlawful for any person owning or leasing one household to own or keep more than three adult dogs or three adult cats within a single-family home or multifamily residential unit. Upon proper ten-day notice to the owner of the animals, the City shall authorize the sheltermaster to inspect the site for compliance and remove that number of animals which exceed the provisions of this section. (98-03)

 

6.12.280 Impoundment—Destructive animals.
The sheltermaster is authorized to capture and remove and keep in a pound designated by the City Council, any cat or dog which has injured or destroyed any real or personal property, or has molested or injured any person, contrary to the provisions of this chapter, or any dog or cat being maintained in violation of Sections 6.12.020, 6.12.180, 6.12.190, 6.12.290, 6.20.070, 6.20.130 or 6.20.140 of this Code. (98-03; prior code § 4.27)

 

6.12.290 Impoundment—Female dogs and cats in heat.
Any unspayed female dog or cat which is allowed to run at large or which is not kept upon the premises of the owner, caretaker or custodian thereof during the period when such female dog or cat is in heat, is declared to constitute a nuisance and such female dog or cat may be impounded by the sheltermaster for the period as such female dog or cat may be in heat. (98-03; prior code § 4.28)

 

6.12.300 Impoundment—Stray animals—Impound and boarding fees.
The sheltermaster is authorized and directed to impound all stray animals, domestic and otherwise, roaming at large in the City, and to impound all animals as otherwise provided in this chapter. Before such animals shall be released to their owner, the owner shall pay the impound, boarding and other fees. The amount of such fees shall be established from time to time by resolution of the City Council. (98-03; 76-9; prior code § 4.30)

 

6.12.310 Impounded animals—Redemption—Failure to redeem.
A list of all impounded animals and a general description of the same shall be maintained, and where the owner, caretaker, or custodian is known, he or she shall be notified that his or her animal has been impounded. Such owner, caretaker, or custodian may redeem the animal(s) by payment of the required impound fees and if such animal has not been licensed and vaccinated as required by this Code, such animal may be redeemed by the payment of license fee and penalty required in this Code and obtaining a vaccination as required in this Code. Any such animal not redeemed by the owner, caretaker or custodian within seventy-two (72) hours after the posting of such notice shall thereupon become the property of the sheltermaster, except that animals with license or identification tags shall be held for five (5) days (one hundred twenty hours) before becoming the property of the sheltermaster. (98-03; prior code § 4.29)

 

6.12.320 Impounded animals—Recordkeeping.
A record of impounded animals, those which have been redeemed, and dogs and cats which have been destroyed shall be kept by the sheltermaster, who shall keep a monthly report thereof, together with a monthly report of all fees collected by him or her. Such reports shall be made to the City Manager upon written request. (98-03; prior code § 4.31)

 

6.12.330 Seizure and impoundment of stray or abandoned animals—Hearings to determine whether seizure or impoundment is proper.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code or State law, Penal Code section 597.1 (as amended from time to time, and any successor statute to Penal Code section 597.1 if one is enacted), relating to the seizure and impoundment of stray or abandoned animals, shall be operative and enforced in the City.

Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code to the contrary, hearings authorized or required under Penal Code section 597.1, shall be conducted before a hearing officer designated or authorized by the City Manager. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final when rendered. However, an owner may, within ten (10) days of the decision, file a request in writing with the City Manager, that the City Manager review the decision. The request for review shall set forth any claimed error. The City Manager may, in his or her discretion, within ten (10) days after the request for review is filed, affirm, alter or set aside the decision of the hearing officer, or order that a new hearing take place. Unless the City Manager acts on the request within such ten (10) days, the request for review shall be deemed denied. There shall be no appeal of the decision of the City Manager. (98-03)

Chapter 6.16 RABIES CONTROL
6.16.010 Immunization required when.
Any person or persons having charge, care, control, custody or possession of any dog four months of age or older within the corporate limits of the City shall cause such dog to be vaccinated with rabies vaccine by a person licensed by the State of California, or other state, to practice veterinary medicine, on or before the latest of the following dates:

A.     One year after vaccination with tissue phenolized vaccine;

B.     Two years after vaccination with chick embryo vaccine;

C.    Fifteen days after first acquiring such dog;

D.    Fifteen days after bringing such dog within the incorporated territory of the City, unless such dog falls within the provisions of subsections A or B of this section. (Prior code § 4.32)

 

6.16.020 Immunization periods—Certificate of immunization.
Immunization shall be made every other year with chick embryo vaccine (a two-year vaccine) and a certificate of immunization presented to the sheltermaster at the time application is made for the issuance of the annual dog license tag. If chick embryo vaccine was used in such vaccination, it must have been completed within two years prior to the date such dog was kept, harbored or brought into the City. If tissue phenolized vaccine was used, such vaccination must have been completed within one year prior to the date such dog was kept, harbored, or brought into the City. (98-03; prior code § 4.34)

 

6.16.030 Authority of licensed veterinarians.
Any veterinarian, who is licensed to practice by the state, is authorized to immunize dogs against rabies, and to issue a certificate of immunization to the dog owner and a copy to the agency or department responsible for the enforcement of animal control. (84-18; prior code § 4.33)

 

6.16.040 Dog showing rabies symptoms—Investigation—Action.
Whenever a dog exhibiting the symptoms of rabies is found within the City, the health officer shall investigate the extent of the prevalence of the disease and if, in his or her opinion, an emergency exists, he or she shall take such steps as he or she deems necessary to prevent further spread of the disease. (Prior code § 4.35)

Chapter 6.20 LIVESTOCK, FOWL AND OTHER ANIMALS
6.20.010 Definitions.
“Birds” means canary, parakeet, finch, pigeon, dove or other bird normally raised as a household pet.

“Fish” means goldfish, tropical fish and other such fish customarily maintained in a household aquarium, except piranhas.

“Fowl” means chicken, duck, goose, turkey or other bird normally raised for meat or egg production.

“Large animal” means horse, cow, sheep, goat, donkey or similar animal which is normally housed in a corral or stable.

“Reptiles and amphibians” means snakes, salamanders, lizards, frogs, toads, turtles and tortoises, all nonpoisonous.

“Small animal” means rabbit, hamster, guinea pig, mouse, white rat or similar animal that is normally raised as a pet and housed in a cage or pen.

“Wild or exotic animal” means any animal which occurs naturally in the State of California or cannot be legally bought or sold in the State of California or requires special permitting by the California Department of Fish and Game or the United States Department of Agriculture. (98-03; prior code § 4.36)

 

6.20.020 Exemption from provisions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to animals, fowl or birds under four months of age, or to pet or animal shops or stores or for training or research purposes at educational institutions or hospitals. (Prior code § 4.38)

 

6.20.030 Permitted number of animals.
A.     The keeping of large animals shall be permitted only on a lot with a minimum net area of twenty thousand square feet, with one animal allowed for the first twenty thousand square feet, and one for each additional fifteen thousand square feet up to a maximum of four animals.

1.     Large animals shall be kept in a fenced corral area of at least five hundred seventy-six square feet for each animal. The corral and stable shall be located not less than fifty feet from all neighboring dwellings.

2.     An overhead cover to screen direct sunlight, wind and rain shall be provided to serve all of the large animals which are maintained on the property; it shall be of such construction that it is waterproof and will not be damaged by wind or rain.

3.     Any effects such as odors, dust, and flies which may be created from the keeping of such animals shall not be detectable from adjacent properties.

4.     Animal stock shall not generate noise in a substantially continuous manner in the daytime or nighttime to the annoyance of people within the neighborhood. Such a disturbance may be declared a nuisance, which may be abated by the procedures provided in Chapter 6.12 of this Code.

5.     The enclosure and barn areas shall be of an appropriate size and type to accommodate the type of animal, and shall be maintained in a neat and orderly manner.

B.     Not more than three fowl (except as noted in Section 6.20.090) shall be kept or maintained on any single-family residential property as defined in the zoning code of the City. There shall be no prescribed limit to the number of birds (except pigeons), fish, reptiles, amphibians or small animals permitted on any property, provided that such animals are not used for commercial purposes. Pigeons shall be limited to twenty-four on any single-family residential property except as may otherwise be allowed under Section 6.20.090. (87-10; prior code § 4.37)

 

6.20.040 Certain animals prohibited where.
No large animals, fowl, pigeons, or doves may be maintained in any residence in the City other than in a single-family residence. (Prior code § 4.39)

 

6.20.050 Swine prohibited.
Under no circumstances shall any animal of the swine family be kept or maintained on any property in the City. (Prior code § 4.40)

 

6.20.060 Roosters prohibited.
The provisions of Section 6.16.030 notwithstanding, under no circumstances shall any rooster be kept or maintained on any property in the City. (Prior code § 4.41)

 

6.20.070 Dangerous animals prohibited.
No person shall own or keep any animal that is dangerous or a menace to the public or an individual. Upon a finding by the court that such animal is dangerous or a menace, it is unlawful for any person to keep, or cause to be kept, such animal within the City. Any license or permit pertaining to such animal shall be revoked. Unless such animal is removed from the City within twenty-four (24) hours after the court finds the animal to be dangerous or a menace, such animal shall be summarily destroyed by the sheltermaster in accordance with State law. (98-03; prior code § 4.42)

 

6.20.080 Wild animals—Prohibited.
Except as provided in Sections 6.20.030 and 6.20.090, no species of animals defined as wild or exotic shall be kept or maintained on any property within the City. This section is to be construed liberally in determining which animals fall within the prohibition. (98-03; prior code § 4.44)

 

6.20.090 Wild animals—Permitted—Permit—Application.
A.     The sheltermaster may issue a yearly permit for wild or exotic animals provided the owner or custodian has all relevant permits from the California Department of Fish and Game and the United States Department of Agriculture. The application for permit shall have attached thereto:

1.     A veterinarian certificate attesting to the health of each animal;

2.     A list of the type and number of animals to be covered by the permit;

3.     Purpose of keeping such animals, with particular emphasis on the knowledge of such person about the animals and experience of such person in handling the animals in question;

4.     A detailed description of the quarters in which the animal will be kept;

5.     Circumstances, if any, under which the animals will be removed from quarters;

6.     Name and address of applicant and other person to be placed in charge of the animals;

7.     Current California Fish and Game and United States Department of Agriculture Permits.

B.     After review of all information available to him or her, including information on the permit application, the sheltermaster may issue a permit for the keeping of such animals. The animals must not in the opinion of the sheltermaster constitute a danger or nuisance to the general public.

C.    The permit may be issued for a period of one year upon payment of a fifty dollar ($50.00) fee. Renewal permits need not be subject to the application procedures unless additional animals have been added or the purpose of the animal keeping has substantially changed since the permit was last issued. (98-03; prior code § 4.45)

 

6.20.100 Wild animals—Exemption from permit fee.
Where an animal is regulated by federal or state laws which require the payment of a permit fee or license fee, there shall be no permit fee required under the provisions of Section 6.20.090. (Prior code § 4.46)

 

6.20.110 Riding animals prohibited where.
No person shall ride or drive or cause, permit, or allow any horse or any animal to be ridden or driven upon any sidewalk, paved portion of a street or any portion of the public right-of-way which has been landscaped with grass, flowers, or shrubbery, or in any public park, unless specifically provided for and so posted. This section shall not, however, prohibit a horse or other animal from being ridden or driven along the unpaved portion or unlandscaped portion of a public right-of-way or from being led across a street in a designated pedestrian’s crosswalk; nor shall it be construed to prohibit a horse or other animal from being ridden or driven across a public right-of-way where an equestrian trail crosses that public right-of-way, nor from a stabling area directly to an area where riding is permitted. This section shall have no application to parades, animal shows, and other types of exhibitions when proper permits have been obtained from the City or on an established equestrian trail designated by the City Council. (Prior code § 4.49)

 

6.20.120 Committing nuisances prohibited where.
No owner or keeper or person having custody or control of any dog, cat or other animal shall allow or permit such animal to commit a nuisance on any public property or any improved private property other than that of the owner or keeper or person who has accepted custody or control of such animal. It shall be the duty of all persons having control of an animal to curb it in order to carry out the intent of this section. Nuisance as used in this section shall include, but not be limited to, urination and defecation. (00-07; prior code § 4.43)

 

6.20.130 Noxious enclosures prohibited.
It is declared to be a nuisance and it is unlawful for any person, either principal, agent or employee to keep or permit to be kept at or upon any premises owned or occupied by him or her in the City any animal enclosure in a foul, noxious, or filthy condition. (Prior code § 4.47)

 

6.20.140 Animals at large prohibited.
It is declared a nuisance and no person shall permit any animal, fowl, bird, reptile or amphibian to run or fly at large or to go upon the premises of any other person without the consent of the owner of that property. The sheltermaster may approve certain animals, fowl, or birds to be released for competitive or sporting purposes. (98-03; prior code § 4.48)

 

6.20.150 Additional nuisances prohibited.
The other provisions of this title notwithstanding, no person shall keep or permit to be kept any animal which constitutes a nuisance to either the neighborhood or the general public. Besides the nuisances specifically enumerated (Sections 6.12.180, 6.12.190, 6.12.290, 6.20.060, 6.20.110, 6.20.120 and 6.20.130), it shall be a nuisance for any person to maintain an animal in such condition so as to constitute a health hazard for either man or animal. Animals which create excessive noise, disruptive and disturbing to the neighborhood, or animals which constitute a clear threat, menace and danger to humans, shall be considered a nuisance. (Prior code § 4.50)

 

6.20.160 Prior existing uses.
Such animals as are kept and maintained prior to the adoption of this title which are not in conformance with the terms and provisions hereof and such animals as are kept and maintained on properties that are not now within the corporate limits of the City which are hereafter annexed to the City, if the keeping and maintenance of such animals is not in conformance with the terms and provisions of this title, the keeping and maintenance of such animals in the circumstances as heretofore mentioned shall be terminated on the first of the following events to occur:

A.     Within one year from the adoption of this title for all properties that are within the corporate limits of the City and within one year after the annexation of these properties that are hereafter annexed to the City;

B.     The failure to keep and maintain animals on any property as such nonconforming uses for any continuous period of six months;

C.    Transfer of the animals from the specific site of such nonconforming use to any other site within the City;

D.    Transfer of ownership of the property upon which the nonconforming use occurs;

E.     Change of tenants upon the property upon which the nonconforming use occurs. (Prior code § 4.51)

 

6.20.170 Coyotes.
A.     Because it has been determined that the willful feeding or providing food for coyotes (Canis latrans) endangers the health and safety of the Claremont Community, it shall be unlawful for any person to willfully feed or in any manner provide food for one or more coyotes.

B.     This section is not applicable to the owner of a coyote that is kept under a valid certificate/permit issued by the State of California Department of Fish and Game.

C.    This section is not applicable to anyone who provides food and water for a trapped, unweaned, or injured coyote during the time the agency in charge is notified and the animal has been picked up.

D.    Every violation of this section shall be an infraction punishable by a fine of twenty-five dollars. (81-19)

 

6.20.180 Impoundment of livestock, fowl and other animals.
Procedures concerning the impoundment of livestock, fowl and other animals shall be the same as those for any animal as set forth in Chapter 6.08 of this Code. (98-03)

Chapter 6.24 VECTOR CONTROL AND MANAGEMENT
6.24.010 Purpose and authority.
This chapter is intended to provide for the control and management of bees and other vectors, and to enable the San Gabriel Valley Mosquito and Vector Control District and certain authorized City representatives to abate or require abatement of feral bees and other vector infestations from public and private property and structures when necessary for the public health and safety. (04-04)

 

6.24.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the same meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section.

“Apiaries” means a place where bees are kept.

“Authorized City representative” shall mean, for the purposes of this chapter, an officer, director, employee, or agent of a licensed private pest control company with whom the City has entered into a contractual agreement for the control and abatement of vectors.

“Bees” mean honey-producing insects of the species Apis mellifera, including the adults, eggs, larvae, pupae, or other immature states thereof, together with such materials as are deposited into hives by their adults, except honey and rendered beeswax.

“District” shall mean the San Gabriel Valley Mosquito and Vector Control District.

“Feral bees” shall mean any wild bees, including, but not limited to, the Africanized honey bees.

“Hives” mean any receptacle or container made or prepared for the intended use of bees and/or storage of honey or brood, or box or similar container of which bees have taken possession.

“Vector” shall mean, for the purposes of this chapter, any insect that poses a nuisance or danger to the public health safety, and that potentially may transmit a disease-producing organism from one host to another, including, but not limited to, the Africanized and European honey bees, mosquitoes, midges (chronomids), and black flies (simulids).

“Wild swarms of bees” means any colony of bees which becomes established upon a lot or in anything other than a hive. (04-04)

 

6.24.030 Permit required for keeping bees.
The placement, keeping, or maintenance of an apiary or hive of bees on any lot or parcel within the City is permitted only in the Open Space (O) District and with the prior approval of a special use and development permit granted in accordance with Chapter 16.306 of the Claremont Municipal Code. (04-04)

 

6.24.040 Requirements of permit for keeping bees.
The approval of any special use and development permit for placement of an apiary or hive of bee shall be subject to the following conditions, and any failure to adhere to said conditions shall be a violation of this chapter.

A.     The applicant shall be registered as a beekeeper with the County of Los Angeles Department of Agricultural Commissioner.

B.     The applicant, if not the owner of the property, shall provide to the City written evidence that the property owner has granted permission to the applicant to maintain an apiary on the subject property.

C.    Any apiary or hive shall be located a minimum of 300 feet from all public streets.

D.    Any apiary or hive shall be located a minimum of 500 feet from all structures used as dwellings or as places of business. An apiary may be placed closer than 500 feet to such a structure if the owner and persons having control or possession of said structure gives written permission to the applicant to do so, and evidence of such permission is furnished to the City.

E.     Any apiary or hive shall be maintained in a manner or location that does not cause the bees to cross over adjacent property in such a number that endangers public health or safety, or creates unreasonable interference with the comfortable enjoyment of life or use of such property by others.

F.     The owner or person having control of any apiary or hive of bees shall at all times furnish and continuously keep available a plentiful supply of fresh water for such apiary or hive of bees. The supply of water shall be within 200 feet of the apiary or hive of bees.

G.    Any owner or person having control of an apiary or hive of bees shall prominently display a sign stating, in letters not less than one inch in height on a background of contrasting color, the name, address, and phone number of the owner or person having control or possession of the apiary or hive. Such sign shall be a maximum of four square feet in size and no more than four feet in height.

H.    The Community Development Director may apply additional conditions as part of the special use and development permit if determined necessary. (04-04)

 

6.24.050 Infested building, structure, or premises a public nuisance.
A.     No person shall maintain or permit a wild swarm of bees or other infestation of other vectors to exist on any property. The property owner shall clean all premises and apply effective pesticides as often as necessary to prevent the infestation of feral bees or other vectors. The district and/or the City may prescribe the type of pesticides, their manner and frequency of application, and the manner and frequency of cleaning for such purpose.

B.     Any buildings, structures, premises, or any parts thereof that are found or reported to be infested with feral bees or other vectors shall be deemed a public nuisance and shall be abated by the property owner or by the district or authorized City representative as set forth in this chapter at the expense of the property owner. The district and/or City are authorized to determine how and whether to abate the nuisance in the manner provided in this chapter. (04-04)

 

6.24.060 Abatement of vectors by district.
A.     The district is authorized pursuant to Section 2270(f) of the California Health and Safety Code to enter upon any property in the City without hindrance or notice for any of the following purposes.

1.     To inspect to ascertain the presence of vectors or their breeding places.

2.     To abate public nuisances either directly or by giving notice to the property owner to abate a nuisance.

3.     To ascertain if a notice to abate vectors has been complied with.

4.     To treat property with appropriate physical, chemical, or biological control measures.

B.     The district is authorized to abate and remove feral bees and other vectors on private property except in the event vectors are located within or attached to a private structure. Abatement of feral bees and other vectors within or attached to a private structure shall be referred to authorized City representatives. All or part of the district’s cost of abatement shall be repaid to the district by the owner of the property subject to the abatement, as determined by the district. Provisions for recovery of the abatement costs are set forth in Sections 2283 through 2289 of the California Health and Safety Code. (04-04)

 

6.24.070 Abatement of vectors by City.
The City’s authorized representative may abate and remove feral bees and other vectors on a property pursuant to the City’s public nuisance abatement procedures as set forth in Chapter 8.16 of this Code. The expenses and costs of abatement shall be paid by the property owner. The City may utilize the cost recovery provisions of Chapter 8.16 or Chapter 1.15 of this Code to recover expenses and costs incurred by the City in abating the bees or other vectors. (04-04)

TITLE 7 RESERVED

TITLE 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapter 8.02 PUBLIC HEALTH
Chapter 8.04 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
Chapter 8.08 GARBAGE AND SOLID WASTE
Chapter 8.12 WEEDS AND RUBBISH
Chapter 8.16 PUBLIC NUISANCES
Chapter 8.17 REGISTRATION AND MAINTENANCE OF ABANDONED PROPERTIES
Chapter 8.18 SMOKING AND VAPING PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC PARKS AND PLAZAS, AND IN OR NEAR RESTAURANTS, BARS, AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS
Chapter 8.21 STREET SWEEPING
Chapter 8.22 MAINTENANCE OF COMMERCIAL LANDSCAPING
Chapter 8.24 LEAF BLOWERS
Chapter 8.28 STORMWATER AND RUNOFF POLLUTION CONTROL
Chapter 8.30 WATER CONSERVATION
Chapter 8.32 MULTIFAMILY RENTAL DWELLING COMPLEXES

Chapter 8.02 PUBLIC HEALTH
8.02.010 Adoption of Public Health Licenses Code.
Division 1, Parts 1 through 6, inclusive, of Title 8 of the Los Angeles County Code (Public Health Licensing Code), as amended and in effect on August 29, 2011, is adopted as the Public Health Licenses Code of the City of Claremont, and by reference is made a part of this chapter with the same force and effect as though fully set forth herein, subject to amendments, deletions and additions set forth in this chapter. (11-08)

 

8.02.020 Adoption of Health Code.
Division 1 of Title 11, Chapters 11.02 to 11.38, inclusive, of the Los Angeles County Code (Health Code), as amended and in effect on August 29, 2011, is adopted as the Public Health Code of the City of Claremont, and by reference is made a part of this chapter with the same force and effect as though fully set forth herein, subject to amendments, deletions, and additions set forth in this chapter. (11-08)

 

8.02.030 Adoption of body art regulations.
Environmental Health Regulations, Part I, Chapter 36, of the County of Los Angeles, Department of Public Health (County Body Art Regulations), as adopted and in effect on August 29, 2011, are adopted as the body art regulations of the City of Claremont, and by reference is a made a part of this chapter with the same force and effect as though fully set forth herein, subject to amendments, deletions and additions set forth in this chapter. (11-08)

 

8.02.040 Will and intention of the City Council.
The provisions of the incorporated Los Angeles County Public Health Licensing Code, Health Code, and Body Art Regulations (collectively referred to as “County Health Code”) fully express the will and intention of the City Council of the City of Claremont as to those matters related to public health, which are contained therein and adopted herein. (11-08)

 

8.02.050 Conflicts or inconsistencies.
The provisions of this chapter, insofar as they are substantially the same as provisions of other provisions of the Claremont Municipal Code relating to the same subject matter existing immediately preceding adoption of the chapter, shall be construed as restatements and continuances, and not as new enactments. In the event of any conflict or inconsistency between the provisions of this adopted codes and regulations of Los Angeles County codes and regulations, and any other provisions of the Claremont Municipal Code, the other provisions of the Claremont Municipal Code shall govern. (11-08)

 

8.02.060 Other requirements.
The issuance of a permit, certification, or approval under the provisions of this chapter shall not constitute a waiver of any other requirement, or constitute an approval of any provision of the Claremont Municipal Code or any other law or ordinance, and all such requirements and provisions shall be complied with in addition to the obtaining of a permit, certification, or approval under the provisions of this chapter. A permit, certification, approval, or document purporting to give authority to violate any law or ordinance shall not be valid with respect to such authority. (11-08)

 

8.02.070 Violations and penalties.
A.     Violations. No person, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, shall violate, cause the violation of, or otherwise fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Every act prohibited or declared unlawful, and every failure to perform an act made mandatory by this chapter shall be a misdemeanor or an infraction, at the discretion of the City Attorney.

B.     Penalties for Violations. All penalties for violations of this chapter shall be as set forth in Chapter 1.12 General Penalty of the Claremont Municipal Code. The penalties provided in Chapter 1.12 are cumulative to any other penalty provided by law.

C.    Compliance with Health Officer. All persons shall obey all rules, regulations, orders or directives of the health officer, as defined in Section 8.04.240 of the Los Angeles County Code. Any person who, after notice, violates, or who, upon demand of the health officer, refuses or neglects to conform to any rule, regulation, order or directive prescribed by the health officer, shall be guilty of an infraction, or a misdemeanor, at the discretion of the City Attorney, as set forth in Chapter 1.12 of the Claremont Municipal Code. (11-08)

 
Chapter 8.04 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
8.04.005 Findings.
The City Council adopts the regulations set forth in this chapter based on the following findings:

A.     Regulating the hours and location of mobile vendors benefits the health, safety and welfare of Claremont residents because the operation of these vehicles at inappropriate hours or locations creates traffic hazards, blocks adjacent sidewalks to pedestrians, results in unwanted noise, littering and loitering at that location and/or creates hazards for children. Moreover, the locational requirements set forth in Section 8.04.050(C) are necessary for the public safety to ensure adequate sight lines for drivers and pedestrians, space for public transportation vehicles and otherwise provide safe, accessible use of the right-of-way by vehicles and pedestrians.

B.     Regulating the manner and type of mobile vendors benefits the health, safety and welfare of the City because the inappropriate operation and uncontrolled proliferation of these vehicles creates traffic hazards, blocks adjacent sidewalks to pedestrians, results in unwanted noise, littering and loitering at that location and/or creates hazards for children.

C.    Regulating mobile vendors on private property is consistent with the City’s interests in the aesthetics of the community, ensuring that the City complies with applicable waste water and storm water regulations and promoting the permanent development of property.

D.    Prohibiting mobile vendors from operating within City parks and recreation facilities is consistent with the City’s interest in the aesthetics of the community, fair competition and otherwise ensuring the proper use of City property. (14-07)

 

8.04.010 Definitions.
“Food establishment” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section 8.04.141 of the Los Angeles County Code, which is adopted as part of Chapter 8.02 of this Code.

“Mobile food vendor” shall mean a person or business that operates or assists in the operation of a vending vehicle.

“Vending vehicle” shall mean any self-propelled, motorized device or vehicle by which any person or property may be propelled or moved upon a highway or street or any vehicle, trailer or other device which may be drawn or towed by a self-propelled, motorized vehicle, from which food or food products are sold, offered for sale, displayed, bartered, exchanged or otherwise given. However, vending vehicle shall not include a device moved exclusively by human power. (14-07)

 

8.04.020 Regulations for food establishments.
A.     Food Preparation and Dispensing. Any person, group, corporation or association, which prepares food for, or dispenses food to members of the public, shall comply with the provisions of the Public Health Licensing Requirements and Health Code of Los Angeles County, adopted by reference and incorporated as part of Chapter 8.02 of this Code.

B.     Enforcement. The City of Claremont, having adopted and incorporated the Public Health Licensing Requirements and Health Code of Los Angeles County as part of Chapter 8.02 of this Code, authorizes the County of Los Angeles to enforce licensing requirements and code provisions requiring licensing and inspections of food establishments and the posting of food establishment inspection grades. (14-07)

 

8.04.030 Mobile food vendor permit.
A.     No mobile food vendor may vend in the City without first obtaining and having in his or her possession a mobile food vendor permit issued by the Community Development Director in accordance with this chapter.

B.     To receive a mobile food vendor permit, a mobile food vendor must complete a permit application on the form approved by the City and file it with the City. The applicant must provide the following information:

1.     Applicant’s full name and address.

2.     Proof of applicant’s identity.

3.     Proof of insurance coverage satisfactory to City.

4.     A brief description of the type of food products to be sold. This shall include the nature, character and quality of the product.

5.     The location where the applicant plans to vend.

6.     If applicant is employed by another to vend, the name and business address of the employer.

7.     A description of the vending vehicle, its registration number, its license number, and the streets the applicant intends to use.

8.     A copy of the valid Los Angeles County Department of Health permit.

9.     A copy of the applicant’s business tax certificate.

10.   A certification that he or she complies with all local, State and Federal laws regarding food product vending, including this chapter.

 

C.    No application for a new or renewed mobile food vendor permit shall be accepted unless the application is accompanied by a fee in an amount set by City Council resolution. (14-07)

 

8.04.040 Mobile food vendor permit issuance and denial.
A.     Upon receipt of a written application for a mobile food vendor permit, the Community Development Director shall conduct an investigation as he or she deems appropriate to determine whether a mobile food vendor permit should be approved. A permit shall be approved, conditionally approved, or denied within thirty (30) days of the filing of an application. The mobile food vendor permit shall be approved unless one of the following findings is made:

1.     The applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement of fact to the City in the application process.

2.     The application does not contain the information required by this chapter.

3.     The applicant has not satisfied the requirements of this chapter.

B.     The City may condition the approval of any mobile food vendor permit to ensure compliance with this chapter and other applicable laws.

C.    Any mobile food vendor permit shall be valid for the term of one year. Upon the expiration of the mobile food vendor permit, an application for renewal shall be filed in a like manner as an application for an original mobile food vendor permit, and such renewal permit shall be approved only when the requirements for the issuance of an original permit are met.

D.    Any mobile food vendor permit may be suspended or revoked by the Community Development Director for failure to comply with the terms and conditions of this chapter. Such suspension or revocation shall be made with written notice to the permit holder, stating the grounds for the revocation and the procedures for appealing the same. The permit holder may appeal this decision by filing a written request for appeal with the City Clerk within fifteen (15) days of the date of the notice. Any revocation or suspension shall be stayed during the pendency of the appeal unless the immediate public health or safety requires otherwise. The hearing on the appeal shall be held within sixty (60) days of the appeal request unless otherwise agreed to by the parties. The City Council may conduct the hearing or designate a hearing officer, consistent with applicable law, to do so. The City Council’s or hearing officer’s decision shall be final.

E.     A mobile food vendor permit shall not be assignable or transferable. (14-07)

 

8.04.050 Regulations for mobile food vendors in public right-of-way.
Notwithstanding Section 10.32.190, mobile food vendors may operate within the public right-of-way subject to the following time, place, and manner requirements:

A.     The vending vehicle shall comply with all parking and Vehicle Code provisions which apply to the location at which it is parked.

B.     The vending vehicle shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic in any manner.

C.    No mobile food vendor may operate a vending vehicle:

1.     Within twenty (20) feet from the outer edge of any entrance of any business during the hours that such business is open to the public. This prohibition may be waived with the written consent of such business. For purposes hereof, the term “entrance” includes, but is not limited to, doors, vestibules, driveways, outdoor dining area entries, and emergency exits.

2.     Within fifty (50) feet of any street intersection controlled by a traffic light, crosswalk, or stop sign.

3.     Within fifty (50) feet of a bus stop.

4.     Unless permitted in writing by the applicable public school, within three hundred (300) feet of the nearest property line of any property in which a public school building is located, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. of any school day. For purposes of this section, “public school” shall be defined as a school governed or operated by a unified school district or other similar public entity. Any mobile food vendor having received written permission to operate within three hundred (300) feet of a public school shall provide a copy of such permission upon request to any City official.

D.    The mobile food vendor shall keep the vending area litter free. The mobile food vendor must remove litter caused by its products from any public and private property within a twenty-five (25) foot radius of the vending vehicle’s location.

E.     The mobile food vendor shall not discharge any liquid (e.g., water, grease, oil, etc.) onto or into City streets, storm drains, catch basins, or sewer facilities. All discharges shall be contained and properly disposed of by the mobile food vendor.

F.     Vending is prohibited on the exposed street and/or traffic side of the vending vehicle.

G.    A vending vehicle may not stand or park in the public right-of-way between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. in commercial and industrial zones, and between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. in residential zones.

H.    The mobile food vendor must have a valid mobile food vendor permit and City business tax certificate. The mobile food vendor shall also maintain insurance, as deemed acceptable in the reasonable discretion of the City, against liability for death or injury to any person as a result of ownership, operation, or use of its vending vehicles.

I.      The mobile food vendor shall comply with Section 8.04.020 and be subject to all applicable requirements for food establishments. All required Los Angeles County health permits must be in the possession of the mobile food vendor at all times during which it operates within the City.

J.     Mobile food vendors shall be located within two hundred (200) feet travel distance of a readily available toilet and hand washing facility to ensure that restroom facilities are available to customers whenever the mobile food vendor is stopped to conduct business for more than a one-hour period.

K.     The mobile food vendor shall otherwise comply with all applicable State and local laws. (14-07)

 

8.04.060 Regulations for mobile food vendors on private or City property.
Mobile food vendors operating on private property or on public property outside of the public right-of-way shall comply with the following requirements:

A.     The written approval of the owner of the location shall be obtained. The vendor shall maintain proof of the owner’s approval in the vending vehicle. The person operating the vending vehicle shall present this proof upon the demand of a peace officer or City employee authorized to enforce this chapter.

B.     The mobile food vendor must have a valid mobile food vendor permit and City business tax certificate. The mobile food vendor shall also maintain insurance, as deemed acceptable in the reasonable discretion of the City, against liability for death or injury to any person as a result of ownership, operation, or use of its vending vehicles.

C.    The vending vehicle shall only be stopped, standing or parked on surfaces paved with concrete, asphalt or another impervious surface.

D.    Mobile food vendors shall not use or permit use of parking spaces on the site (e.g., customer queuing, tables, chairs, portable restrooms, signs, and any other ancillary equipment) if doing so will adversely affect the required off-street parking available for the primary use(s) of the site, as determined by the Community Development Director.

E.     The vending vehicle and surrounding property shall be maintained in a safe and clean manner at all times.

F.     The mobile food vendor shall not discharge any liquid (e.g., water, grease, oil, etc.) onto or into City streets, storm drains, catch basins, or sewer facilities. All discharges shall be contained and properly disposed of by the mobile food vendor.

G.    All signs shall comply with Title 18 of this Code.

H.    No tables, chairs or other site furniture shall be permitted.

I.      Temporary shade structures shall be removed whenever the mobile vendor vehicle is not operating.

J.     The property shall be located in an area where vending is permitted under Title 16 of this Code.

K.     Pursuant to Section 11.02.090 of this Code, no mobile food vendor shall operate within any City park and recreation facility, except as permitted in that section.

L.     The mobile food vendor must have a valid business license issued by the City.

M.    The mobile food vendor shall comply with Section 8.04.020 and be subject to all applicable requirements for food establishments. All required Los Angeles County health permits must be in the possession of the mobile food vendor at all times during which it operates within the City.

N.    The mobile food vendor shall otherwise comply with all applicable State and local laws. (14-07)

 

8.04.070 Solicitation permit—Exemption.
Mobile food vendors operating in compliance with this chapter shall be exempted from the provisions of Chapter 5.40 of this Code. (14-07)

 

8.04.080 Exemptions.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, this chapter shall not apply to the following:

A.     Any publicly owned or operated vending vehicle.

B.     Any mobile food vendor conducted in connection with a private event or party in a residential zone located either on the site of the event or in the public right-of-way with no retail sale to the general public. This exemption does not excuse a vendor from obtaining and maintaining a business tax certificate as required Chapter 4.10.

C.    Any mobile food vendor conducted in connection with a special event permitted under Chapter 12.42 of this Code. (14-07)

 

8.04.090 Violations and penalties.
All penalties for violations of this chapter shall be as set forth in Chapter 1.12 General Penalty of the Claremont Municipal Code. The penalties provided in Chapter 1.12 are cumulative to any other penalty provided by law. (14-07)

Chapter 8.08 GARBAGE AND SOLID WASTE
8.08.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall, when used in this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

“City Manager” means the City Manager of the City or his or her duly authorized representative.

 

“Combustible waste matter” includes and means magazines, books, boots, hats, trimmings from lawns, trees, shrubs and flower garden cuttings, pasteboard boxes, rags, paper, straw, sawdust, packing material, shaving boxes and all rubbish and refuse that will incinerate through contact with flames or ordinary temperature.

“Contractor” means the person to whom the City Council has awarded a contract, or has otherwise authorized to receive, collect, carry, haul, transport and dispose of any and all refuse, garbage, rubbish, waste matter or dirt within the City.

“Garbage” includes and means household refuse and leavings, offal, swill and any accumulation of animal, vegetable and other matter that attends the preparation, consumption, decay or dealing in or storage of meats, fish, fowl, birds, fruits and vegetables.

“Noncombustible waste matter” includes and means glass, broken brick, metal vessels, cans, crockery and bottles, stones, ashes, auto parts and all rubbish or refuse that will not incinerate through contact with flames of ordinary temperature. This shall not include any unusually large or weighty items.

“Person” means natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business trust, organization or the manager, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them.

“Recyclable container” means a wheeled plastic container having a capacity of one hundred five gallons for storing recyclable material as defined by this section and provided by the City for automated collection of recyclable material.

“Recyclable material” means glass, newspaper, aluminum, plastics, waste paper, cardboard, tin, and such other reusable materials as the City Council may designate by resolution, sorted or commingled and otherwise prepared under rules established by Council resolution.

“Refuse container” means a wheeled plastic container having a capacity of one hundred five gallons for storing garbage and provided by the City for the automated collection of garbage.

“Street” includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares or other public ways in this City which have been or may hereafter be dedicated or open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state.

Title of Officers. The title of any officer or employee means such officer or employee of the City.

“Waste matter” includes both combustible and noncombustible waste matter as defined by this section. (90-16; 82-4; prior code § 11.1)

 

8.08.020 Collection—Reserved for City or contractor.
The City, in order to more effectually promote and protect the public health and safety and reduce the danger and hazard of fire and conflagrations, reserves unto itself or its licensee or contractor the exclusive right to collect, transport and dispose of, or cause to be collected, transported and disposed of, all garbage and waste matter produced or found within the corporate limits of the City. It is unlawful for any person, except as provided in this chapter, to collect, transport or dispose of any garbage or waste matter within the City, except as provided by this chapter. (Prior code § 11.21)

 

8.08.030 Collection—Authorization.
The collection, removal and disposal of all garbage and waste matter shall be performed exclusively by the City or its licensee under the supervision of the City Manager; provided, however, that any person may engage in the business of collection, removal or disposal of garbage and waste matter, if authorized or licensed to do so by the City pursuant to Section 8.08.040. Nevertheless, person engaged in the business of commercial gardening are authorized to collect, remove and dispose of garden trimmings as incident to such business. (90-25; prior code § 11.11)

 

8.08.040 Collection—Licensing authority—Bids.
The City Council may make or let contracts or enter into agreements or licenses with any persons for the removal of garbage or waste matter. Before any such contract is entered into by the City, bids shall be called for. A notice inviting bids shall be printed once in a newspaper published and circulated within the City. (Prior code § 11.23)

 

8.08.050 Collection—Licensee’s bond.
Each licensee under the provisions of Section 8.08.040 shall give a bond payable to the City, in a sum satisfactory to the City Council, conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties imposed by this chapter and the terms of any contract or agreement entered into with the City. (Prior code § 11.24)

 

8.08.060 Collection—Revocation of license.
Any license issued under the provisions of Section 8.08.040 may be revoked at any time by the Council for noncompliance with the terms of this chapter or any agreement entered into. (Prior code § 11.25)

 

8.08.070 Collection—Vehicle regulations.
A.     An person authorized or permitted to collect, remove and dispose of garbage or waste matter within the City and any person conveying garbage collected outside of the City upon or along any public street or alley or other public place in the City shall have a vehicle with a body which shall be watertight and metal lined and constructed so as to prevent the contents from falling or spilling therefrom.

B.     In case any person is responsible for the leakage or deposit of garbage or waste matter upon or along any public street or alley or other public place in the City, such person shall pay the costs of removing such garbage or waste matter.

C.    Every vehicle used in the collection of refuse, combustible and noncombustible matters shall be well painted, shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be properly marked in a conspicuous place to show its classification and number. (Prior code § 11.27)

 

8.08.080 Collection—Maximum weight for residential pickup.
The maximum weight of refuse collected shall not exceed that equivalent to one cubic yard per residential pickup. (Prior code § 11.17)

 

8.08.090 Collection—Certain refuse not subject to routine collection.
Refuse not subject to routine collection shall include large discarded appliances, bed springs, logs, stumps, rubble, construction waste, dirt, junked automobiles or solid waste resulting from industrial processes and manufacturing operations. (Prior code § 11.18)

 

8.08.095 Recycling.
In those areas of the City where recycling service is provided by the City, recyclable materials may be placed at the curb, or where alley collection is provided, at the alley, on the day established by the City Manager for collection, or the night before. Recyclable materials shall be placed in containers or bundled in accordance with rules adopted by resolution of the City Council. No one other than the owner of the recyclable materials, or the City, or their authorized agents, may remove or interfere with recyclable materials placed for collection. Each violation of this Code section shall be an infraction. (82-4)

 

8.08.100 Collection—Special service charges.
For the collection of such refuse itemized in Section 8.08.090, special service charges at rates to be established by resolution of the City Council shall be payable to the City immediately upon presentation of a bill for such services. (Prior code § 11.19)

 

8.08.110 Collection—Tree trimmings and hazardous waste.
A.     Green waste will only be collected in City provided refuse containers. Tree trimmings, tree limbs, tree trunks, and tree stumps will not be collected if they exceed four inches in diameter or three feet in length or weigh more than ten pounds for any one piece.

B.     No hazardous waste shall be placed in City provided refuse containers. Hazardous waste shall be handled, stored, and disposed in accordance with state and federal standards. (04-04)

 

8.08.120 Collection—Number of collections.
The City Manager may make such regulations concerning the number of collections and removals of garbage and waste matter as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. In no case, however, shall collection be less often than once a week for garbage and waste matter. (Prior code § 11.28)

 

8.08.130 Collection—Charges—Classes.
The City Council shall by uncodified ordinance determine, fix and establish fees or charges to be paid the City for providing and making available a service in the collection and disposal of refuse, garbage and waste matter. Such charges may be established by classification as follows:

A.     For single-family dwellings;

B.     For all apartment houses, flats, duplexes, bungalow courts and multiple-family dwellings;

C.    For commercial establishments, churches, schools and any sources other than residential. (92-9; 92-1; 89-20; prior code § 11.29)

 

8.08.140 Collection—Fees—Persons to be billed—Exemptions.
The fees established by the City Council shall be billed to and paid for by the owner of the premises; provided, however, that the owner shall have the right to reimbursement from the respective occupants for whose benefit the charge is paid. For nonresidential uses such as commercial establishments, churches, schools, etc., such fees may be billed to and paid for by the proprietor or occupant thereof.

All owners of places and premises in the City are made liable for the fees as prescribed by this chapter, except upon special exemption by the City Council. (77-33; 75-4; prior code § 11.30)

 

8.08.150 Collection—Fees—Billing period—Delinquent penalty.
All fees for the collection of garbage and combustible and noncombustible waste matter may be billed on a monthly or quarterly basis and shall be payable upon presentation date at the cashier’s window and may be combined with statements for other services.

In accordance with California Government Code Section 54348, a penalty for delinquent payment or nonpayment of sanitation service charges may be established at a rate determined by the City Council provided that the maximum rate shall be that permitted under Government Code Section 54348, as it may be amended from time to time. The City Council shall establish the rate of the penalty fee by resolution after first holding a public hearing. The City’s financial services department shall be charged with administering and collecting the penalty. (95-05; prior code § 11.31)

 

8.08.160 Collection—Delinquent accounts—Hearing—Costs to become lien when.
Any fees authorized pursuant to Sections 8.08.130, 8.08.150 and 12.36.010 which remain unpaid for a period of six or more months after the date upon which they were billed may be collected thereafter by the City as provided as follows:

A.     The City Council shall cause a report of delinquent rubbish and sewer fees to be prepared periodically. The Council shall fix a time, date and place for hearing the report and any objections or protests thereto.

B.     The Council shall cause notice of the hearing to be mailed to landowners listed on the report not less than 14 days prior to the date of the hearing.

C.    At the hearing the Council shall hear any objections or protests of land owners liable to be assessed for delinquent fees. The Council may make such revisions or corrections to the report as it deems just, after which, by resolution, the report shall be confirmed.

D.    The delinquent fees set forth in the report as confirmed shall constitute special assessments against the respective parcels of land and are a lien on the property for the amount of such delinquent fees plus late charges and cost of lien. A certified copy of the confirmed report shall be filed with the City Clerk, or auditor appointed by the City Council, for the amount of the respective assessments against the respective parcels of land as they appear on the current assessment role. The lien created attaches upon recordation, in the office of the County Recorder, of a certified copy of the resolution of confirmation. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary City ad valorem property taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for such taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of City ad valorem property taxes shall be applicable to such assessment. (95-05; 78-20; prior code § 11.31-1)

 

8.08.180 Receptacles—Location.
The City with its own employees or a duly authorized contract agent shall collect and remove, from all places and premises in the City, all garbage and waste matter which are contained in receptacles placed along the street curb in front thereof, or along the alley in the rear thereof, depending upon whether the prescribed route is along the street or alley, except as may be otherwise provided in Section 8.08.300. (Prior code § 11.11)

 

8.08.190 Receptacles—Backyard collection.
The City Council may by resolution direct the backyard collection of refuse in which event all garbage and waste matter receptacles shall at all times be located at the nearest accessible place for removing and emptying the same, but shall not be placed along the curb of any street within the corporate limits of the City. “Nearest accessible place” shall be defined as the side of an alley if the property adjoins an alley, or a distance within twenty-five feet of the rear of the house if the property does not adjoin an alley. (Prior code § 11.12)

 

8.08.200 Receptacles—Manner and time of placement.
No person shall place any garbage receptacles in any public street or alley at any place or in any manner other than as provided in this chapter or at any time other than on the day established by the City Manager for the collection of such materials on the particular route, or on the preceding night, or permit such a receptacle to remain thereon for more than twelve hours after it has been emptied. (84-19; prior code § 11.13)

 

8.08.210 Receptacles—Authorized persons to move.
No person other than the owner thereof, or any officer, employee or licensee of the City shall move, remove or interfere with any garbage or waste matter receptacle or the contents thereof. (Prior code § 11.14)

 

8.08.220 Garbage and solid waste.
All refuse and recyclable receptacles shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition by the person using the same. (04-04)

 

8.08.230 Receptacles—Covering required.
Garbage and waste matter receptacles shall be kept tightly covered at all times, except as noted in Section 8.08.220 or when garbage and waste matter is being deposited therein or removed therefrom and shall at all times be proof against access by flies to the contents thereof. (Prior code § 11.16)

 

8.08.240 Dumping or burying garbage prohibited.
No person shall dump, place or bury in any lot, land or street within the City, any garbage, waste matter or any other deleterious or offensive substance; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to any land used by the City for a disposal site, or to lawful composting as described in Section 8.08.255. (92-7; prior code § 11.2)

 

8.08.250 Garbage accumulations prohibited.
No person owning or occupying any building, lot or premises in the City shall allow any garbage or waste matter to accumulate, collect and remain open upon such lot or premises. This provision shall not be construed as interfering with building under a building permit during the course of construction and within a reasonable time thereafter, or wood neatly piled for kitchen or household use, or lawful composting as described in Section 8.08.255. (92-7; prior code § 11.3)

 

8.08.255 Composting permitted.
A.     Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, it is lawful to compost yard wastes, including grass clippings, leaves, plant trimmings, wood ashes, and vegetable kitchen scraps (but not including other household refuse or animal wastes) if the following conditions are met:

1.     Compost piles or containers are located in the rear or side yard, not visible from a public street, and no greater than five feet in height;

2.     The compost piles or containers are at least five feet from the property line or separated from adjacent property by a solid wall;

3.     Compost piles are maintained so that they do not generate an offensive odor or harbor rodents;

4.     The maximum size of any pile or container is five feet in height by five feet in width by five feet in length; and

5.     The compost is enclosed, screened or otherwise maintained to minimize insects or pests. The pile or container shall not permit surface run-off or leachate to another property.

B.     The Director of Community Services may authorize for educational purposes the creation of a composting demonstration area visible to the public at a City park or other facility.

C.    No composting shall be permitted at any location where it is determined to be a fire hazard by the Los Angeles County fire department. (14-07; 92-7, 12-04)

 

8.08.260 Storing garbage accessible to rats prohibited.
It is unlawful to store, deposit or keep garbage in a place accessible to rats. (Prior code § 11.5)

 

8.08.270 Burning garbage prohibited—Exception.
It is unlawful to burn garbage within the City except in incinerators of a type approved in writing by the City Engineer and the health officer. (Prior code § 11.6)

 

8.08.280 Burning waste matter prohibited—Exception.
A.     No waste matter shall be burned within the City except as permitted by the fire chief; provided, however, that paper may be burned without a permit in an incinerator designed, constructed and installed in accordance with the rules and regulations of the fire department.

B.     No waste matter shall be burned which shall, in burning cause or create a dense or offensive smoke or odor. (Prior code § 11.7)

 

8.08.290 Conveyance of garbage prohibited—Exception.
No person shall remove or convey or cause or permit to be removed or conveyed any garbage upon or along any public street or alley or other public place in the City; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any person in the employ of the City who shall be assigned by the City Manager to the work of garbage removal or to any person with whom the City has entered into a contract for the collection, removal or purchase of garbage or to any employee of such contractor during such time as such contract shall be in force or to any person conveying garbage collected outside of the City. (Prior code § 11.26)

 

8.08.300 Disputes and complaints.
A.     In all cases of disputes or complaints concerning the place where garbage, combustible or noncombustible receptacles shall be placed while waiting for the removal of their contents, where the same is not specifically fixed by this chapter, the City Manager shall immediately designate the place, and his or her decision shall be final.

B.     In all cases of disputes or complaints concerning the rates of collection fees to be charged when the same are not specifically fixed by this chapter, the City Manager shall immediately fix and designate the collection fee to be charged and his or her decision shall be final. (Prior code § 11.8)

 

8.08.310 Enforcement of provisions—Right of entry.
All members of the police department and the health office are specifically required to enforce the provisions of this chapter and shall have the right to enter any and all premises for the purpose of determining the sanitary conditions thereof. In the event that entry is denied to the officer, he or she shall apply for the issuance of a warrant of inspection and show cause for the desired inspection. (77-32; prior code § 11.9)

 

8.08.320 Disposal by producers of waste matter.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit any producer of combustibles or noncombustibles, except garbage, from hauling to and dumping the same at the dump site located outside of the City limits but in accordance with the fee payment provisions as established hereinbefore. All garbage, etc., shall be hauled out and disposed of outside the corporate limits of the City. (Prior code § 11.32)

Chapter 8.12 WEEDS AND RUBBISH
8.12.010 Weeds and rubbish declared nuisances.
It is unlawful for any person to permit the sidewalk, curb or space between the sidewalk and curb in front of the premises owned, occupied or controlled by him or her, or any part thereof, to become overgrown with grass or weeds, or covered with rubbish, garbage or other waste matter, and all such growth of grass or weeds and deposits of rubbish, garbage and other waste matter are declared to be public nuisances. (Prior code § 11.33)

 

8.12.020 Abatement—Notice—Costs to become lien when.
The superintendent of streets shall, in writing, notify all persons violating this chapter to remove, within ten days after notice given as provided in this chapter, all weeds, grass, obstructions or deposits made or suffered by such persons in violation of this chapter. Such notice shall be given by person service on the occupant of such premises where there is one, or in cases where there is no occupant, by personal service upon any owner or person having control thereof residing in the City and known to the superintendent of streets. In cases where a known owner or controller of such premises resides outside the City, the notice shall also be given by mailing a copy thereof to such person and in all cases where there is no occupant or owner of such property known to the superintendent of streets, the notice shall be given by posting for at least ten days a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the premises. The superintendent of streets shall, after giving such notice as aforesaid, at the expiration of the time fixed by the notice, remove any and all weeds, grass, obstructions and deposits prohibited by this chapter and specified in such notice from the lot or parcel of land, sidewalk, street, alley or other public place where any such person may have deposited or suffered the same to exist, and deposit the same in any suitable and proper place that has been or may be provided for the reception of City refuse of garbage. The reasonable value of the service of the superintendent of streets in preparing and serving notices as aforesaid and removing the weeds, grass, obstructions or deposits and costs of any suit shall be a recoverable charge against the owner of the premises on which or in front of which the weeds, grass, obstructions or deposits existed, and shall also be a lien on the premises, and shall be recovered by action in the name of the City either against such person or against such property. In such action the sum of twenty-five dollars shall be recovered as costs by the City, for attorney’s fees in the action. In case such property is sold either under execution in a personal action or in a suit to foreclose such lien, enough of the proceeds shall be paid into the City treasury to satisfy the lien and costs, and the overplus, if any is paid to the owner of the premises and if he or she is not known, then into the City treasury for the use of such owner when ascertained. (Prior code § 11.34)

Chapter 8.16 PUBLIC NUISANCES
8.16.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

“Building” or “structure” means and includes, in addition to any building or structure on such property, fences, walls, billboards and any other manmade device included within the legal boundaries of the property under consideration.

“City Manager” means the City Manager or designee.

“Director of Community Development” means the Director of Community Development or designee.

“Owner” means any person(s) shown as the property owner on the latest equalized property tax assessment roll. For purposes of this chapter, an owner shall also include a person having charge or control of real property as a tenant, co-tenant, lessee, sub-lessee, or any other person with any right to possession of real property, or a contractual obligation to lease or maintain real property, where a public nuisance exists on such real property.

“Property” means and includes all land, buildings, and structures situated within the boundaries determined by the legal description of the property under consideration. (98-13; 90-8)

 

8.16.020 Declaration of a public nuisance.
A.     A public nuisance is created by every building or structure which:

1.     Has become dilapidated, dangerous or at risk of collapse resulting from decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, fire, wind, earthquake, flood, old age or neglect;

2.     Is a breeding place for rodents or vermin;

3.     Is likely to shelter vagrants;

4.     Has been abandoned, partially destroyed, boarded up, or permitted to remain unreasonably in a state of partial construction;

5.     Allows easy access into a vacant structure through any doorway, window, or other opening because of the failure to close and secure by lock, and fails to protect against such entry without the use of substantial force;

6.     Is unsafe;

7.     Is left unpainted or which has paint deterioration, dry rot, warping, or lack of weather protection; or

8.     Has graffiti or other words, letters, or drawings which remain on the exterior of any building or structure and which are visible from a public street, for 30 days or more and for which a sign permit has not been issued.

B.     A public nuisance is created by any condition or use of a building, structure or property which is detrimental to the property of others. This includes, but is not limited to:

1.     Any condition of property that would be classified as a detrimental or unsightly condition pursuant to Section 16.154.060 of the Claremont Municipal Code;

2.     Violation of any condition of a conditional use permit;

3.     Clothes lines, or clothes hanging in front yards, front porches, balconies, or fences which are visible from a public street;

4.     Trash, garbage, or refuse cans, bins, boxes, or other such containers stored in front or side yards and/or visible from a public street, excepting containers provided by the City or containers approved by the Community Services Director, placed or stored in a manner required by this Code;

5.     Overgrown vegetation which is likely to harbor rodents or vermin or which obstructs the necessary view of drivers on public streets or private driveways;

6.     Any use of property which creates a noxious smell or creates conditions dangerous to public safety, health or welfare, adjoining properties, property owners, or property values;

7.     Attractive nuisances dangerous to children and visible from a public street including, but not limited to, abandoned, broken or neglected equipment, machinery, refrigerators and freezers;

8.     Property where construction activities have been initiated and no significant visible progress has been made in exterior construction activities and/or site features in 90 days or more, as determined by the City’s Building Official, and where any one of the following conditions exist:

a.     Construction equipment and/or materials are being stored in an area visible from the street, or

b.     Landscaping has been damaged and has not been repaired, and/or is not being maintained, or

c.     Tarps and other temporary materials are being used to protect a structure or building from the elements, or

d.     Windows or other openings in a structure are boarded up, or

e.     A structure is left in a state of partial construction with exposed framing, missing windows or doors, incomplete roofing, or unfinished exterior materials, or

f.      Construction has left exposed foundations, footings, concrete slabs, or flooring systems without structures, or

g.     Pools, spas, or ponds remain in an incomplete state, and/or which lack required fencing and other required safety devices.

C.    A public nuisance is created by any building, structure, or property that is in violation of any provision of the Claremont Municipal Code, or the statutes of the State of California.

D.    A public nuisance is created by any signs or billboards that are unsafe, unused, obsolete or illegal.

E.     A public nuisance is created by any overflow of sewage from private sewer laterals or the public sewer system as a result of a blockage of hardened waste cooking oil and grease. (14-07; 12-01; 10-06; 90-8)

 

8.16.030 Notification to property owner.
Whenever the Director of Community Development finds, upon the recommendation of an authorized representative of the Community Development Department, that a nuisance, as defined by Section 8.16.020, exists on any property located within the City, he or she shall serve a notice of violation on the owner of the property on which the nuisance is located in accordance with Section 8.16.080, and direct that the nuisance be abated. The notice shall describe the nuisance and establish a reasonable period of time, which shall not be less than 10 days, within which the nuisance shall be abated or corrected. Alternatively, a code or law enforcement officer of the City of Claremont may issue an administrative citation pursuant to Chapter 1.14 of this Code and provide the owner or responsible person or party with a reasonable period of time to abate the alleged nuisance. (08-16)

 

8.16.040 Voluntary abatement of nuisances.
The owner of any building, structure, or property alleged to be a nuisance under the provisions of this chapter, may abate the nuisance at any time within the abatement period provided in Section 8.16.030. The owner shall advise the community development department of the abatement. Once so advised, the department shall inspect the premises to insure that the nuisance has been abated. (90-8)

 

8.16.050 Failure to voluntarily abate a declared nuisance.
If an alleged nuisance is not properly abated within the period set forth in the notice provided pursuant to Section 8.16.030, the Director of Community Development or a code or law enforcement officer of the City shall serve the owner with a written notice of the City’s intention to abate the public nuisance described in the notice, in accordance with Sections 8.16.060 and 8.16.080 of this chapter. The owner shall have the right to request a hearing on the abatement of the public nuisance within 15 days of the date indicated on the notice provided pursuant to this section. The request for a hearing shall be submitted to the Community Development Department in writing. The failure of the owner to request a hearing as provided in this section shall constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing and the City shall have the right to abate the nuisance in accordance with this chapter. (08-16)

 

8.16.060 Notice of intention to abate the public nuisance—Hearing.
The notice of the City’s intention to abate a public nuisance, referred to in Section 8.16.050 shall describe the nuisance and inform the owner of the property of his or her right to request a public hearing on the abatement of the public nuisance as set forth in Section 8.16.050. If a hearing is requested in accordance with Section 8.16.050, the Director of Community Development or designee shall schedule the hearing and shall give notice of the time, date, and place of the hearing that shall be held by the City Manager on question of the determination of the public nuisance and the abatement of the public nuisance. The hearing shall be set for a date after the time afforded for voluntary abatement has expired. The hearing on the determination of the public nuisance and the abatement of the public nuisance may be continued to a later specified date either by agreement or by written notice from the Director of Community Development. The notice referred to in this section shall be substantially the following format:

 

NOTICE OF HEARING ON THE ABATEMENT OF A PUBLIC NUISANCE

 

This notice is to inform you of a hearing to be held before the City Manager to determine whether certain conditions and/or uses existing on (street address), Claremont, California (referred to after this as the “Property”) constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the Claremont Municipal Code. The Property is more particularly described as (Assessor’s Parcel Number).

 

You may bring any witnesses, pictures, photographs, reports, or any other exhibits to this hearing that you feel will establish or prove that the Property is not a public nuisance. An attorney may represent you. You will have an opportunity to examine all evidence and witnesses testifying against you.

 

If the City Manager determines at the end of the hearing, that this Property is in fact a nuisance, you will be ordered to abate the public nuisance and your property will be assessed the City’s administrative and incidental costs incurred up to that stage in the abatement process. This assessment will result in a lien upon your property until paid. Thereupon, if you fail to obey the City Manager’s order to abate this nuisance, the City may do so for you, by the rehabilitation, repair, or demolition of the building or structures, or by otherwise eliminating the nuisance from the Property. The costs and expense of abating the nuisance including the City’s incidental and administrative expenses will be assessed upon the Property, together with interest on the entire amount owing, and will result in a lien upon the Property until it is paid.

 

In addition, you may also be cited for violations of the Claremont Municipal Code and be subject to criminal proceedings.

 

You may voluntarily abate the nuisance yourself by doing the following things: If you chose to voluntarily abate this nuisance prior to this hearing, you may notify the community development department at least three (3) days prior to the date of hearing set below, for a prehearing inspection.

 

Dated this day of _______________________________

(Title)

Time and date of hearing:

Authority: Claremont Municipal Code Chapter 8.16.

 

(08-16)

 

8.16.070 Authority to enter upon land.
The Director of Community Development may enter upon the land for the purpose of posting or serving notice required by this chapter. (90-8)

 

8.16.080 Service of notices and orders.
Service of notices and orders required under this chapter shall be made by posting a notice in a conspicuous place on or in front of the property in question and by either one of the following methods:

A.     By personal service on the owner(s); or,

B.     By registered or certified mail addressed to the owner(s) of the property at their last-known address. If there is no known address for the owner, lessee, occupant and other person having charge or control of the property, the notice shall be sent to the property address. Service shall be completed at the time of deposit into the United States mail. (90-8)

 

8.16.090 Hearing by the City Manager.
At the time and place stated in the notice of hearing on the abatement of a public nuisance, issued pursuant to Section 8.16.060, the City Manager shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, objections, or protests, and shall receive sworn testimony of owners, witnesses, City personnel, and interested persons relative to such alleged public nuisance and to any proposed abatement measures. The hearing may be continued from time to time. (90-8)

 

8.16.100 Hearing procedures.
All hearings held pursuant to this chapter shall be recorded by a video or audio recording device unless the City chooses to use a court reporter. The hearings need not be conducted according to technical rules of evidence. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence, but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in a civil action in a California court of competent jurisdiction. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of evidence on which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in a civil action. Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation. Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. (90-8)

 

8.16.110 Decision of the City Manager on the abatement of a public nuisance.
Following the hearing on the abatement of a public nuisance, the City Manager shall consider all evidence and determine whether the property, in whole or in part, or any building of structure thereon, constitutes a public nuisance as alleged. If the City Manager finds that a public nuisance does exist and that there is sufficient cause to exist and that there is sufficient cause to abate the nuisance, the City Manager shall make a written order entitled “order finding and ordering the abatement of a public nuisance.” Said order shall set forth those findings, and order the owner to abate the nuisance. The order shall further inform the owner that the administrative and incidental costs and expenses incurred so far in abating the nuisance, and which are proved in accordance with Section 8.16.180, shall be assessed against the property and result in a lien until paid. The order shall also specifically direct the owner to abate the nuisance by rehabilitation, repair, or demolition in the manner set forth in the order. The order shall state that if the nuisance is not abated, it will be removed and abated by the City. The order shall state that the additional costs and expenses of removal and abatement by the City, including any additional administrative and incidental expenses, together with interest on the entire amount owing, will also be assessed and result in a lien upon the property until paid. The order shall set forth the time within which the work shall be commenced and completed. The order shall inform the property owners of their right to appeal the order ordering liability for incidental and administrative expenses incurred thus far, and ordering the abatement of a public nuisance, to the City Council pursuant to Section 8.16.210. (90-8)

 

8.16.112 Alternative process.
In addition to being granted the authority to issue an “order finding and ordering abatement of a public nuisance,” the City Manager shall also be authorized to impose an administrative fine and/or penalty pursuant to Chapter 1.14 of this Code. (98-13)

 

8.16.113 Repeat offenses.
Where the City Manager in a previous nuisance abatement hearing ordered the abatement of a public nuisance and provided that no recurrence of the nuisance shall occur within twenty-four (24) months of the date the order is issued, and the person to whom the order is issued fails to prevent the nuisance from recurring within the twenty-four (24) month period, the City Manager may issue a subsequent abatement order and assess the person for the City’s administrative and incidental costs incurred in reissuing the order. The order shall be a written order containing the same information required by Section 8.16.110. The person to whom the subsequent abatement order is issued may appeal the order in accordance with the appeal process provided for in this chapter. (98-13)

 

8.16.120 Service of the abatement order.
The City Manager’s order finding and ordering the abatement of a public nuisance shall be served upon the property owner, in accordance with Section 8.16.080. (90-8)

 

8.16.130 Voluntary abatement after order finding and ordering the abatement of a public nuisance.
The property owner may, at his or her own expense, remove and abate the nuisance as prescribed by the order prior to the expiration of the abatement period set forth in the order. If the property has been inspected by a representative of the community development department and the nuisance has been abated in accordance with the order, the Director of Community Development shall not remove or abate the nuisance but may schedule a hearing pursuant to Section 8.16.080 to determine the administrative and incidental costs and expenses incurred so far in abating the public nuisance. (90-8)

 

8.16.140 Abatement by the City.
If a declared nuisance is not completely abated within the time prescribed in the City Manager’s order finding and ordering the abatement of a public nuisance, the Director of Community Development is authorized and directed to abate the nuisance by City forces or private contract in accordance with law. Furthermore, the Director of Community Development is expressly authorized to enter upon the premises for the purpose of removing and abating the nuisance. A search warrant shall be obtained prior to any entry if the nuisance is not located in an open area or if the nuisance is not sizeable without an intrusion into privacy. (90-8)

 

8.16.150 Demolition.
No building found to be a public nuisance shall be ordered demolished if it was built in accordance with the laws in effect at the time of construction unless it is found that, in fairness and in justice, there is no reasonable way other than demolition to correct such nuisance. (90-8)

 

8.16.160 Notice of intent to demolish.
A copy of any order finding and ordering the abatement of a public nuisance, that requires abatement of a public nuisance, that requires abatement by demolition of any habitable structure or any building with a floor, four walls, a roof and which is larger than one hundred twenty square feet shall be immediately recorded with the County Recorder. (90-8)

 

8.16.170 Record of expenses and costs for abatement.
A.     The Community Improvement Coordinator shall keep an account of the expenses and costs of removing and abating the nuisance on each separate lot or parcel of land where the work is done, and shall render a written, itemized report to the Director of Community Development, showing the costs and expenses of abating the nuisance including the City’s incidental and direct administrative expenses, less any salvage value relating thereto.

B.     The Director of Community Development shall review the report and determine the correctness and reasonableness of such expenses and costs.

C.    If approved by the Director of Community Development, the Community Improvement Coordinator shall serve the itemized report and invoice for the total cost indicated in the report, on the owner of the property, in accordance with Section 8.16.080. The owner shall pay the amount indicated on the invoice within thirty (30) days of the date indicated on the invoice. The owner shall have the right to request a hearing on the cost of abatement of the public nuisance within fifteen (15) days of the date indicated on the invoice provided pursuant to this section. The request for a hearing shall be submitted to the Community Development Department in writing. The failure to request a hearing as provided in this section shall constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing and the City shall have the right to collect the costs and, if such costs are not paid, to assess such costs against the parcel to which the report relates in accordance with this chapter.

D.    The term “incidental expenses” or “expenses” shall include, but shall not be limited to the actual expenses and costs of the City in preparing notice, specifications, and contracts, in inspecting the work, legal fees, and other related costs. (08-16)

 

8.16.180 Hearing on the cost of abatement.
If the owner of the property requests a hearing in accordance with Section 8.16.170(C), the Director of Community Development shall schedule the hearing and shall give notice of the time, date, and place of the hearing that shall be held by the City Manager on cost of abatement of the public nuisance. The hearing on the cost of abatement of the public nuisance may be continued to a later specified date either by agreement or by written notice from the Director of Community Development. At the time and place fixed for the hearing, the City Manager shall hear and consider the report of the costs and expenses of abatement, together with any objections or protests. The City Manager may make any revision, correction, or modification in the report as he/she deems just, after which the report, as submitted or modified, shall be confirmed. The decision of the City Manager shall be final, subject only to an appeal pursuant to Section 8.16.210. The City Manager shall serve a copy of his/her order entitled “order determining the cost of abatement of the public nuisance” upon the property owner. This notice shall inform the recipients of their right to appeal the determination of costs to the City Council pursuant to Section 8.16.210. (08-16)

 

8.16.190 Assessment of costs against property.
The order determining the cost of abatement of the public nuisance shall constitute a special assessment against the respective parcel of land to which it relates and, upon recordation in the office of the County Recorder of a notice of lien, shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment.

A.     After confirmation and recordation, a copy of the lien shall be filed with the Assessor and Tax Collector of the County, in order that the County Assessor may add the amounts of the assessments to the next regular tax bill levied against the respective parcel and, thereafter, the amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as provided for ordinary municipal taxes, and shall be subject to the same procedure for foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency;

B.     After recordation, the lien may also be foreclosed by judicial or other sale in the manner and means provided by law;

C.    Such notice of lien for recordation shall be in substantially the following form:

 

NOTICE OF LIEN

(Claim of City of Claremont)

 

Pursuant to authority granted by the City of Claremont Municipal Code, the Director of Community Development on or about ______, ______, caused a public nuisance on the real property, hereafter described, to be abated; the City of Claremont on _______, _______, assessed the expenses and costs of abating the public nuisance upon the real property, hereafter described; the City of Claremont does hereby claim a lien for abating the public nuisance in the amount of the assessment: the sum of $ _______. This assessment shall be a lien upon the real property until paid in full and discharged of record.

 

The nuisance that was abated was:

 

The real property upon which a lien is claimed is located in the City of Claremont, County of Los Angeles, State of California, and is described as follows: (LEGAL DESCRIPTION)

 

Dated: This day of ___________, _______.

_____________ of the City of Claremont, California

(NOTARIAL ACKNOWLEDGEMENT)

 

(90-8)

 

8.16.200 Violations.
A.     No owner, lessee, occupant, or other person having charge or control of any property shall fail to comply with any order of abatement served as provided in this chapter.

B.     No person shall remove any notice or order posted as required by this chapter.

C.    No person shall obstruct, impede, or interfere with any representative of the City, or with any person who owns, leases, or occupies property, when any of them are lawfully engaged in proceedings required under this chapter. (90-8)

 

8.16.210 Grievance with final order—Appeals to City Council.
A.     An owner, occupant, or other party who has a legal or equitable interest in the property may appeal the final order of the City Manager finding and ordering the abatement of a public nuisance pursuant to Section 8.16.110. Said appeal must be in writing and must be filed with the City Council no later than ten days from the date of the service of the City Manager’s order. After ten days from the date of service of the City Manager’s order finding and ordering the abatement of a public nuisance, the order is deemed final and may no longer be appealed.

B.     An owner, occupant, or other party who has a legal or equitable interest in the property may appeal the final order of the City Manager determining the cost of abatement. Said appeal must be in writing and must be filed within ten days from the date of service of the City Manager’s order. Unless the written appeal is filed within ten days from the date of service of the City Manager’s order, the order determining the costs of abatement is final. Also, unless a timely appeal was filed pursuant to subsection (A) of this section, this appeal is limited to evaluating the fairness and accuracy of determining the costs of abatement pursuant to Section 8.16.180.

C.    All written appeals shall be filed in triplicate with the City Clerk and shall state the grounds for such appeal and the specific factual and/or legal errors committed by the City Manager in issuing either the order finding and ordering the abatement of a public nuisance or the order determining the cost of abatement. Any appeal shall contain:

1.     A specific identification of the subject property;

2.     The names and addresses of all appellants;

3.     A statement of appellant’s legal interest in the subject property;

4.     A statement, in ordinary and concise language, of the specific order or action protested and the grounds for appeal, together with all supporting material facts;

5.     The date and signatures of all appellants; and

6.     The verification of at least one appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal.

D.    The City Clerk shall then transmit one copy each of the written appeal to the City Manager and the Director of Community Development.

E.     No later than 21 days from the date of the City Manager’s receipt of the written appeal, he/she shall transmit to the City Council the records of all hearings and copies of all papers submitted, and orders given. The City Manager shall also submit a written report, stating the factual and legal basis upon which the City Manager reached his/her decision.

F.     Within 45 days from the date of the City Manager’s receipt of the written appeal, the City Council shall, after review of the entire record, the City Manager’s report, and appellant’s written appeal, and without further hearings on the matter, issue a resolution affirming, reversing, or modifying, in whole or in part, either the order finding and ordering the abatement of a public nuisance or the order determining the cost of abatement. Such resolution shall be served upon the owners, or other appellants in accordance with Section 8.16.080 and shall inform the appellants of their right to file a judicial action to appeal said decision within thirty days pursuant to Section 8.16.220. The decision of the City Council shall be final.

G.    On the date a written appeal is filed under this section, all proceedings in furtherance of the order appealed from shall be stayed until the final determination by the City Council of the appeal, unless the Director of Community Development finds that conditions on the property constitute an immediate threat to the health, safety or welfare of persons or property and must be abated immediately. (90-8)

 

8.16.220 Limitation of filing judicial action.
An owner or other person who has an interest in the property aggrieved at any proceeding taken on appeal by the City Council in affirming, reversing or modifying in whole or in part either the order finding and ordering the abatement of a public nuisance or the order determining the cost of abatement must bring judicial action to contest such decision within thirty days after the date of such decision of the City Council. Otherwise, all objections to such decision shall be deemed waived. (90-8)

 

8.16.230 Alternatives.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the City Council from ordering the City Attorney to commence a civil or criminal proceeding to abate a public nuisance as an alternative to the proceedings set forth in this chapter. (90-8)

 

8.16.240 Treble damages.
Upon the entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment against the owner of property which constitutes a nuisance as set forth in this chapter, within a two-year period, the City Attorney is authorized to seek three times the amount of abatement costs in any such judgment. (90-8)

 

8.16.250 Emergency abatement.
Whenever the Director of Community Development, or designee, finds that conditions on a parcel of property constitute an immediate threat to the health, safety, or welfare of persons or property, then the Director of Community Development or designee may order the summary abatement of the conditions constituting the threat without the notice or hearing described in Sections 8.16.060 and 8.16.090. A record of and a hearing to confirm the expenses and costs of abatement shall be held pursuant to Sections 8.16.070 and 8.16.180. (90-8)

 

8.16.260 Director of Community Development—Authority.
The Director of Community Development, or designee, is designated as the proper City official to remove nuisances and vehicles or parts thereof considered abandoned within the City limits. For this purpose, the City official is vested with the powers, rights, and duties of the County Engineer and hearing officer referred to in the Uniform Building Code, Chapters 98 and 99, and the California State Vehicle Code, Section 22660. (90-8)

Chapter 8.17 REGISTRATION AND MAINTENANCE OF ABANDONED PROPERTIES
8.17.010 Purpose.
It is the intent of the City Council, through the adoption of this chapter, to establish a mechanism to protect residential neighborhoods from becoming blighted through the lack of maintenance and security of abandoned properties; to establish an abandoned property registration program and to set forth guidelines for the maintenance of abandoned properties. (08-17)

 

8.17.020 Definitions.
Certain words and phrases in this chapter are defined, when used herein, as follows:

ABANDONED. Any residential building, structure or real property that is vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, and (1) is subject to a current notice of default and/or notice of trustee’s sale, pending tax assessors lien sale and/or (2) is the subject of a foreclosure sale resulting in the acquisition of title by an interested beneficiary of a deed of trust, and/or (3) was conveyed to the current owner under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale.

ABATEMENT ORDER. A “notice of violation and order to abate” issued pursuant to Section 8.16.030 and/or a hearing officer’s “order to abate” issued pursuant to Section 8.16.110.

ACCESSIBLE PROPERTY. Real property that is accessible to the public, either, in general or through an open and unsecured door, window, gate fence, wall, etc.

ACCESSIBLE STRUCTURE. A building or structure that is not secured or is open in such a way as to allow public or unauthorized access to the interior.

ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY PAYMENT DUE DATE. The date that is the 10th day after the issuance of an abatement order, a notice of violation issued pursuant to Section 8.16.030 or a final order by the City Council pursuant to Section 8.16.210, if any.

AGREEMENT. Any written instrument that transfers or conveys title to residential real property from one owner to another after a sale, trade, transfer or exchange.

BENEFICIARY. A lender participating in a real property transaction that holds a secured interest in the real property in question identified in a deed of trust.

BUYER. Any person, partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary or other legal entity that agrees to transfer anything of value in consideration for real property via an agreement.

DANGEROUS BUILDING. Any building or structure reasonably deemed by authorized City staff to represent a violation of any provision specified in the Claremont Municipal Code Chapter 15.05.

DAYS. Calendar days.

DEED OF TRUST. An instrument whereby an owner of real property, as trustor, transfers a secured interest in the real property in question to a third party trustee, as security for a loan issued in the context of a real property transaction. This definition applies to any and all subordinate deeds of trust; i.e., 2nd trust deed, 3rd trust deed, etc.

DEED IN LIEU OF FORECLOSURE. A recorded instrument that transfers ownership of property from the trustor to the holder of a deed of trust upon consent of the beneficiary of the deed of trust.

DEFAULT. The material breach of, or failure to fulfill, a legal or contractual duty arising from or relating to a deed of trust.

DISTRESSED. Any building, structure or real property that is subject to a current notice of default and/or notice of trustee’s sale, pending tax assessors lien sale and/or any real property conveyed via a foreclosure sale resulting in the acquisition of title by an interested beneficiary of a deed of trust, and/or any real property conveyed via a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale, regardless of vacancy.

ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL. The City Manager, the Building Official, and/or any employee or agent of the City of Claremont designated and/or charged with enforcing this Code, including but not limited to applicable codes adopted by reference therein.

EVIDENCE OF VACANCY. Any real property condition that independently, or in the context of the totality of circumstances relevant to that real property would lead a reasonable enforcement official to believe that a property is vacant or occupied by a person without a legal right of occupancy. Such real property conditions include but are not limited to: overgrown or dead vegetation; accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers or mail; past due utility notices or disconnected utilities; accumulation of trash, junk or debris; the absence of window coverings such as curtains, blinds or shutters; the absence of furnishings or personal items consistent with residential habitation; and/or statements by neighbors, passersby, delivery agents, government employees that the property is vacant.

FORECLOSURE. The process by which real property subject to a deed of trust is sold to satisfy the debt of a defaulting trustor, i.e., borrower.

LOCAL. Within 40 driving miles of the subject building, structure or real property.

NEIGHBORHOOD STANDARD. The condition of real property that prevails in and through the neighborhood where an abandoned building, structure or real property is located. When determining the neighborhood standard no abandoned or distressed building, structure or real property shall be considered.

NOTICE OF DEFAULT. A recorded instrument that reflects and provides notice that a default has taken place with respect to a deed of trust, and that a beneficiary intends to proceed with a trustee’s sale.

NOTICE OF TRUSTEE’S SALE. A document prepared and recorded by the trustee that sets forth the day, date and time of the trustee’s sale, describes the property to be sold, and gives an estimate for the unpaid debt on the deed of trust secured by the property.

OUT OF AREA. In excess of 40 road or driving miles of the subject building, structure or real property.

OWNER. Any person, partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary or other legal entity having a legal or equitable title or any interest in real property.

OWNER OF RECORD. Any person shown as the owner of land on the last equalized assessment roll produced by the Los Angeles County Recorders Office.

PROPERTY. Any unimproved or improved real property designed or permitted to be used for residential or dwelling purposes, or portion thereof, including but not limited to building or structures located on said real property, regardless of condition.

RESIDENTIAL BUILDING. Any improved real property, or portion thereof, designed or permitted to be used for dwelling purposes, including buildings and structures located on such improved real property. This includes any real property being offered under any circumstances for sale, trade, transfer, or exchange as “residential,” whether or not said property is legally permitted and zoned for such use.

SECURE. Such measures as may be directed by an enforcement official that assist in rendering real property inaccessible to unauthorized persons, including but not limited to repairing fences and walls, chaining/pad locking gates, the repairing or boarding of doors, windows or other openings. Such measures shall be implemented in conformance with all applicable standards of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.

TAX ASSESSOR’S LIEN SALE. The sale, conducted by the Assessor of Los Angeles County of tax liens for delinquent taxes on the property.

TRUSTEE. Any person, partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary or other legal entity holding a deed of trust securing an interest in real property for the benefit of the beneficiary.

TRUSTOR. Any owner/borrower identified in a deed of trust, who transfers an interest in real property to a trustee as security for payment of a debt by that owner/borrower.

VACANCY. Any building, structure or real property that is unoccupied or occupied by a person without a legal right of occupancy. (08-17)

 

8.17.030 Duty to record instrument for property transfer.
Within 10 days of a property transaction involving a change in the identity of an owner or the owner of record, or alternatively a transfer/assignment of a loan or deed of trust secured by residential property, each beneficiary and trustee engaged in said transaction or transfer/assignment shall record, with the Los Angeles County Recorder’s Office, an instrument evidencing such transaction, transfer or assignment. This instrument shall reflect the identity, mailing address and telephone number of the trustee and beneficiary responsible for receiving payments associated with the loan or deed of trust in question. This duty/obligation shall be joint and several among and between all trustees and beneficiaries and their respective agents. (08-17)

 

8.17.040 Registration.
A.     Each beneficiary and trustee, who holds a deed of trust on a property located within the City of Claremont, shall perform an inspection of the property that is security for the deed of trust upon default by the trustor prior to recording a Notice of Default or similar instrument with the Los Angeles County Recorders Office.

B.     If such inspection shows that the property is abandoned, the owner, beneficiary or trustee shall, within 10 days of the inspection register the property with the City’s Community Improvement Office on forms provided by the City.

C.    If the property is occupied but distressed, the trustee and beneficiary or a designee shall inspect the property on a monthly basis until:

1.     The trustor or another party remedies the default; or

2.     The property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, deemed abandoned and registered subject to subsection B of this section.

D.    The registration required pursuant to subsection B of this section shall contain the identity of the beneficiary and trustee, the direct mailing address of the beneficiary and trustee and, in the case of a corporate or out of area beneficiary or trustee, the local property management company, if any, responsible for the security, maintenance and marketing of the property in question.

E.     The registration pursuant to subsection B of this section shall be renewed annually.

F.     This section shall also apply to properties that have been the subject of a foreclosure sale wherein title has been transferred to the beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure, and to any properties transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure.

G.    Properties subject to this chapter shall remain subject to the annual registration requirement, security and maintenance standards of this chapter as long as they remain vacant and/or abandoned.

H.    Any person, partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary or other legal entity that has registered a property under this chapter must make a written report to the City’s Community Improvement Division of any change of information contained in the registration within 10 days of the change. (08-17)

 

8.17.050 Maintenance requirements.
It is declared a public nuisance for any person, partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary or other legal entity, that owns, leases, occupies, controls or manages any abandoned property to cause, permit, or maintain any property condition contrary to any provision of this chapter. The following maintenance standards shall apply to any abandoned property.

A.     Any abandoned property shall be maintained in compliance with the requirements of this chapter and Chapter 8.16.

B.     Abandoned property shall be kept free of weeds, dry brush, dead vegetation, excessive foliage growth, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any accumulation of newspaper, circular flyers, notices (except those required by federal, state or local law), discarded personal items including but not limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, printed material or any other items that give the appearance that the property is abandoned.

C.    Abandoned property shall be maintained free of graffiti, tagging or similar marking. Any removal or painting over of graffiti shall be with an exterior grade paint that matches the color of the exterior of the structure.

D.    Visible front and side yards shall be landscaped and maintained to the neighborhood standard. Landscaping includes, but is not limited to, grass, ground covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark or artificial turf/sod designed specifically for residential installation and standards listed in the Claremont Municipal Code Section 16.130.030. Landscaping does not include weeds, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt, plastic sheeting, mulch, indoor-outdoor carpet or any similar material.

E.     Pools and spas shall be kept in working order so that water remains clear and free of pollutants, mosquito larvae, and debris, or alternatively shall be drained and kept dry. In either case, properties with pools and/or spas must comply with the minimum security fencing requirements set forth in Title 15.

F.     Adherence to this section does not relieve the beneficiary/trustee or property owner of obligations set forth in any covenants conditions and restrictions and/or home owners association rules and regulations which may apply to the property.

An enforcement official may allow exceptions to the maintenance standards set forth in this section for abandoned property, that is under construction and/or repair, that is diligently pursued for at least three business days per week, and is undertaken in compliance with all applicable laws including but not limited to City permitting requirements. (08-17)

 

8.17.060 Security requirements.
A.     Abandoned properties shall be secured so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons.

B.     Securing of abandoned property includes but is not limited to closing and locking of windows, doors (walk-through, sliding and garage) gates and any other opening that may allow access to the interior of the property and or structure(s). In the case of broken windows securing means reglazing or boarding the window.

C.    If the abandoned property is owned by a corporation and/or out of area beneficiary/trustee/owner, a local property management company shall be contracted to perform weekly inspections to verify that the abandoned property is maintained in accordance with the requirements of this section, and any other applicable laws.

D.    The property shall be posted with the name and 24-hour contact phone number of the local property management company. The posting shall be no less than 18″ x 24″, shall be of a font that is legible from a distance of forty-five (45) feet, and shall contain the following verbiage: “THIS PROPERTY MANAGED BY ____________,” and “TO REPORT PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS CALL (name and phone number).”

E.     The posting shall be placed on the interior of a window facing the street to the front of the property so it is visible from the street, or secured to the exterior of the building/structure facing the street of the front of the property so it is visible from the street. If no such area exists, the posting shall be on a stake of sufficient size to support the posting, in a location that is visible from the street to the front of the property, and to the extent possible, not readily subject to potential vandalism. Exterior posting must be constructed of, and printed with weather resistant materials.

F.     The local property management company shall inspect the property on a weekly basis to determine if the property is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. If the property management company determines the property is not in compliance, it is the company’s responsibility to bring the property into compliance.

G.    The duties/obligations specified in this section shall be joint and several among and between all trustees and beneficiaries and their respective agents. (08-17)

 

8.17.070 Additional authority.
In addition to the enforcement remedies established in this chapter, the City shall have the authority to require the beneficiary, trustee, owner or owner of record of any property affected by this section, to implement additional maintenance and/or security measures including but not limited to, securing any and all doors, windows or other openings, installing additional security lighting, increasing on-site inspection frequency, employment of an on-site security guard or other measures as may be reasonably required to secure and reduce the visual decline of the property. (08-17)

 

8.17.080 Fees.
The fee for registering and re-registering an abandoned property shall be set, from time to time, by resolution of the City Council. The amount of the fee charges shall not exceed the cost of administering the provisions of this chapter. (08-17)

 

8.17.090 Enforcement.
A.     Any violation of this chapter shall be treated as a strict liability offense; a violation shall be deemed to have occurred regardless of a violator’s intent.

B.     Any person, partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary or other legal entity, that owns, leases, occupies, controls or manages any abandoned property and causes, permits, or maintains a violation of the chapter as to that property, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, may be punished as provided in Chapter 1.12 of this Code.

C.    This section is intended to be cumulative to, and not in place of, other rights and remedies available to the City pursuant to this Code. As an alternative to the violation and penalty specified in this section, the City Attorney or enforcement official may pursue any other right or remedy permitted by this Code, including, but not limited to, commencement of any civil action, or administrative action to abate the condition of a property as a public nuisance pursuant to Chapter 8.16.

D.    If an enforcement officer determines that the owner of abandoned property has failed to maintain that property as obligated under California Civil Code Section 2929.3 and in accordance with this chapter, the City may impose a civil fine against the owner of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000) per day for each day that the owner fails to maintain the property commencing on the day following the expiration of the period to remedy the violation as set forth in the notice provided pursuant to subsection E. The City shall not impose fines on an owner under this subsection where it has already done so pursuant to any other provision of this Code.

E.     If the City chooses to impose a fine pursuant to subsection D of this section, it shall give notice of the alleged violation to the owner. The notice shall include a description of the conditions that gave rise to the violation, and notice of the City’s intent to assess a civil fine if action to correct the violation is not commenced within a period of not less than 14 days and completed within a period of not less than 30 days. The notice shall be mailed to the name and address provided in the deed or other instrument for mailing future tax statements, or, if none, to the return address provided on the deed or other instrument.

F.     The City shall provide a period of not less than 30 days for the legal owner to remedy the violation prior to imposing a civil fine. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City may provide less than 30 days’ notice to remedy a condition before imposing a civil fine if the entity determines that a specific condition of the property threatens public health or safety and provided that notice of that determination and time for compliance is given.

G.    The City shall provide an owner who wishes to contest any fines imposed pursuant to subsection D a hearing and opportunity to be heard in accordance with the procedures for administrative citations contained in Chapter 1.14 of this Code. (08-17)

 

8.17.100 Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any of the requirements of this chapter may appeal a determination made hereunder in the manner specified with respect to appeals under Section 8.16.210 of this Code. (08-17)

 

8.17.110 Joint and several liability.
The duties/obligations specified in this chapter shall be joint and several among and between all trustees and beneficiaries and their respective agents. (08-17)

Chapter 8.18 SMOKING AND VAPING PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC PARKS AND PLAZAS, AND IN OR NEAR RESTAURANTS, BARS, AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS
8.18.010 Purpose.
The City Council has determined that there is ample evidence that smoking in any form (including vaping), and the resultant secondhand smoke (or vapor), poses a serious hazard to the health of members of the general public and City employees and can have a deleterious effect on the health and welfare of those in the vicinity of smoking activity. Secondhand smoke has been deemed a Class A Carcinogen which produces substances considered hazardous and dangerous to individuals’ health. In order to serve the public health, safety and welfare the City Council has determined that it is necessary and desirable to establish regulations that prohibit smoking (including vaping) in certain places designated in this chapter. (20-08, 10-08)

 

8.18.020 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them below:

“Bar” or “drinking establishment” means any establishment where alcoholic beverages and/or other drinks, including, but not limited to, juice, coffee, teas, or soda are sold to the public for on-site consumption, including for consumption on an outdoor patio or parklet.

“Public park” means any park or other site designated by the City of Claremont for any recreational purpose which is owned, managed or controlled by the City, and includes the entire site of the public park, including, without limitation, all structures thereon, any parking lots, and any public sidewalk adjacent to the park site.

“Public plaza” means a public square or area designed as a gathering place for the public and designated by the City of Claremont as a public plaza and which is owned, managed or controlled by the City.

“Restaurant” means any establishment where food, including meals, appetizers, desserts, or snacks, is sold to the public for on-site consumption, including for consumption on an outdoor patio or parklet.

“Smoke” or “smoking” means: (1) inhaling, exhaling, burning, or vaporizing of any tobacco, nicotine, marijuana, or plant product, whether natural or synthetic, or other similar combustible material; or (2) carrying any lighted, heated, or activated form of tobacco, nicotine, marijuana, or plant product, whether natural or synthetic, or other similar combustible material, intended for inhalation; or (3) using any cigar, cigarette, pipe, electronic cigarette, vape pen, or other device intended for the burning or vaporizing of tobacco, nicotine, marijuana, or plant product, whether natural or synthetic, or other similar combustible material. (20-08, 10-08)

 

8.18.030 Smoking prohibited.
Smoking is hereby prohibited in all of the following locations within the City limits of the City of Claremont:

A.     Public parks.

B.     Public plazas.

C.    Restaurants (including outdoor patios and parklets of restaurants).

D.    Bars and drinking establishments (including outdoor patios and parklets of bars and drinking establishments).

E.     Within 20 feet of any restaurant, bar, or drinking establishment, including within 20 feet of the outdoor patio or parklet of any restaurant, bar, or drinking establishment. (20-08, 10-08)

 

8.18.040 Signs.
Signs stating that smoking is prohibited shall be clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted in all of the areas where smoking is prohibited under this chapter. Every owner, operator, manager, or other persons having control of a property where smoking is prohibited under this chapter shall conspicuously post signs on site using a City-provided “No Smoking” sign template with capital letters not less than one inch in height and the international “No Smoking” symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) on a contrasting background. City staff may use discretion to approve operators’ requests for minor modifications to the appearance of the City-provided “No Smoking” sign on a case-by-case basis. Whether on public or private property, “No Smoking” signs must include a reference to “Claremont Municipal Code § 8.18.030” or “CMC § 8.18.030.” (20-08, 10-08)

 

8.18.045 Disposal of smoking waste.
No person shall dispose of any cigarette, cigar, electronic cigarette, or tobacco, or any part of a cigarette, cigar, or electronic cigarette except in a designated waste disposal container. (20-08)

 

8.18.050 Penalties.
Violations of this chapter shall be an infraction. This chapter shall be enforceable by any City employee granted authority to issue written administrative citations pursuant to Claremont Municipal Code Chapters 1.12 and 1.14. Pursuant to California Government Code Sections 36900 and 53069.4, the amount of the fine for a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be as follows:

A.     $100.00 for the first violation;

B.     $200.00 for a second violation committed within one year of the first violation; and

C.    $500.00 for a third violation or subsequent violation committed within one year of the first violation.

All citations issued for violations of this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of Claremont Municipal Code Chapters 1.12 and 1.14. (20-08, 10-08)

Chapter 8.21 STREET SWEEPING
8.21.010 Authority to establish streetsweeping charges.
The City Council shall by uncodified ordinance determine, fix and establish fees or charges to be paid the City for providing and making available a service in the sweeping of streets, curbs and gutters. Such charges may be established by classification of structures or other method determined in the uncodified ordinance. (92-9; 92-1; 89-21; 79-5)

Chapter 8.22 MAINTENANCE OF COMMERCIAL LANDSCAPING
8.22.001 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall, when used in this chapter, have the following meanings:

“Commercial landscaping areas” means all areas where plantings are required either by ordinance or when required as a condition to approval by the Architectural Commission in any commercial or industrial zone.

“Sprinkler system” means a mechanical or electrical irrigation system for the distribution of water to the required landscaping.

“Trash” means any cans, paper, junk, debris, glass, discarded lumber or waste material.

“Weeds” includes any weeds or dead, diseased, damaged or overgrown vegetation of any type (including trees, shrubs, hedges, grass and ground cover). (78-31)

 

8.22.002 Plants and improvements.
All commercial landscaping areas shall be planted with suitable plants, shrubs, grass, ground cover and trees as may be required by the Architectural Commission or the department of community development. (78-38)

 

8.22.003 Irrigation.
All plantings required shall be irrigated by an approved sprinkling system. (78-38)

 

8.22.004 Maintenance.
All plantings shall be cut, pruned or trimmed as needed to prevent overgrowth of the landscaped area. Plantings shall be replaced as needed in accordance with the approved landscaping plan. All modifications to the approved landscaping plan shall be subject to review and approval by the department of community development or the Architectural Commission. (78-38)

 

8.22.005 Removal of debris.
All weeds, trash and debris shall be removed from the landscaped area. (78-38)

 

8.22.006 Nuisances.
Failure to maintain any commercial landscaping area shall be considered a public nuisance and abated as set forth in this chapter. (78-38)

 

8.22.007 Inspection and notice.
The code enforcement officer of the City shall inspect the commercial landscaping areas and, where necessary, notify the owner of the real property or his or her agent to comply with this chapter. (78-38)

 

8.22.008 Appeal of order to comply.
An order of real property wherein the landscaped area is located, or his or her bona fide agent who has received an order from the City to correct any condition existing on the subject property, may request within fifteen days after such an order has been sent by registered mail, return receipt requested, or delivered by personal service, a hearing before the Architectural Commission sitting as a board of appeals. (78-38)

 

8.22.009 Time of hearing.
Upon receipt of a written request to appeal a order to correct any condition existing on the commercial real property, the Architectural Commission shall fix a time and place of public hearing thereon, not less than fifteen days nor more than forty days thereafter. The Commission shall make a determination and announce is decision within forty days of such hearing. The decision shall determine the validity of the violation and the order to correct the conditions in question. In the event that the order to correct is upheld, the Commission shall determine that the condition on the property is a public nuisance. The Architectural Commission shall adopt a resolution which shall state the decision and shall set forth findings in support of the decision. A copy of the resolution shall be mailed to the applicant by the City Clerk. (78-3)

 

8.22.010 Appeal to City Council.
The decision of the Architectural Commission may be appealed to the City Council within fifteen days of the date of mailing of that decision. Such request for appeal shall be made in writing to the City Clerk. (78-3)

 

8.22.011 Notice of hearing before City Council.
A notice of hearing before the City Council to consider an appeal of the Architectural Commission shall be given to the appellant in the same manner as stated in Sections 8.22.008 and 8.22.009. The decision of the City Council shall be final. (78-38)

 

8.22.012 City Council hearing.
At the time and place of hearing, the City Council shall hear and consider all relevant evidence including, but not limited to, the report of the code enforcement officer, the resolution of the Architectural Commission, objections or protests relative to the existence of a nuisance because of the condition of the commercial landscaping area, and the manner proposed for abatement of the nuisance. (78-38)

 

8.22.013 Council findings.
Upon the conclusion of said hearing, the City Council shall, on the basis of the evidence presented at such hearing, determine whether the condition of the commercial landscaping area constitutes a public nuisance. If the Council finds that a public nuisance exists, it shall, by resolution, order the same abated in a reasonable time to be set forth in the resolution. The determination of the City Council shall be final and conclusive. (78-38)

 

8.22.014 Service of order of abatement.
A copy of the City Council’s resolution ordering the abatement of the nuisance shall be served upon the owner of the property. (78-38)

 

8.22.015 Abatement after hearing.
An owner shall have the right to rehabilitate the commercial landscaping area at his or her own expense, provided the same is done prior to the expiration of the time set forth in the resolution of the City Council. If the compliance of the owner occurs within such time, the proceedings hereunder shall be deemed terminated. If such nuisance is not completely abated by the owner, as directed, within the time set forth by the City Council’s resolution, then the City Manager shall cause the same to be abated by the City forces or private contract, and entry upon the premises is expressly authorized for such purposes. (78-38)

 

8.22.016 Cost of abatement.
Where the City Manager is required to cause the rehabilitation of the commercial landscaping in order to abate the nuisance determined by the City Council, he or she shall keep an accounting of the cost thereof, including incidental expenses of such abatement. Upon conclusion of such abatement, the City Manager shall submit his or her itemized statement of costs to the City Clerk. Upon receipt of such statement, the City Clerk shall cause notice of the time and place of such hearing to be given to the owner of the property to which the same relates, and to any other interested person who requests notice, by United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to such person at his or her last known address, at least five days in advance of such hearing. The term “incidental expenses” includes, but is not limited to, the actual expenses and costs of the City in the preparation of notices, specifications and contracts, inspection of the work, and costs of printing and mailings required under this chapter. (78-38)

 

8.22.017 Report—Hearing on assessment.
At the time and place fixed for receiving and considering said report, the City Council shall hear and pass upon the report of the City Manager, together with any objections or protests raised by any of the persons liable to be assessed for the cost of abating such nuisance. Thereupon, the City Council may make such revision, correction or modification to said report as it may deem just, after which the report as submitted, or as revised, corrected or modified, shall be confirmed by resolution. Said hearing may be continued from time to time. The decision of the City Council shall be final and conclusive. (78-38)

 

8.22.018 Notice of decision.
The City Clerk shall give notice of the City Council’s decision to the owner of the property by United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to such owner at his or her last known address. (78-38)

 

8.22.019 Assessment of costs against property.
The cost of abatement of the nuisance relating to the commercial landscaping area as confirmed by the City Council shall constitute a special assessment against the land to which it relates and, after its recording, shall constitute a lien on said property in the amount of such assessment. After the confirmation of said report, a copy thereof shall be transmitted to the assessor and the tax collector for the City, whereupon it shall be the duty of said assessor and tax collector to add the amount of such assessment, or assessments, to the next regular bills of taxes levied against said respective lot or parcel of land for municipal purposes, and thereafter said amount shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure for foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. (78-38)

Chapter 8.24 LEAF BLOWERS
8.24.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter:

“Leaf blower” means any air blowing machine which uses a concentrated stream of air to blow leaves, grass cuttings, trash, or other debris.

“Parcel” means an area of real property as defined by the Los Angeles County Recorder.

“Power yard maintenance equipment” means any engine driven device or machine used primarily for the maintenance of lawns, shrubs, trees, or other landscaping. (90-29)

 

8.24.020 Leaf blower use.
Leaf blowers powered by installed line current or by battery may be used in the City subject to the provisions of this chapter not withstanding the noise standards in Chapter 16.154 of this Code. Internal combustion engine (gasoline) powered leaf blowers shall be prohibited in the City after March 1, 1991. (90-29)

 

8.24.030 Permitted hours of operation.
Electric or battery powered leaf blowers may be operated only between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., seven days per week. (90-29)

 

8.24.040 Requirements for use in residential areas.
A.     No leaf blower shall be operated for more than fifteen minutes per hour on any one parcel.

B.     No leaves or other debris shall be blown into the street, sidewalk, or beyond the parcel property line.

C.    The full blower nozzle extension shall be used for maximum efficiency and to minimize the spread of dust.

D.    When leaf blowers are used in dusty conditions, surfaces shall be moistened prior to blowing or a mister used during blowing.

E.     After leaf blower use, debris shall be disposed in trash receptacles.

F.     Leaf blowers shall be in proper working order and all manufacturer’s noise and dust control equipment on the leaf blower shall remain on the blower and be in operating condition.

G.    Leaf blower users shall operate the leaf blower with the least amount of noise and at the lowest speed possible and keep use time as short as possible.

H.    Commercial leaf blower operators shall have in their possession a Claremont business license available for inspection on site. (90-29)

 

8.24.050 Prohibition of leaf blowers on City property.
Use of any type of leaf blower on any City owned or maintained property is prohibited. (90-29)

 

8.24.060 Violation and penalty.
No person, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, shall violate, cause the violation, or otherwise fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1.12 of this Code. (09-05, 90-29)

Chapter 8.28 STORMWATER AND RUNOFF POLLUTION CONTROL
8.28.010 Definitions.
The following words, phrases and terms as used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section 8.28.010.

Act or Clean Water Act (CWA) means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq.

Adverse impact means a detrimental effect upon water quality or beneficial uses caused by a discharge or loading of a pollutant or pollutants to the storm drain system or to receiving waters.

Automotive service facility means a facility that is categorized in any one of the following Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) and North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) codes: SIC 5013, 5014, 5511, 5541, 7532-7534 and 7536-7539.

Basin Plan means the Water Quality Control Plan, Los Angeles Region, Basin Plan for the Coastal Watersheds of Los Angeles and Ventura Counties, adopted by the Regional Water Board on June 13, 1994 and subsequent amendments.

Beneficial uses means existing or potential uses of receiving waters in the permit area as designated by the Regional Board in the Basin Plan.

Best management practices (BMPs) means practices or physical devices or systems designed to prevent or reduce pollutant loading from stormwater or non-stormwater discharges to receiving waters, or designed to reduce the volume of stormwater or non-stormwater discharged to the receiving water.

Biofiltration means a LID BMP that reduces stormwater pollutant discharges by intercepting rainfall on vegetative canopy, and through incidental infiltration and/or evapotranspiration, and filtration. Incidental infiltration is an important factor in achieving the required pollutant load reduction. Therefore, the term “biofiltration” as used in this chapter is defined to include only systems designed to facilitate incidental infiltration or achieve the equivalent pollutant reduction as biofiltration BMPs with an underdrain (subject to approval by the Regional Board’s Executive Officer). Biofiltration BMPs include bioretention systems with an underdrain and bioswales.

Bioretention means a LID BMP that reduces stormwater runoff by intercepting rainfall on vegetative canopy, and through evapotranspiration and infiltration. The bioretention system typically includes a minimum two-foot top layer of a specified soil and compost mixture underlain by a gravel-filled temporary storage pit dug into the in-situ soil. As defined in the municipal NPDES permit, a bioretention BMP may be designed with an overflow drain, but may not include an underdrain. When a bioretention BMP is designed or constructed with an underdrain it is regulated by the municipal NPDES permit as biofiltration (Modified from: Order No. R4-2012-0175).

Bioswale means a LID BMP consisting of a shallow channel lined with grass or other dense, low-growing vegetation. Bioswales are designed to collect stormwater runoff and to achieve a uniform sheet flow through the dense vegetation for a period of several minutes.

City means the City of Claremont, California.

Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) means the codification of the general and permanent rules and regulations published in the Federal Register by the executive departments and agencies of the federal government of the United States.

Commercial development means any public or private activity not defined as an industrial activity in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14), involved in the storage, transportation, distribution, exchange or sale of goods and/or commodities or providing professional and/or nonprofessional services. The category includes, but is not limited to: hospitals, laboratories and other medical facilities, educational institutions, recreational facilities, plant nurseries, car wash facilities; mini-malls and other business complexes, shopping malls, hotels, office buildings, public warehouses and other light industrial complexes.

Commercial malls means any development on private land comprised of one or more buildings forming a complex of stores which sells various merchandise, with interconnecting walkways enabling visitors to easily walk from store to store, along with parking area(s). A commercial mall includes, but is not limited to: mini-malls, strip malls, other retail complexes, and enclosed shopping malls or shopping centers.

Construction activity means any construction or demolition activity, clearing, grading, grubbing, or excavation or any other activity that results in land disturbance. Construction does not include emergency construction activities required to immediately protect public health and safety or routine maintenance activities required to maintain the integrity of structures by performing minor repair and restoration work, maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purposes of the facility. See the “routine maintenance” definition for further explanation. Where clearing, grading or excavating of underlying soil takes place during a repaving operation, state general construction permit coverage is required if more than one acre is disturbed or the activities are part of a larger plan.

Control means to minimize, reduce or eliminate by technological, legal, contractual, or other means, the discharge of pollutants from an activity or activities.

Council means the City Council of the City of Claremont.

Dechlorinated/debrominated swimming pool/spa discharges means discharges from swimming pools/spas and do not include swimming pool/spa filter backwash or swimming pool/spa water containing bacteria, detergents, wastes, or algaecides, or any other chemicals including salts from salt water pools.

Department means the Community Development Department of the City of Claremont.

Development means construction, rehabilitation, redevelopment or reconstruction of any public or private residential project (whether single-family, multi-unit or planned unit development); industrial, commercial, retail, and other nonresidential projects, including public agency projects; or mass grading for future construction. It does not include routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of facility, nor does it include emergency construction activities required to immediately protect public health and safety.

Directly adjacent means situated within 200 feet of the contiguous zone required for the continued maintenance, function, and structural stability of the environmentally sensitive area.

Director means the Director of Community Development, or his/her authorized deputy, agent, representative or inspector.

Discharge means any addition, release, spill, leak, pumping, flow, escape, dumping, or disposal of any pollutant to the storm drain system or to receiving waters from any conveyance or source regulated under the Clean Water Act or its regulations.

Disturbed area means an area that is altered as a result of clearing, grading, and/or excavation.

Drinking water supplier distribution system releases means sources of flows from drinking water storage, supply and distribution line testing, and flushing and dewatering of pipes, reservoirs, and vaults, minor non-invasive well maintenance not involving chemical addition(s) where otherwise regulated by NPDES Permit No CAG674001, NPDES Permit No. CAG994005, or another separate NPDES permit.

Essential non-emergency fire fighting activities means fire fighting activities, which simulate emergency responses, and routine maintenance and testing activities necessary for the protection of life and property, including building fire suppression system maintenance and testing (e.g. sprinkler line flushing) and fire hydrant testing and maintenance. Discharges from vehicle washing are not considered essential and as such are not conditionally exempt.

Flow-through BMPs means modular, vault type “high flow biotreatment” devices contained within an impervious vault with an underdrain or designed with an impervious liner and an underdrain.

General Construction Activities Stormwater Permit (GCASP) means the general NPDES permit adopted by the State Board which authorizes the discharge of stormwater from construction activities under certain conditions.

General Industrial Activities Stormwater Permit (GIASP) means the general NPDES permit adopted by the State Board which authorizes the discharge of stormwater from certain industrial activities under certain conditions.

Green roof means a LID BMP using planter boxes and vegetation to intercept rainfall on the roof surface. Rainfall is intercepted by vegetation leaves and through evapotranspiration. Green roofs may be designed as either a bioretention BMP or as a biofiltration BMP. To receive credit as a bioretention BMP, the green roof system planting medium shall be of sufficient depth to provide capacity within the pore space volume to contain the design storm depth and may not be designed or constructed with an underdrain.

Good housekeeping practice means a best management practice related to the transfer, storage, use, or cleanup of materials which when performed in a regular manner minimizes the discharge or potential discharge of pollutants to the storm drain system and/or receiving waters.

Hazardous material means any material defined as hazardous by Chapter 6.95 of the California Health and Safety Code or any substance designated pursuant to 40 CFR 302. This also includes any unlisted hazardous substance which is a solid waste, as defined in 40 CFR 261.2, which is not excluded from regulation as a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261.4(b), or is a hazardous substance under Section 101(14) of the Act, if it exhibits any of the characteristics identified in 40 CFR 261.20 through 261.24.

Hazardous waste means a hazardous material which is to be discharged, discarded, recycled, and/or reprocessed.

Hillside means a property located in an area with known erosive soil conditions, where the development contemplates grading on any natural slope that is 25% or greater and where grading contemplates cut or fill slopes.

Illicit connection means either of the following:

1.     Any drain or conveyance whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by a government agency; or

2.     Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent records and approved by the City.

Illicit discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system or receiving waters that is prohibited under local, state, or federal statutes, ordinances, codes, or regulations. Illicit discharge includes all non-stormwater discharges except discharges pursuant to a NPDES permit or discharges that are exempted or conditionally exempted by such permit.

Impervious surface means any man-made or modified surface that prevents or significantly reduces the entry of water into the underlying soil, resulting in runoff from the surface in greater quantities and/or at an increased rate, when compared to natural conditions prior to development. Examples of places that commonly exhibit impervious surfaces include parking lots, driveways, roadways, storage areas, and rooftops. The imperviousness of these areas commonly results from paving, compacted gravel, compacted earth, and oiled earth.

Industrial activity means any public or private activity as defined in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14) required to obtain a NPDES permit.

Industrial/commercial facility means any public or private facility involved and/or used in the production, manufacture, storage, transportation, distribution, exchange or sale of goods and/or commodities, or any facility involved and/or used in providing professional and nonprofessional services. This category of facility includes, but is not limited to, any facility defined by a Standard Industrial Classification (SIC).

Industrial park means land development that is set aside for industrial development. Industrial parks are usually located close to transport facilities, especially where more than one transport modalities coincide: highways, railroads, airports, and navigable rivers. It includes office parks, which have offices and light industry.

Infiltration BMP means a LID BMP that reduces stormwater runoff by capturing and infiltrating the runoff into in-situ soils or amended onsite soils. Examples of infiltration BMPs include infiltration basins, dry wells, and pervious pavement.

LID means low impact development. LID consists of building and landscape features designed to retain or filter stormwater runoff.

MS4 means Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4). The MS4 is a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains):

1.     Owned or operated by a state, city, town, borough, county, parish, district, association, or other public body (created by or pursuant to state law) having jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, industrial wastes, stormwater, or other wastes, including special districts under state law such as a sewer district, flood control district or drainage district, or similar entity, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian tribal organization, or a designated and approved management agency under section 208 of the CWA that discharges to waters of the United States;

2.     Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;

3.     Which is not a combined sewer; and

4.     Which is not part of a Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) as defined at 40 CFR Section 122.2.

National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit means a general, group, or industrial permit issued by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the State Water Resources Control Board or a California Regional Water Quality Control Board pursuant to the Act, that authorizes discharges to waters of the United States.

New development means land disturbing activities; structural development, including construction or installation of a building or structure, creation of impervious surfaces; and land subdivision.

Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system and/or receiving waters that is not composed entirely of stormwater.

Parking lot means land area or facility for the parking or storage of motor vehicles used for businesses, commerce, industry, or personal use, with a lot size of 5,000 square feet or more of surface area, or with 25 or more parking spaces.

Permit means the Waste Discharge Requirements for Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems within the Coastal Watersheds of Los Angeles County (Order No. R4-2012-0175) and the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit No. CAS004001, including any amendments, reissuance, renewal, or successor permit issued by the Regional Board.

Person means any natural person, firm, association, club, organization, corporation, partnership, business, trust, public agency, company or other entity which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.

Planning priority projects means development projects subject to permittee conditioning and approval for the design and implementation of post-construction controls to mitigate stormwater pollution, prior to completion of the project(s).

Pollutant shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section 502(6) of the Act and as incorporated into the California Water Code Section 13373. Pollutants include, but are not limited to, the following:

1.     Commercial and industrial waste (such as fuels, solvents, chemicals, detergents, plastic pellets, hazardous materials or substances, hazardous wastes, fertilizers, pesticides, soot, slag, ash, and sludge);

2.     Metals (such as cadmium, lead, zinc, copper, silver, nickel, chromium and arsenic) and nonmetals (such as carbon, chlorine, fluorine, phosphorous and sulfur);

3.     Petroleum hydrocarbons (such as fuels, oils, lubricants, surfactants, waste oils, solvents, coolants, and grease);

4.     Eroded soils, sediment, and particulate materials in amounts which may adversely affect any beneficial use of the receiving waters, flora, or fauna of the state;

5.     Animal wastes (such as discharges from confinement facilities, kennels, pens, recreational facilities, stables, and show facilities);

6.     Substances having acidic or corrosive characteristics such as a pH of less than six or greater than nine;

7.     Substances having unusual coloration or turbidity, levels of fecal coliform, fecal streptococcus, or enterococcus, which may adversely affect the beneficial use of the receiving waters, flora, or fauna of the state; and

8.     Anything which causes the deterioration of water quality such that it impairs subsequent and/or competing uses of the water.

Project means all development, redevelopment, and land disturbing activities. The term is not limited to “project” as defined under CEQA (Pub. Resources Code Section 21065).

Rainfall harvest and use means a LID BMP system designed to capture runoff, typically from a roof but can also include runoff capture from elsewhere within the site, and to provide for temporary storage until the harvested water can be used for irrigation or non-potable uses. The harvested water may also be used for potable water uses if the system includes disinfection treatment and is approved for such use by the local building department.

Receiving waters means all waters of the United States into which a pollutant is or may be discharged. “Waters of the United States” means surface watercourses and water bodies as defined at 40 CFR 122.2, including all natural waterways and definite channels and depressions in the earth that may carry water, even though such waterways may only carry water during rains and storms and may not carry stormwater at and during all times and seasons.

Redevelopment means land-disturbing activity that results in the creation, addition, or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious surface area on an already developed site. Redevelopment includes, but is not limited to: the expansion of a building footprint; addition or replacement of a structure; replacement of impervious surface area that is not part of routine maintenance activity; and land disturbing activity related to structural or impervious surfaces. It does not include routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of facility, nor does it include emergency construction activities required to immediately protect public health and safety.

Regional Board means a Los Angeles Regional Water Quality Control Board.

Retail gasoline outlet means any facility engaged in selling gasoline and lubricating oils.

Routine Maintenance. “Routine maintenance” projects include, but are not limited to, projects conducted to:

1.     Maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of the facility.

2.     Perform as needed restoration work to preserve the original design grade, integrity and hydraulic capacity of flood control facilities.

3.     Includes road shoulder work, re-grading dirt or gravel roadways and shoulders and performing ditch cleanouts.

4.     Update existing lines* and facilities to comply with applicable codes, standards, and regulations regardless if such projects result in increased capacity.

5.     Repair leaks.

“Routine maintenance” does not include construction of new** lines or facilities resulting from compliance with applicable codes, standards and regulations.

*      Update existing lines includes replacing existing lines with new materials or pipes.

**    New lines are those that are not associated with existing facilities and are not part of a project to update or replace existing lines (Source: Order No. R4-2012-0175).

Runoff means any stormwater or non-stormwater discharge from any surface and/or drainage area that reaches the storm drain system and/or receiving waters.

Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) means a classification pursuant to the current edition of the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President of the United States, Office of Management and Budget, and as the same may be periodically revised.

Significant Ecological Areas (SEAs) means an area that is determined to possess an example of biotic resources that cumulatively represent biological diversity, for the purposes of protecting biotic diversity, as part of the Los Angeles County General Plan. Areas are designated as SEAs, if they possess one or more of the following criteria:

1.     The habitat of rare, endangered, and threatened plant and animal species.

2.     Biotic communities, vegetative associations, and habitat of plant and animal species that are either one of a kind, or are restricted in distribution on a regional basis.

3.     Biotic communities, vegetative associations, and habitat of plant and animal species that are either one of a kind or are restricted in distribution in Los Angeles County.

4.     Habitat that at some point in the life cycle of a species or group of species, serves as a concentrated breeding, feeding, resting, migrating grounds and is limited in availability either regionally or within Los Angeles County.

5.     Biotic resources that are of scientific interest because they are either an extreme in physical/geographical limitations, or represent an unusual variation in a population or community.

6.     Areas important as game species habitat or as fisheries.

7.     Areas that would provide for the preservation of relatively undisturbed examples of natural biotic communities in Los Angeles County.

8.     Special areas (Source: Order No. R4-2012-0175).

Site means land or water area where any “facility or activity” is physically located or conducted, including adjacent land used in connection with the facility or activity.

State Board means the State Water Resources Control Board.

Storm drain system means any street, gutter, conduit, natural or artificial drain, curb, inlet, detention and retention basins, channel and watercourse, and/or other facility or any combination thereof, that is owned or operated by the city and used for the purpose of collecting, storing, conveying, transporting, and/or disposing of runoff.

Storm water or stormwater means any surface flow, runoff or drainage which originates from atmospheric moisture (rainfall or snowmelt) and falls onto land, water, and/or other surfaces.

Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) means a plan required by and whose contents are specified in a NPDES permit.

Stormwater runoff means stormwater which travels across any surface to the storm drain system or receiving waters.

Structural BMP means any permanent facility constructed to control, treat, store, divert, neutralize, dispose of, and/or monitor runoff in order to reduce or measure pollutants.

SUSMP means the Los Angeles Countywide Standard Urban Stormwater Mitigation Plan. The SUSMP was required as part of the previous Municipal NPDES Permit (Order No. 01-182, NPDES No. CAS004001) and required plans that designate best management practices (BMPs) that must be used in specified categories of development projects. The requirements of this chapter replace the SUSMP unless otherwise required by the Director or State or Regional Board.

Uncontrolled discharge means any discharge, intentional or accidental, occurring in such a manner that the discharger is unable to determine or regulate the quantity, quality or effects of the discharge.

Urban runoff means surface water flow produced by storm and non-storm events. Non-storm events include flow from residential, commercial, or industrial activities involving the use of potable and non-potable water.

U.S. EPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency. (14-05)

 

8.28.020 General provisions.
A.     Short Title. The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the “Stormwater and Runoff Pollution Control Ordinance” and may be referred to as such.

B.     Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health and safety of the residents of the city by protecting the beneficial uses, marine habitats, and ecosystems of receiving waters from pollutants carried by stormwater and non-stormwater discharges. The intent of this chapter is to enhance and protect the water quality of receiving waters consistent with the Act.

C.    Applicability of This Chapter. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the discharge, deposit, addition or disposal of any non-stormwater, stormwater and/or runoff to the storm drain system and/or receiving waters within the City of Claremont.

D.    Standards, Guidelines and Criteria. The Director may establish uniform minimum standards, guidelines, and/or criteria for specific discharges, connections and/or BMPs. The provisions of this section shall not prohibit the Director from requiring a discharger or permittee from taking additional measures to achieve the objectives of this chapter or any permit. (14-05)

 

8.28.030 Discharge to the storm drain system.
A.     Except as otherwise conditionally authorized by the Permit or any other NPDES permit, waiver or waste discharge order issued by the U.S. EPA, the State Board, or a regional board, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver or order and other applicable laws and regulations, including the provisions of this chapter, and subject to any requirements specified by the Director, no person shall:

1.     Discharge non-stormwater to the City’s storm drain system or to receiving waters except in compliance with the requirements of this chapter;

2.     Cause, allow or facilitate any prohibited discharge;

3.     Discharge, cause, allow or facilitate any discharge that may cause or threaten to cause a condition of pollution or nuisance as defined in Water Code Section 13050, that may cause, threaten to cause or contribute to an exceedance of any water quality standard in any Statewide Water Quality Control Plan, California Toxics Rule, or Basin Plan, or that may cause or contribute to the violation of any receiving water limitation.

B.     Pursuant to the Permit, discharges which may be conditionally authorized subject to best management practices and other restrictions or prohibitions determined by the Director include, but are not limited to, the following types of discharges:

1.     Authorized non-stormwater discharges from emergency firefighting activities (i.e., flows necessary for the protection of life or property);

2.     Natural flows, including natural springs;

3.     Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;

4.     Diverted stream flows, authorized by the State or Regional Water Board;

5      Uncontaminated ground water infiltration;

6.     Rising groundwaters where groundwater seepage is not otherwise covered by a NPDES permit;

7.     Discharges from drinking water supplier distribution systems where not otherwise regulated by an individual or general NPDES permit;

8.     Landscape irrigation;

9.     Uncontaminated foundation and footing drains;

10.   Uncontaminated water from crawl space pumps;

11.   Air conditioning condensation;

12.   Uncontaminated non-industrial roof drains;

13.   Individual residential and occasional non-commercial car washing;

14.   Dechlorinated/debrominated swimming pool/spa discharges; and

15.   Street and sidewalk wash waters.

C.    The Director may limit or prohibit any discharge which is conditionally authorized by the Permit if the discharge is a source of pollutants or causes or contributes to an exceedance of applicable receiving water limitations or water quality based effluent limitations, including but not limited to imposing conditions on such discharge, requiring control measures and other actions to reduce pollutants, requiring diversion of the discharge to the sanitary sewer, or requiring pretreatment.

D.    The Director may require any person to obtain a permit from the City before discharging, or causing, allowing, or facilitating any discharge to the storm drain system. It is unlawful to discharge, cause, allow, or facilitate any discharge to the storm drain system in violation of any permit so required.

E.     Littering and other discharge of polluting or damaging substances prohibited.

1.     No person shall cause any refuse, rubbish, food waste, garbage, or any other discarded or abandoned objects to be littered, thrown, deposited, left, accumulated, maintained or kept in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain, inlet, catch basin, conduit, drainage structure, place of business, or upon any public or private property so that the same may or does become a pollutant which may or does enter the storm drain system or receiving waters, except when such materials are placed in containers, bags, recycling bins, or other lawfully established waste disposal facilities protected from stormwater or runoff.

2.     No person shall cause the disposal of hazardous materials or hazardous wastes into trash containers used for municipal trash disposal.

3.     No person shall cause to be discharged to the storm drain system or to receiving waters any pesticide, fungicide, or herbicide prohibited by the U.S. EPA or the California Department of Pesticide Regulation.

4.     No person shall cause the accumulation of pollutants, leaves, dirt, or other landscape debris into a street, alley, catch basin, culvert, curb, gutter, inlet, ditch, natural watercourse, flood control channel, canal, storm drain, or any fabricated or natural conveyance so that the same may or does become a pollutant which may or does enter the storm drain system or receiving waters.

5.     No person shall cause the disposal of sanitary or septic waste or sewage into the storm drain system from any property or residence or any type of recreational vehicle, camper, bus, boat, holding tank, portable toilet, vacuum truck or other mobile source of waste holding tank, container or device.

6.     No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged anything that would result in or contribute to a violation of the city’s NPDES permit and any amendment, revision or re-issuance, thereof, either separately or when combined with other discharges. (14-05)

 

8.28.031 Illicit connections prohibited.
A.     Installation or Use of Illicit Connections Prohibited. No person shall install, maintain or use any connection to the storm drain system or act, cause, permit or suffer any non-stormwater to be discharged or conveyed through a connection to the storm drain system unless the connection has been permitted by the Director. This prohibition is retroactive and applies to connections made in the past, regardless of whether made under a permit or other authorization, or whether permissible under the laws or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of the connection.

B.     Removal of Illicit Connection From the Storm Drain System. If any person fails to remove an illicit connection upon notification by the Director, or upon revocation of a connection permit, the Director may remove such connection from the storm drain system pursuant to Section 8.28.060 of this chapter. The Director may pursue the recovery of costs for such removal pursuant to Section 8.28.060 of this chapter. (14-05)

 

8.28.032 Best management practices required.
A.     Any person engaged in activities which will or may result in pollutants entering the City storm drain system shall undertake all control measures and BMPs as the Director may require to reduce such pollutants. Premises with a high potential threat of discharge may be required to implement a monitoring program meeting standards established by the City. Where best management practices guidelines or requirements have been adopted by any federal, state, regional, and/or city agency, for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to stormwater pollution or contamination, illicit discharges, and/or discharges of non-stormwater to the storm drain system, every person undertaking such activity or operation, or owning or operating such facility shall comply with such guidelines or requirements as may be identified by the Director.

B.     Installation of Structural BMPs. No person shall install a structural BMP for the purpose of treating, neutralizing, disposing of, monitoring or diverting to the sanitary sewer system any runoff without the approval of the Director and of the Los Angeles County Sanitation District or any successor thereto. Such facilities may be subject to plan review, application and issuance of operating permits pursuant to this Code.

C.    BMPs to Be Consistent With Environmental Goals. No person shall install or implement a BMP that transfers pollutants to air, groundwater, surface soils and/or other media in a manner inconsistent with applicable environmental laws and regulations.

D.    The Director may require any person responsible for any industrial or commercial facility or new or redevelopment project to submit documentation demonstrating coverage by and compliance with any applicable permit, including copies of any notice of intent, stormwater pollution prevention plans, inspection reports, monitoring results, and other information deemed necessary to assess compliance with this chapter or any NPDES permit. Each discharger identified in an individual NPDES permit relating to stormwater discharges shall comply with and undertake all activities required by such permit.

E.     The Director may require any person responsible for any industrial or commercial facility or new or redevelopment project to enter into an agreement for the operation and maintenance of any structural control measures and to record such agreement with the County Recorder’s office.

F.     The following BMPs are required of every owner or occupant of any property:

1.     No person shall leave, deposit, discharge, dump, or otherwise expose any chemical, fuel, animal waste, garbage, batteries and/or septic waste in an area where actual or potential discharge to the city streets or the storm drain system may occur. Any spills, discharge, or residues shall be removed as soon as possible and disposed of properly.

2.     Runoff from landscape irrigation, air conditioning condensate, water line flushing, foundation/footing drains, individual residential car washing, dechlorinated/debrominated swimming pool/spa discharges and sidewalk washing shall be conducted in a manner which minimizes or eliminates the possibility of pollutant discharges reaching the city storm drain system or receiving waters.

3.     Runoff from washing paved areas, including but not limited to parking lots, on industrial or commercial property is prohibited unless specifically required by federal, state, or local health or safety codes and not in violation of any other provision of this code. Runoff from authorized washing of paved areas shall be minimized to the extent practicable.

4.     Objects, such as motor vehicle parts, containing grease, oil, or other hazardous materials, and unsealed receptacles containing hazardous materials, shall not be stored in areas exposed to stormwater or otherwise susceptible to runoff.

5.     Any machinery or equipment which is to be repaired or maintained in areas exposed to stormwater or otherwise susceptible to runoff shall be provided with containment areas to control leaks, spills, or discharges.

6.     All motor vehicle parking lots with more than 25 parking spaces and located in areas exposed to stormwater or otherwise susceptible to runoff shall have debris removed by regular sweeping or other equally effective measures. Such debris shall be collected and properly disposed of. (14-05)

 

8.28.033 Monitoring, information collection, and reporting.
A.     The Director may require any person discharging or causing, allowing, or facilitating a discharge to the storm drain system or receiving waters to take any or all of the following actions:

1.     To submit information necessary to comply with the Permit or to confirm that person’s compliance with this chapter;

2.     To monitor discharges and submit reports of discharge activities;

3.     To maintain records of monitoring and discharging; and

4.     To take any other action necessary to comply with the Permit or this chapter.

B.     Notwithstanding any other requirement of law, any known or suspected release of materials, pollutants or waste, which may result in pollutants or non-stormwater discharges entering stormwater, the storm drain system or waters of the state or United States, shall be reported immediately in the following manner by any person in charge of a premises or responsible for the premises’ emergency response:

1.     The release of a hazardous material shall be immediately reported to emergency services by emergency dispatch services (911).

2.     The release of a nonhazardous material shall be reported as follows:

a.     To the Director and to the 24-hour stormwater hotline by telephone no later than 5:00 p.m. on the same business day;

b.     If the release occurs after 5:00 p.m. on a weekday, on a weekend or holiday, to the 24-hour stormwater hotline on the same day and to the Director by telephone on the next business day;

c.     A written notification of the release shall also be made to the Director within 10 business days of the release. A copy of the written notice shall be retained at the premises for at least three years. The notification shall include a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge, corrective action taken and measures to be taken to prevent future occurrences, and measures taken to remediate the effects of the discharge. Such notification shall not relieve the discharger or permittee from liability or fines incurred as a result of the uncontrolled discharge.

3.     In addition to the above requirements, the release of any hazardous materials or substances, sewage, oil, or petroleum to any waters of the state, or discharged or deposited where it is or probably will be discharged in or on any waters of the state, shall be reported to the State Office of Emergency Services, as required by Sections 13271 and 13272 of California Water Code. (14-05)

 

8.28.034 Control of runoff required—Industrial and commercial facilities.
A.     Prohibited Discharges From Industrial or Commercial Activity. Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. The following discharges from industrial or commercial activities are prohibited unless the discharge is in compliance with a NPDES permit:

1.     Discharge of wash waters to the storm drain system from the cleaning of gas stations, auto repair garages, or other types of auto repair facilities;

2.     Discharge of wastewater to the storm drain system from mobile auto washing, steam cleaning, mobile carpet cleaning, or other such mobile commercial and industrial operations;

3.     Discharge to the storm drain system from areas where repair of machinery and equipment, including motor vehicles, which are visibly leaking oil, fluids or coolants is undertaken;

4.     Discharge to the storm drain system from storage areas for materials containing grease, oil, or hazardous materials, or from uncovered receptacles containing hazardous materials, grease, or oil;

5.     Discharge of commercial/public swimming pool filter backwash to the storm drain system;

6.     Discharge from the washing of toxic materials from paved or unpaved areas to the storm drain system;

7.     Discharge from the washing out of concrete trucks to the storm drain system; and

8.     Discharge from the washing or rinsing of restaurant mats, equipment or garbage bins or cans in such a manner that causes non-stormwater to enter the storm drain system.

B.     Industrial/Commercial Facility Sources Required to Obtain a NPDES Permit. Any industrial or commercial facility required to have a NPDES permit shall retain on-site and, upon request, make immediately available to the Director the following documents as evidence of compliance with permit requirements, as applicable:

1.     A copy of a NPDES permit or notice of intent to comply with a general permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial or construction activity as submitted to the state board or report of waste discharge as submitted to a regional board of jurisdiction;

2.     A waste discharge identification number issued by the state board or copy of the NPDES permit issued by a regional board;

3.     A SWPPP and a monitoring program plan or group monitoring plan;

4.     Stormwater quality data; and

5.     Evidence of facility self-inspection.

C.    Best Management Practices for Industrial and Commercial Facilities. All industrial and commercial facilities shall implement BMPs which will effectively prevent the direct or indirect discharge of pollutants to the storm drain system or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable. Minimum BMPs applicable to all industrial and commercial facilities include, but are not limited to:

1.     Termination of all non-stormwater discharge to the storm drain system that is not specifically authorized by a NPDES permit;

2.     Exercising general good housekeeping practices;

3.     Incorporating regular scheduled preventative maintenance into operations;

4.     Maintaining spill prevention and control procedures;

5.     Implementing soil erosion control;

6.     Posting on-site private storm drains to indicate that they are not to receive liquid, solid wastes or pollutants;

7.     Implementing regular cleaning of the on-site private storm drain system; and

8.     Insuring that stormwater runoff is directed away from operating, processing, fueling, cleaning and storage areas. (14-05)

 

8.28.035 Control of runoff required—Municipal facilities.
Public Facility Sources Required to Obtain a NPDES Permit. Any public facility required to have a NPDES permit shall retain on-site and, upon request, make immediately available to the Director the following documents as evidence of compliance with permit requirements, as applicable:

A.     A copy of a NPDES permit or notice of intent to comply with a general permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial or construction activity as submitted to the state board or report of waste discharge as submitted to a regional board of jurisdiction;

B.     A waste discharge identification number issued by the state board or copy of the NPDES permit issued by a regional board;

C.    A SWPPP and a monitoring program plan or group monitoring plan;

D.    Stormwater quality data; and

E.     Evidence of facility self-inspection. (14-05)

 

8.28.040 Control of runoff required—Construction activity.
A.     Stormwater and Runoff Pollution Mitigation for Construction Activity. No person shall commence any construction activity for which a permit is required by this chapter or any law or regulation without implementing all stormwater and runoff pollution mitigation measures required by such permit(s), law, regulation or this chapter. In addition to any other requirements set forth in this chapter, prior to obtaining a grading or building permit, each operator of any construction activity shall submit evidence to the Director that all applicable permits have been obtained, including but not limited to the General Construction Activities Stormwater Permit and State Water Board 401 Water Quality Certification.

B.     No grading permit shall be issued for any development with a disturbed area of one acre or greater or which is part of a larger common plan of development unless the applicant can show that (1) a notice of intent to comply with the State Construction Activity Stormwater Permit has been filed and (2) a stormwater pollution prevention plan has been prepared. The City may adopt regulations establishing controls on the volume and rate of stormwater runoff from new developments and redevelopments of less than one acre as may be appropriate to minimize the discharge and transport of pollutants.

C.    Prior to obtaining a grading or building permit, each operator of any construction site of less than one acre shall cause to be prepared and submitted to the City an erosion and sediment control plan which satisfies the requirements of the Permit, to ensure that discharges of pollutants are effectively prohibited and will not cause or contribute to an exceedance of water quality standards. A SWPPP prepared in accordance with the General Construction Permit may be substituted for an erosion and sediment control plan. No operator of any construction activity shall commence any construction activity prior to receiving written approval of the erosion and sediment control plan from the Director.

D.    Best Management Practices for Construction Activity. All BMPs required as a condition of any NPDES permit for construction activity granted by U.S. EPA, the State Water Resources Control Board, or a regional board or pursuant to this Code shall be maintained in full force and effect during the term of the project, unless authorized by the Director. (14-05)

 

8.28.041 Control of runoff required—New development and redevelopment.
A.     Prior to construction of a development, redevelopment or new development project, such project shall be evaluated by the City for its potential to discharge pollutants to the storm drain system or to receiving waters based on its intended land use. Such evaluation shall be conducted in accordance with development planning requirements established by the Regional Board or its Executive Officer, pursuant to the municipal NPDES permit. No discretionary permit may be issued for any new development or redevelopment project until the Director finds that the project plans comply with the LID/SUSMP requirements set forth in the Permit and in this chapter.

B.     Once a development, redevelopment or new development project has been evaluated for its potential to discharge pollutants to the storm drain system or receiving waters, the City shall require appropriate BMPs to be implemented during construction and following project completion. The prescription of BMPs shall be in keeping with Standard Urban Stormwater Mitigation Plan requirements established by the regional board or its executive officer, pursuant to the municipal NPDES permit and with this chapter. (14-05)

 

8.28.050 Stormwater pollution control measures for development planning and construction activities.
A.     Objective. The provisions of this section contain requirements for construction activities and facility operations of development and redevelopment projects to comply with the current “municipal NPDES permit,” lessen the water quality impacts of development by using smart growth practices, and integrate LID design principles to mimic predevelopment hydrology through infiltration, evapotranspiration and rainfall harvest and use. LID shall be inclusive of SUSMP requirements.

B.     Scope. This section contains requirements for stormwater pollution control measures in development and redevelopment projects and authorizes the City of Claremont to further define and adopt stormwater pollution control measures, develop LID principles and requirements, including but not limited to the objectives and specifications for integration of LID strategies, alternative compliance for technical infeasibility from the requirements of the onsite retention requirements, and collect funds for projects that are granted alternative compliance for technical infeasibility. Except as otherwise provided herein, the City of Claremont shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this section.

C.    Applicability. The following development and redevelopment projects, termed “planning priority projects,” shall comply with the requirements of Section 8.28.050:

1.     All development projects equal to one acre or greater of disturbed area that adds more than 10,000 square feet of impervious surface area.

2.     Industrial parks 10,000 square feet or more of surface area.

3.     Commercial malls 10,000 square feet or more of surface area.

4.     Retail gasoline outlets with 5,000 square feet or more of surface area.

5.     Restaurants (Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) of 5812) with 5,000 square feet or more of surface area.

6.     Parking lots with 5,000 square feet or more of impervious surface area, or with 25 or more parking spaces.

7.     Streets and roads construction of 10,000 square feet or more of impervious surface area.

8.     Automotive service facilities of 5,000 square feet or more of surface area.

9.     Projects located in or directly adjacent to, or discharging directly to an Environmentally Sensitive Area (ESA), where the development will:

a.     Discharge stormwater runoff that is likely to impact a sensitive biological species or habitat; and

b.     Create 2,500 square feet or more of impervious surface area.

10.   Single-family hillside homes.

11.   Redevelopment Projects.

a.     Land disturbing activity that results in the creation or addition or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious surface area on an already developed site on planning priority project categories.

b.     Where redevelopment results in an alteration to more than 50% of impervious surfaces of a previously existing development, and the existing development was not subject to post-construction stormwater quality control requirements, the entire project must be mitigated.

c.     Where redevelopment results in an alteration of less than 50% of impervious surfaces of a previously existing development, and the existing development was not subject to post-construction stormwater quality control requirements, only the alteration must be mitigated, and not the entire development.

d.     Redevelopment does not include routine maintenance activities that are conducted to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, original purpose of facility or emergency redevelopment activity required to protect public health and safety. Impervious surface replacement, such as the reconstruction of parking lots and roadways which does not disturb additional area and maintains the original grade and alignment, is considered a routine maintenance activity. Redevelopment does not include the repaving of existing roads to maintain original line and grade.

e.     Existing single-family dwelling and accessory structures are exempt from the redevelopment requirements unless such projects create, add, or replace 10,000 square feet of impervious surface area.

D.    Effective Date. The planning and land development requirements contained in Section 7 of Order No. R4-2012-0175 became effective 90 days from the adoption of the Order (February 6, 2013). This includes planning priority projects that are discretionary permit projects or project phases that have not been deemed complete for processing, or discretionary permit projects without vesting tentative maps that have not requested and received an extension of previously granted approvals within 90 days of adoption of the Order. Projects that have been deemed complete within 90 days of adoption of the Order are not subject to the requirements of Section 7.

E.     Stormwater Pollution Control Requirements. The site for every planning priority project shall be designed to control pollutants, pollutant loads, and runoff volume to the maximum extent feasible by minimizing impervious surface area and controlling runoff from impervious surfaces through infiltration, evapotranspiration, bioretention and/or rainfall harvest and use.

1.     A new single-family hillside home development shall include mitigation measures to:

a.     Conserve natural areas;

b.     Protect slopes and channels;

c.     Provide storm drain system stenciling and signage;

d.     Divert roof runoff to vegetated areas before discharge unless the diversion would result in slope instability; and

e.     Direct surface flow to vegetated areas before discharge, unless the diversion would result in slope instability.

2.     Street and road construction of 10,000 square feet or more of impervious surface shall be in accordance with the City of Claremont’s Green Street Policy and the USEPA guidance regarding Managing Wet Weather with Green Infrastructure: Green Streets (December 2008 EPA-833-F-08-009) to the maximum extent practicable.

3.     The remainder of planning priority projects shall prepare a LID plan to comply with the following:

a.     Retain stormwater runoff onsite for the stormwater quality design volume (SWQDv) defined as the runoff from:

i.      The 85th percentile 24-hour runoff event as determined from the Los Angeles County 85th percentile precipitation isohyetal map; or

ii.     The volume of runoff produced from a 0.75 inch, 24-hour rain event, whichever is greater.

b.     When, as determined by the City of Claremont, 100% onsite retention of the SWQDv is technically infeasible, partially or fully, the infeasibility shall be demonstrated in the submitted LID plan. The technical infeasibility may result from conditions that may include, but are not limited to:

i.      The infiltration rate of saturated in-situ soils is less than 0.3 inch per hour and it is not technically feasible to amend the in-situ soils to attain an infiltration rate necessary to achieve reliable performance of infiltration or bioretention BMPs in retaining the SWQDv onsite;

ii.     Locations where seasonal high groundwater is within five (5) to ten (10) feet of surface grade;

iii.     Locations within 100 feet of a groundwater well used for drinking water;

iv.    Brownfield development sites or other locations where pollutant mobilization is a documented concern;

v.     Locations with potential geotechnical hazards;

vi.    Smart growth and infill or redevelopment locations where the density and/or nature of the project would create significant difficulty for compliance with the onsite volume retention requirement.

c.     If partial or complete onsite retention is technically infeasible, the project site may biofiltrate 1.5 times the portion of the remaining SWQDv that is not reliably retained onsite. Biofiltration BMPs must adhere to the design specifications and requirements specified in the Los Angeles County Municipal NPDES Permit.

Additional alternative compliance options such as offsite infiltration may be available to the project site. The project site should contact the City of Claremont to determine eligibility.

d.     The remaining SWQDv that cannot be retained or biofiltered onsite must be treated onsite to reduce pollutant loading. BMPs must be selected and designed to meet pollutant-specific benchmarks as required per the Municipal NPDES Permit. Flow-through BMPs may be used to treat the remaining SWQDv and must be sized based on a rainfall intensity of:

i.      0.2 inches per hour, or

ii.     The one-year, one-hour rainfall intensity as determined from the most recent Los Angeles County isohyetal map, whichever is greater.

e.     A multi-phased project may comply with the standards and requirements of this section for all of its phases by: (i) designing a system acceptable to the City of Claremont to satisfy these standards and requirements for the entire site during the first phase, and (ii) implementing these standards and requirements for each phase of development or redevelopment of the site during the first phase or prior to commencement of construction of a later phase, to the extent necessary to treat the stormwater from such later phase. For purposes of this section, “multi-phased project” shall mean any planning priority project implemented over more than one phase and the site of a multi-phased project shall include any land and water area designed and used to store, treat or manage stormwater runoff in connection with the development or redevelopment, including any tracts, lots, or parcels of real property, whether developed or not, associated with, functionally connected to, or under common ownership or control with such development or redevelopment.

F.     Non-Planning Priority Projects. For new development or redevelopment projects not meeting the “planning priority projects” thresholds, but which may potentially have adverse impacts on post-development stormwater quality, a site-specific plan including post-construction design, source and/or treatment control to mitigate stormwater pollution shall be required where one or more of the following project characteristics exist:

1.     Vehicle or equipment fueling areas;

2.     Vehicle or equipment maintenance areas, including washing and repair;

3.     Commercial or industrial waste handling or storage;

4.     Outdoor handling or storage of hazardous materials;

5.     Outdoor manufacturing areas;

6.     Outdoor food handling or processing;

7.     Outdoor animal car, confinement, or slaughter; or

8.     Outdoor horticultural activities.

G.    Other Agencies of the City of Claremont. All City of Claremont departments, offices, entities and agencies, shall establish administrative procedures necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter on their development and redevelopment projects and report their activities annually to the Director of Community Development.

H.    Certification. As a condition for issuing a certificate of occupancy for a new development or redevelopment project, the Director shall require the applicant, facility operators and/or owners, as appropriate, to construct and/or employ all stormwater control BMPs identified in the approved development planning documents and submit a signed certification stating that the project site and all BMPs will be employed and maintained in compliance with the City’s LID/SUSMP ordinance and other applicable regulatory requirements until the responsibility for such maintenance is legally transferred.

I.      Fees. City Council may establish fees for services provided under this chapter, as authorized under Sections 66016 and 66018 of the California Government Code. (14-05)

 

8.28.060 Violations and enforcement.
A.     Enforcement—Director’s Powers and Duties. The Director shall have primary responsibility for the enforcement of the regulations in this chapter. The Director may enter into agreements with other departments for the purpose of implementing this chapter.

B.     Identification for Inspectors and Maintenance Personnel. The Director shall provide means of identification to inspectors and storm drain system maintenance personnel which shall identify them as such. Inspectors and storm drain system maintenance personnel shall identify themselves upon request in the performance of their duties under this chapter.

C.    Obstructing Access to Facilities Prohibited. No object, whether a permanent structure, a temporary structure, or any object which is difficult to remove, shall be located on any storm drain easement or placed in such a position as to interfere with the ready and easy access to any facility conveying stormwater or runoff as described in this chapter unless authority is granted by the Director. Upon notification by the Director, any such obstruction shall be immediately removed by the responsible party at no expense to the City, and shall not be replaced.

D.    Inspection to Ascertain Compliance—Access Required.

1.     The Director may inspect in a manner authorized by law, as often as he/she deems necessary, any publicly or privately owned storm drain, storm drain connection, street, gutter, yard, plant, storage facility, building, BMP, NPDES permit, SWPPP, stormwater management plan, construction activity or other facility to ascertain whether such facilities, plans, or protective measures are in place, maintained and operated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

2.     In the course of such inspection, the Director may:

a.     Inspect, sample, make flow measurements of any runoff, discharge or threatened discharge;

b.     Place on the premises devices for runoff or discharge sampling, monitoring, flow measuring or metering;

c.     Inspect, copy, or examine any records, reports, plans, test results or other information required to carry out the provisions of this chapter, to the extent allowed by law; and

d.     Photograph any materials, storage areas, waste, waste containers, BMP, vehicle, connection, discharge, runoff and/or violation discovered during an inspection.

E.     Interference With Inspector Prohibited. No person shall, during reasonable hours, refuse, restrict, resist or attempt to resist the entrance of the Director into any building, factory, plant, yard, construction project or other place or portions thereof in the performance of his/her duty within the powers conferred upon him/her by law.

F.     Notice to Correct Violations—Director May Take Action. The Director may issue a notice of violation and order to comply to achieve compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Failure to comply with the terms and conditions of a notice of violation and order to comply shall constitute a violation of this chapter. If a person fails to comply with an order issued under this section to remove an illicit connection, obstruction or other encroachment to the storm drain system, the Director may perform the work as provided in subsection H of this section. The person responsible for installing or operating such a facility shall be liable to the City for the cost of such work, including reasonable attorneys’ fees and other costs of enforcement, to be recovered in a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction.

G.    Violation a Public Nuisance. Any discharge in violation of this chapter, any illicit connection, and/or any violation of runoff management requirements shall constitute a threat to public health and safety and is declared and deemed a public nuisance.

H.    Nuisance Abatement—Costs. Whenever a nuisance shall be found to exist on any premises, the Director may summarily abate such nuisance upon determination that the nuisance constitutes an immediate threat to public health or safety, or the Director may notify in writing the person(s) having control of or acting as agent for such premises to abate or remove such nuisance within such time as is stated on the notice. Upon the failure or refusal of such person(s) to comply with the notice, the Director may abate such nuisance in the manner provided by law. The person(s) having control of such premises, in addition to the penalties provided by this chapter, shall be liable to the city for any costs incurred by the city for such abatement, including reasonable attorneys’ fees and other costs of enforcement, to be recovered in a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction.

I.      Violation—Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Such violation shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not to exceed six months. Each day during any portion of which such violation is committed, continued or permitted shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.

J.     Penalties Not Exclusive. Penalties under this chapter are in addition to, and do not supersede or limit, any and all other penalties or remedies provided by law.

K.     Conflicts With Other Code Sections. The provisions of this chapter shall control over any inconsistent or conflicting provisions of this Code.

L.     Severability. If any portion of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this chapter, and the application of such provisions to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected thereby. (14-05)

Chapter 8.30 WATER CONSERVATION
8.30.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a water conservation and supply shortage program that will reduce water consumption within the City of Claremont through conservation, assist in effective water supply planning, assure reasonable and beneficial use of water, prevent waste of water, and maximize the efficient use of water within the City to avoid and minimize the effect and hardship of water shortages to the greatest extent possible.

This chapter establishes water conservation restrictions intended to alter behavior related to water use efficiency at all times and further establishes three levels of water supply shortage response actions to be implemented during times of declared water shortage or declared water shortage emergency, with increasing restrictions on water use in response to worsening drought or emergency conditions and decreasing supplies. (09-10)

 

8.30.020 Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:

“Landscape irrigation system” means an irrigation system with pipes, hoses, spray heads, or sprinkling devices that are operated by hand or through an automated system.

“Large landscape areas” means a lawn, landscape, or other vegetated area, or combination thereof, equal to more than one acre of irrigable land.

“Lawn, landscape or other vegetated area” means any plant material.

“Local retail water agency” means any agency or privately-owned company that provides water to residents, businesses and other water users in the City of Claremont.

“Person” means any natural person or persons, corporation, public or private entity, governmental agency or institution, or any other user of water in the City of Claremont.

“Potable water” means water which is suitable for drinking.

“Recycled water” means the reclamation and reuse of non-potable water for beneficial use as defined in Title 22 of the California Code of Regulations.

“Single pass cooling systems” means equipment where water is circulated only once to cool equipment before being disposed. (09-10)

 

8.30.030 Application.
A.     The provisions of this chapter apply to any person in the use of any potable water in the City.

B.     The provisions of this chapter do not apply to uses of water necessary to protect public heath and safety or for essential governmental services, such as police, fire and other similar emergency services.

C.    The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the use of recycled water, with the exception of Section 8.30.040(A).

D.    The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the use of water by commercial nurseries and commercial growers to sustain plants, trees, shrubs, crops or other vegetation intended for commercial sale.

E.     This chapter is intended solely to further the conservation of water. It is not intended to implement any provision of federal, state, or local statutes, ordinances, or regulations relating to protection of water quality or control of drainage or runoff.

F.     Where any provision of the Claremont Municipal Code is in conflict with this chapter, the provision of this chapter shall take precedence. (09-10)

 

8.30.040 Permanent water conservation requirements.
The following water conservation requirements are effective at all times. Any person who violates this section shall be subject to the penalties for violation as set forth in Section 8.30.100 of this Code.

A.     Limits on water hours. Outdoor watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or any other vegetated area with potable water is prohibited between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Pacific Standard Time (PST) on any day, except by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device, or for very short periods of time for the express purpose of adjusting ore repairing an irrigation system. This subsection does not apply to landscape irrigation systems that exclusively use very low-flow drip type irrigation systems when no emitter produces more than two (2) gallons of water per hour.

B.     Limit on watering duration. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water using a landscape irrigation system or a watering device that is not continuously attended is limited to no more than fifteen (15) minutes watering per day per station. This subsection does not apply to landscape irrigation systems that exclusively use very low-flow drip type irrigation systems when no emitter produces more than two (2) gallons of water per hour and weather based controllers or stream rotor sprinklers that meet a 70% efficiency standard.

C.    No excessive water flow or runoff. Watering or irrigating of any lawn, landscape or other vegetated area in a manner that causes or allows excessive water flow or runoff onto an adjoining sidewalk, driveway, street, alley, gutter or ditch is prohibited.

D.    No washing down hard or paved surfaces. Washing down hard or paved surfaces, including but not limited to sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios or alleys is prohibited, except when necessary to alleviate safety or sanitary hazards, and then only by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off device, a low-volume, high-pressure cleaning machine equipped to recycle any water used, or a low-volume high-pressure water broom.

E.     Obligation to fix leaks, breaks or malfunctions. Excessive use, loss or escape of water through breaks, leaks or other malfunctions in the water user’s plumbing or distribution system for any period of time after such escape of water should have reasonably been discovered and corrected and in no event more than five (5) business days of the property owner receiving notice from the local retail water agency or the City of Claremont, is prohibited.

F.     Re-circulating water required for water fountains and decorative water features. Operating a water fountain or other decorative water feature that does not use re-circulated water is prohibited.

G.    Limits on washing vehicles. Using water to wash or clean a vehicle, including but not limited to any automobile, truck, van, bus, motorcycle, boat or trailer, whether motorized or not is prohibited, except by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container or a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device. This subsection does not apply to any commercial car washing facility.

H.    Drinking water served upon request only. Eating or drinking establishments, including but not limited to a restaurant, hotel, café, cafeteria, bar, or other public place where food or drinks are sold, served, or offered for sale, are prohibited from providing drinking water to any person unless expressly requested.

I.      Commercial lodging establishments must provide guests option to decline daily linen services. Hotels, motels, and other commercial lodging establishments must provide customers the option of not having towels and linen laundered daily. Commercial lodging establishments must prominently display notice of this option in each bathroom using clear and easily understood language.

J.     No installation of single pass cooling systems. Installation of single pass cooling systems is prohibited in buildings requesting new water service.

K.     No installation of non-recirculating commercial car wash and laundry systems. Installation of non-recirculating water systems is prohibited in new commercial conveyor car wash and new commercial laundry systems.

L.     Restaurants required to use water conserving dish wash spray valves. Food preparation establishments, such as restaurants or cafes, are prohibited from using non-water conserving dish wash spray valves. (09-10)

 

8.30.050 Level 1 water supply shortage.
A.     Upon the declaration by the City Manager of a Level 1 water supply shortage condition, the City will implement the mandatory Level 1 conservation measures identified in this section. Following the City Manager’s declaration, he or she shall agendize before the City Council an item for the Council to affirm the declaration.

Generally, a Level 1 water supply shortage is warranted when a reduction in consumer demand of up to 10% is needed to respond to existing water conditions. Conditions to be considered by the City Manager and City Council in declaring a water supply shortage include, but are not limited to: time of year, local rainfall totals, regional/sub-regional water district’s water supply allocation plans, groundwater use programs, State water project allocations or anticipated allocations, local or regional water system emergencies, or natural disasters that cause damage to water supplies or water distribution system.

B.     Additional water conservation measures. In addition to the prohibited uses of water identified in Section 8.30.040, the following water conservation requirements apply during a declared Level 1 water supply shortage. Any person in violation of this subsection shall be subject to the penalties for violation as set forth in Section 8.30.100 of this Code.

1.     Limits on watering days. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is limited to three (3) days per week on a schedule established and posted by the City of Claremont. During the months of November and March, watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is limited to no more than one day per week on a schedule established and posted by the City of Claremont. This provision does not apply to landscape irrigation zones that exclusively use very low flow drip type irrigation systems when no emitter produces more than two (2) gallons of water per hour. This provision also does not apply to watering or irrigating by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device, or for very short periods of time for the express purpose of adjusting or repairing an irrigation system.

2.     Obligation to fix leaks, breaks or malfunctions. All leaks, breaks, or other malfunctions in the water user’s plumbing or distribution system must be repaired within seventy-two (72) hours of notification of any property owner by the City of Claremont or a local retail water agency unless other arrangements are made with the City or local retail water agency. (09-10)

 

8.30.060 Level 2 water supply shortage.
A.     Upon the declaration by the City Manager of a Level 2 water supply shortage condition, the City will implement the mandatory Level 2 conservation measures identified in this section. Following the City Manager’s declaration, he or she shall agendize before the City Council an item for the Council to affirm the declaration. Generally, a Level 2 water supply shortage is warranted when a reduction in consumer demand of 11% to 30% is needed to respond to existing water conditions.

B.     Additional conservation measures. In addition to the prohibited uses of water identified in Sections 8.30.040 and 8.30.050, the following additional water conservation requirements apply during a declared Level 2 water supply shortage.

1.     Watering days. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is limited to two (2) days per week on a schedule established and posted by the City of Claremont. During the months of November through March, watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is limited to no more than one day per week on a schedule established and posted by the City of Claremont. This provision does not apply to landscape irrigation zones that exclusively use very low flow drip type irrigation systems when no emitter produces more than two (2) gallons of water per hour. This provision also does not apply to watering or irrigating by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device, or for very short periods of time for the express purpose of adjusting or repairing an irrigation system.

2.     Obligation to fix leaks, breaks or malfunctions. All leaks, breaks, or other malfunctions in the water user’s plumbing or distribution system must be repaired within forty-eight (48) hours of notification of the property owner by the City of Claremont or the local retail water agency unless other arrangements are made with either the City or local retail water agency.

3.     Limits on washing vehicles. Using water to wash or clean a vehicle, including, but not limited to, any automobile, truck, van, bus, motorcycle, boat or trailer, whether motorized or not, is prohibited except by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device, by high pressure/low volume wash systems, or at a commercial car washing facility that utilizes a re-circulating water system to capture or reuse water. (15-06; 09-10)

 

8.30.070 Level 3 water supply shortage emergency.
A.     A Level 3 water supply shortage condition is also referred to as an “emergency” condition. A level 3 condition exists when the City Manager declares a water shortage emergency and notifies its residents and businesses that a significant reduction in consumer demand is necessary to maintain sufficient water supplies for public health and safety. Upon the declaration of a Level 3 water supply shortage condition, the City will implement the mandatory Level 3 conservation methods identified in this section. Following the City Manager’s declaration, he or she shall agendize before the City Council an item for the Council to affirm the declaration. Generally, a Level 3 water supply emergency is warranted when a reduction in consumer demand of more than thirty percent (30%) is needed to respond to existing water conditions.

B.     Additional conservation measures. In addition to the prohibited uses of water identified in Sections 8.30.040, 8.30.050 and 8.30.060, the following water conservation requirements apply during a declared Level 3 water supply shortage emergency.

1.     No watering or irrigating. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is prohibited. This restriction does not apply to the following categories of use, unless the City has determined that recycled water is available and may be applied to the use:

a.     Maintenance of vegetation, including trees and shrubs, that are watered using a hand-held bucket or similar container, hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device;

b.     Maintenance of existing landscape necessary for fire protection;

c.     Maintenance of existing landscape for soil erosion control;

d.     Maintenance of plant materials identified to be rare or essential to the well-being of protected species;

e.     Maintenance of landscape within active public parks and playing fields, day care centers, golf course greens, and school grounds, provided that such irrigation does not exceed two (2) days per week according to the schedule established in Section 8.30.060(B)(1) and time restrictions in Section 8.30.040(A) and (B);

f.      Actively irrigated environmental mitigation projects.

2.     Obligation to fix leaks, breaks or malfunctions. All leaks, breaks, or other malfunctions in any plumbing or water distribution system must be repaired within twenty-four (24) hours of notification of the property owner by the City or local retail water agency unless other arrangements are made with the City or local retail water agency. (09-10)

 

8.30.080 Procedures for determination/notification of water supply shortage.
A.     Declaration and notification of water supply shortage. The existence of Level 1, Level 2 or Level 3 water supply shortage conditions may be declared by the City Manager and affirmed by resolution of the City Council adopted at a regular or special public meeting held in accordance with State law. The mandatory conservation requirements applicable to Level 1, Level 2 or Level 3 conditions will take effect ten (10) days after the date the shortage level is declared. Within five (5) days following the declaration of the shortage level, the City Council must publish a copy of the resolution in a newspaper used for publication of official notices.

B.     Declaration and notification that a water supply shortage has ended. The City Council may declare an end to a water supply shortage situation upon recommendation from the City Manager, or designee, by approval of a resolution at a regular or special public meeting of the City Council. (09-10)

 

8.30.090 Hardship waiver.
A.     Undue and disproportionate hardship. If, due to unique circumstances, a specific requirement of this chapter would result in undue hardship to a person using water or to property upon which water is used, that is disproportionate to the impacts to water users generally or to similar property or classes of water users, then the person may apply for a waiver to the requirements as provided in this section.

B.     Written finding. The waiver may be granted or conditionally granted only upon a written finding of the existence of facts demonstrating an undue hardship to a person using water or to property upon which water is used, that is disproportionate to the impacts to water users generally or to similar property or classes of water use due to specific and unique circumstances of the user or the user’s property.

 

1.     Application. Application for a waiver must be on a form prescribed by the City and accompanied by a non-refundable processing fee in an amount set by City Council resolution.

2.     Supporting documentation. The application must be accompanied by photographs, maps, drawings, and other information, including a written statement of the applicant.

3.     Required findings for waiver. An application for a waiver will be denied unless the Community Development Director finds, based on the information provided in the application, supporting documents, or such additional information as may be requested, and on water use information for the property as shown by the records of the local retail water agency or its agent, all of the following:

a.     That the waiver does not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other residents and businesses;

b.     That because of special circumstances applicable to the property or its use, the strict application of this chapter would have a disproportionate impact on the property or use that exceeds the impacts to residents and businesses generally;

c.     That the authorizing of such waiver will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent properties, and will not materially affect the ability of the City Council to effectuate the purpose of this chapter and will not be detrimental to the public interest; and

d.     That the condition or situation of the subject property or the intended use of the property for which the waiver is sought is not common, recurrent or general in nature.

4.     Approval authority. The City Manager, or his or her designee, must act upon any completed application no later than ten (10) days after submittal and may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the waiver. The applicant requesting the waiver must be promptly notified in writing of any action taken. Unless specified otherwise at the time a waiver is approved, the waiver will apply to the subject property during the period of the mandatory water supply shortage condition. The decision of the City Manager, or his or her designee, will be final. (09-10)

 

8.30.100 Penalties and violations.
A.     Misdemeanor. Any violation of this chapter may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the County Jail for not more than thirty (30) days, or by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000), or by both.

B.     Penalties. Penalties for failure to comply with any provisions of this chapter are as follows:

1.     First violation. The City may issue a written warning and deliver a copy of this chapter by mail to a violator.

2.     Second violation. A second violation within the preceding twelve (12) calendar months is punishable by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100).

3.     Third violation. A third violation within the preceding twelve (12) calendar months is punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250).

4.     Fourth and subsequent violations. A fourth and any subsequent violation is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500).

C.    Separate offenses. Each day that a violation of this chapter occurs is a separate offense. (09-10)

Chapter 8.32 MULTIFAMILY RENTAL DWELLING COMPLEXES
8.32.010 Findings and declarations.
The City Council finds and declares as follows:

A.     That there exists in the City of Claremont, substandard residential buildings and dwelling units, the physical conditions and characteristics of which are such as to be detrimental to or jeopardize the health, safety and welfare of their occupants and of the public.

B.     That the existence of such substandard residential buildings and dwelling units:

1.     Threatens the physical, social and economic stability of surrounding residential buildings and areas, and of their supporting neighborhood facilities and institutions.

2.     Necessitates disproportionate expenditures of public funds for law enforcement and remedial action.

3.     Impairs the efficient and economical exercise of governmental powers and functions.

C.    That the business of operating rental dwelling complexes as defined herein, has resulted in instances of absentee landlords and/or off-site managers, which, in turn, has increased the likelihood of instances of substandard buildings and dwelling units, health violations and crime, all of which are a public nuisance.

D.    For these reasons, it is hereby declared to be the policy of the City of Claremont:

1.     That it is in the public interest of the people of the City of Claremont to protect and promote the existence of sound and safe residential buildings, dwelling units and neighborhoods by the adoption and enforcement of such standards, regulations and procedures as will remedy the existence or prevent the development or creation of dangerous, substandard, or unsanitary and deficient residential buildings and dwelling units; and

2.     That the adoption of this chapter, related to the licensing of rental dwelling complexes, is in the interest of the health, safety and welfare of the people of the City of Claremont. (12-10)

 

8.32.020 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section. Words used in the present tense include the future tense, plural words include the singular, and singular words include the plural. Words not specifically defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.

“Applicant” means the owner, or the owner’s authorized representative, applying for a license pursuant to this chapter.

“City Council” means the City Council of the City of Claremont.

“Director” means the Director of Community Development for the City of Claremont.

“License” means the multifamily rental license issued for a rental dwelling complex pursuant to this chapter.

“Licensee” means the person issued a license pursuant to this chapter.

“Owner’s authorized representative” means any person authorized by a written statement signed by the owner to act on the owner’s behalf in regards to an owner’s rental dwelling complex.

“Person” means any individual, firm, co-partnership, corporation, company, association, organization, joint stock association or body politic; and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee or other similar representative thereof.

“Rental dwelling complex” means an apartment community with ten or more residential units that are rented or leased, in whole or in part, for 30 consecutive days or greater in any consecutive 12-month period.

“Subject property” means the underlying real property where the rental dwelling complex is located. (12-10)

 

8.32.030 Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:

A.     Housing accommodations in any hospital; state licensed community care facility; convent, monastery, or other facility occupied exclusively by members of a religious order; extended medical care facility; asylum; on-campus fraternity or sorority houses; or on-campus housing accommodations owned, operated or managed by an institution of higher education, a high school, or an elementary school for occupancy by its students.

B.     Housing accommodations which a federal, state or local government unit, agency or authority owns, operates, or manages, or which are specifically exempted from municipal regulation by state or federal law or administrative regulation. This exception shall not apply once the governmental ownership, operation, or management regulation is discontinued.

C.    Mobilehomes, mobilehome parks, recreational vehicles as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 18010, or recreational vehicle parks.

D.    Single-family dwellings. (12-10)

 

8.32.040 License required.
On and after October 11, 2012, every person who owns a rental dwelling complex shall procure and maintain a license from the City, which license shall authorize the person to operate the rental dwelling complex. (12-10)

 

8.32.050 Duration of license.
A license issued under this chapter shall terminate at the expiration of one year from the date of its issuance unless renewed pursuant to Section 8.32.070(D) or revoked prior to said termination pursuant to Section 8.32.090. (12-10)

 

8.32.060 License non-transferable.
A license issued under this chapter is non-transferable both as to the location(s) and as to the person holding the license. When the owner of the rental dwelling complex procures such a license, any other person who conducts, manages or carries on such business as owner’s authorized representative, is not required to obtain an additional license; however, the owner’s authorized representative must verify that a valid license has been issued and is in effect at all times while operating the rental dwelling complex. (12-10)

 

8.32.070 Application for license, standards of operation, license application fee and renewal of license.
A.     Application for License. The applicant for a license shall provide to the Director, on a form prepared by the City, the following information:

1.     The name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the rental dwelling complex.

2.     The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant, if the applicant is the owner’s authorized representative, and a copy of the owner’s written and signed authorization.

3.     An emergency telephone number to contact the owner and/or the owner’s authorized representative. A confidential/non-business 24-hour contact telephone number, designated by the owner and/or the owner’s authorized representative as confidential, shall be treated as confidential by the City.

4.     The location and address of the rental dwelling complex.

5.     A description of the size and character of the rental dwelling complex, including, but not limited to, the number of units, the number of bedrooms/bathrooms in each unit, and a description of any other facilities on the subject property.

6.     A certification signed by the owner or owner’s authorized representative under penalty of perjury that to the best of their knowledge and belief on the date of application, each unit in the rental dwelling complex identified in the application complies with the requirements of Section 8.32.070(B).

7.     Any other information deemed necessary by the Director in carrying out the provisions of this chapter.

B.     Standards of Operation. As a condition to the issuance or renewal of a license under this chapter, the owner, and the owner’s authorized representative (if any), shall be responsible for complying with the following standards:

1.     Each unit in the rental dwelling complex and the subject property shall be in compliance with all applicable laws.

2.     Each unit in the rental dwelling complex and the subject property shall be in compliance with all applicable provisions of this Code.

3.     Each unit in the rental dwelling complex and the subject property shall not be operated, conducted or maintained so as to constitute a public nuisance.

4.     The owner or owner’s authorized representative shall develop a corrective action plan with the Claremont Police Department if criminal activity has developed on the subject property that jeopardizes the health, safety and welfare of the occupants of the rental dwelling complex as determined by the Chief of Police.

5.     A smoke detector(s) and a carbon monoxide detector shall be installed and maintained in each unit in a rental dwelling complex in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions, as provided by State law and regulations.

6.     The exterior of each rental dwelling complex and the subject property will be inspected at least once each year by members of the Community Development Department, checking for compliance with the Claremont Municipal Code.

7.     The owner or the owner’s authorized representative shall give one copy of the publication “Renting, A User Manual” to the renters of each rental unit. This publication is published by the California Apartment Association and will be available free of charge to owners or their representative at Claremont City Hall. The renters will acknowledge receiving the publication by initialing a note of receipt on their rental agreement. The rental agreement shall be made available for inspection upon the request of a representative of the City.

8.     The owner or the owner’s authorized representative(s) shall be available in person, by telephone, by telephone answering machine, or by other electronic messaging device to authorized representatives of the City on a 24-hour, seven days a week, basis to receive emergency calls regarding the condition and/or operation of the rental dwelling complex. Failure to respond to calls in a timely and appropriate manner may result in revocation of the license. For purposes of this section, responding in a timely and appropriate manner shall mean that:

a.     A response to an initial call shall be made in a prompt and timely manner for the purpose of acknowledging the call and communicating a preliminary plan for any necessary corrective action; and

b.     Within 30 calendar days of the initial call, any necessary corrective action to address any violation of this chapter shall be completed, unless:

i.      Failure to complete the necessary corrective action may jeopardize the health and safety of the occupants, in which case the corrective action shall be completed as quickly as reasonably possible; and/or

ii.     The Director determines that additional time to complete the corrective action was reasonable, based on licensee’s demonstration that the delay was not caused by the licensee, and the delay was caused by extraordinary circumstances that justify an extension of time to complete the corrective action.

C.    License Application Fee. The City Council may establish a license fee by resolution which shall accompany all applications for a license, including applications to renew a license, issued under this chapter.

D.    Renewal of License. Prior to the expiration of the license, an applicant shall renew a license issued pursuant to this chapter following the same procedures stated in this section. To ensure City review of an application for renewal prior to expiration of a license, an application to renew must be provided to the Director at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the license. However, no application for renewal of a license shall be accepted earlier than 90 days prior to the expiration of the license. (12-10)

 

8.32.080 Issuance or renewal of license.
A.     The Director shall not issue or renew a license under this chapter unless and until the Director has received a correct and complete application and the appropriate license fee.

B.     No license shall be issued or renewed if the Director determines that the rental dwelling complex or the subject property is not in compliance with any provision of this chapter.

C.    In the event that the application to issue or renew a license is denied, the Director shall cause a “notice of denial” to be mailed by registered mail, postage prepaid, to the applicant at the applicant’s mailing address shown on the most recent application or otherwise filed by the applicant with the Director. Service may also be made by personal service on the applicant or by leaving the notice at the applicant’s residence or business in the custody of a person over the age of 18 years of age or older. Any person denied a license pursuant to this chapter shall not rent any vacant unit in the rental dwelling complex until a license is issued. An applicant may appeal the denial to the City Council as provided in Section 8.32.100. (12-10)

 

8.32.090 Revocation of license.
A.     A license issued under this chapter may be revoked by the Director upon one or more of the following grounds:

1.     That the licensee practiced fraud or deceit in obtaining a license under this chapter.

2.     That the licensee violated any provision of this chapter.

3.     That the rental dwelling complex and/or subject property upon which the rental dwelling complex is located is not in compliance with any provisions of this chapter.

4.     That the license was issued in error.

B.     In the event that a license issued under this chapter is revoked, the Director shall cause a “notice of revocation” to be mailed by registered mail, postage prepaid, to the licensee at the licensee’s mailing address shown on the most recent application or otherwise filed by the licensee with the Director. Service may also be made by personal service on the licensee or by leaving the notice at the licensee’s residence or business in the custody of a person 18 years of age or older. Any person whose license to operate a rental dwelling complex is revoked pursuant to this chapter, shall not rent any vacant unit in the rental dwelling complex until the license is reinstated. A licensee may appeal the revocation to the City Council as provided in Section 8.32.100. A license shall remain revoked unless and until the City Council reinstates the license through the appeal process, or the person applies for and is issued a new license. (12-10)

 

8.32.100 Appeal rights.
Any person denied a license under this chapter, or any person whose license has been revoked under this chapter, may appeal the Director’s determination to the City Council. Any such appeal must be in writing and must be filed with the City Clerk not more than 15 days following the Director’s deposit of the notice of denial or notice of revocation into the mail or personal delivery of said notice pursuant to Sections 8.32.080(C) and 8.32.090(B). All decisions of the City Council shall be final. (12-10)

 

8.32.110 Abatement.
Any rental dwelling complex operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be, and the same is hereby declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance, and the City may, in addition to, or in lieu of any other legal or criminal proceedings, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement, removal and/or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law; and shall take such other steps, and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove the nuisance and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining a rental dwelling complex contrary to the provisions of this chapter. (12-10)

TITLE 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
Division I. OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST PUBLIC OFFICERS AND GOVERNMENT (RESERVED)
Division II. OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON (RESERVED)
Division III. OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY
Division IV. OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
Division V. OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Division VI. CONSUMER PROTECTION
Division VII. OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS
Division VIII. WEAPONS

Division I. OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST PUBLIC OFFICERS AND GOVERNMENT (RESERVED)

Division II. OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON (RESERVED)

Division III. OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY
Chapter 9.20 GAMBLING
9.20.010 Gambling rooms prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person, either as owner, principal, agent, servant or employee, to establish, open, keep, maintain or carry on, or assist in keeping, maintaining or carrying on any gambling house, room or place for the purpose of playing any game of chance or skill, either with cards or otherwise, for money, checks or other representatives of value within the City. (Prior code § 14.9)

 

Chapter 9.23 DRINKING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC
9.23.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

“Alcoholic beverage” means and includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and which contains more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume and which is fit for consumption as a beverage, either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances.

“Public place” means and includes any public street, alley, sidewalk, parkway, off-street parking area, park, or other City property. (97-08)

 

9.23.020 Drinking alcoholic beverages in public places prohibited.
Any person drinking or consuming any alcoholic beverage in or upon any public place or going in or upon any part of any public place while they are drinking or consuming any alcoholic beverage except as otherwise permitted by this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. (97-08)

 

9.23.030 Use of alcoholic beverages in connection with a permitted use.
Notwithstanding Section 9.23.020, alcoholic beverages may be dispensed and consumed in public places in connection with: (1) a use or an event previously approved as part of a City approval of a conditional use permit, special use and development permit or other special permit approved pursuant to Title 16 of this Code; (2) a use or event approved pursuant to this Code; or (3) a use or event on City property where an alcohol permit is obtained pursuant to Chapter 11.04 of this Code; or (4) a special use or event approved by the City Manager or his or her designee. (97-08)

 

Chapter 9.25 URINATION AND DEFECATION IN PUBLIC
9.25.010 Urination and defecation in public.
Any person who, in any public park, street, alley, highway, public meeting place, assembly or other public place, or in an area on private property exposed to viewing by the public from said public places, urinates or defecates, shall be deemed guilty of an infraction; provided, that this section shall not be applicable to the act of urinating or defecating in a proper receptacle, in a restroom or bathroom in any enclosed structure. (97-07)

Division IV. OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
Chapter 9.30 CAMPING, LODGING AND STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY
9.30.010 Purpose of chapter.
Public property within the City should be accessible and available to residents and the public at large. The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that public streets, public property, including parks, plazas, depots, entry areas to public buildings and other publicly owned areas are clean and readily accessible to the public, and to prevent the use of any public property for purposes of erecting camp paraphernalia, storage of personal property or placement of personal items on public property which creates health, safety or welfare dangers. (12-03)

 

9.30.020 Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

“Camp” means to pitch or occupy camp facilities; to use camp paraphernalia.

“Camp facilities” include, but are not limited to, tents, huts, or temporary shelters.

“Camp paraphernalia” includes, but is not limited to, tarpaulins, tents, “easy up or pop ups,” canopies, huts or other temporary physical shelters, cots, beds, sleeping bags, hammocks, buckets, or cooking facilities (other than those located in a specified camping area designated by the City) and similar equipment.

“Lodge” shall have the meaning ascribed to the term in Section 647(j) of the California Penal Code, as it may be amended from time to time, and shall include (but not be limited to) sleeping or being inside a sleeping bag.

“Public property” means any publicly owned property in the City, including any of the following: public parks, public plazas, depots, public bike trails, public riverbeds, public alleyways, public parking lots, public passageways, public entry ways and areas in front of public buildings, public rights-of-way, publicly owned landscaped areas, greenbelts, sidewalks, curbs, public educational institutions or any other government owned properties located within the City.

“Store” means to put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put for safekeeping, or to place and leave in a location. (12-03)

 

9.30.030 Unlawful camping, lodging and storage of personal property.
It is unlawful for any person to camp, occupy camp facilities, or use camp paraphernalia or to store personal property, including camp facilities and camp paraphernalia, on any public property within the City, except as expressly otherwise provided by ordinance, resolution, order of the City Council or in connection with the issuance of a special event permit or a City-sponsored event or activity. (12-03)

 

9.30.040 Exemptions from provisions.
This chapter shall not apply to anyone sleeping or camping or placing, erecting, or maintaining any tents, camp facilities, or camp paraphernalia in a specified camping area designated by the City. The City Council may, by resolution, establish one or more specified camping areas. Such camping areas, if any, may be located on public property. (12-03)

 

9.30.050 Confiscation of personal property.
Any personal property, including, but not limited to, camp facilities, camp paraphernalia, bags, carts, luggage carriers, backpacks, cooking utensils and equipment, sleeping bags, blankets, clothing, signs, personal paperwork, cans or bottles stored on public property in violation of this chapter shall immediately be removed from the public property upon request by any law enforcement official. If an individual does not comply with such request or if a law enforcement official has not been successful in identifying the owner of the personal property after making a reasonable effort to do so, the personal property shall be confiscated, held and disposed of by the Police Department in accordance with its policies and laws that apply to abandoned property. (12-03)

 

9.30.060 Enforcement.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the enforcement provisions of Claremont Municipal Code as set forth in Chapter 1.12 of the Code. The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed as permitting conduct not prescribed herein and shall not affect the enforceability of any other applicable provisions of law. (12-03)

 

Chapter 9.32 RADIO INTERFERENCE
9.32.010 Interference prohibited—Exceptions.
It is unlawful for any person to operate in the City any device, appliance, equipment or apparatus generating or causing high frequency oscillations or radiations which interfere with radio broadcast receiving, or wireless apparatus, except that a person duly licensed to practice medicine receiving, osteopathy, chiropractic or dentistry by the state in the course of practice of his or her profession may operate, or cause to be operated under his or her direct supervision, any machine necessary to give treatment; provided, however, that all reasonable methods of preventing interference with radio broadcast receiving apparatus or wireless receiving apparatus shall be applied. (Prior code § 18.1)

 

9.32.020 Sale of equipment apt to cause interference prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to sell, or offer for sale in the City any electrical device, equipment, apparatus or appliance which will, or which is apt to when in operation or use, cause high frequency oscillations or radiations which will interfere with radio broadcast receiving apparatus or wireless receiving apparatus, unless the same is protected by or equipped with a suitable device which will reasonably prevent such interference. Any person selling any such merchandise shall also either have displayed in a conspicuous place easily visible to prospective purchasers thereof in the store, establishment or place of business of such person a sign to the effect that all equipment there sold or offered for sale is protected or equipped as provided by this section, or a tag attached to each of such respective articles of merchandise plainly so indicating. (Prior code § 18.5)

 

9.32.030 Equipment violating provisions—Inspection—Notice.
When an inspection and test is made and it is found that any device, equipment, apparatus or appliance coming within the terms of this chapter is being operated in violation of this chapter, the owner or operator of such device, equipment, apparatus or appliance shall be notified in writing and a copy of such notice shall be placed on file in the office of the building inspector. Such notice shall be personally served. (Prior code § 18.3)

 

9.32.040 Equipment violating provisions—Modification required.
The owner or operator of a device, equipment, apparatus or appliance operated as provided by Section 9.32.030 shall make additions, repairs or modifications thereof in order that the same may be operated in a manner which complies with the provisions of this chapter or discontinue the use of such device, equipment, apparatus or appliance within forty-eight hours or other reasonable period specified. (Prior code § 18.4)

 

9.32.050 Exemptions from provisions.
This chapter shall not apply to radio stations, either broadcast, commercial or amateur, licensed by the federal government, or which are engaged in interstate communication, or to public utilities under the supervision of the state railway commission. (Prior code § 18.2)

Division V. OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Chapter 9.35 ALARM SYSTEMS
9.35.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter certain words and phrases shall be construed as set forth in this section unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended:

“Alarm agent” means any person employed by an alarm business whose duties include the altering, installing, maintaining, moving, repairing, replacing, selling, servicing, responding to (excluding public safety officers), or causing others to respond to an alarm system, in or on any building, structure or facility.

“Alarm business” means the business carried on by any individual, partnership, corporation or other entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing any alarm system or causing to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved or installed any alarm system in or on any building, structure or facility.

“Alarm system” means any mechanical or electrical device which is designed or used for the detection of intrusion into a building, structure or facility or for alerting others of an event within a facility, or both, which event causes a local audible alarm or transmission of a signal or message. Alarm systems include, but are not limited to, audible alarms and proprietary alarms. Devices which are not designed or used to evoke a police response, or used to register alarms that are intended to be audible, visible or perceptible outside of the protected building, structure or facility are not included within this definition, nor are auxiliary devices installed by a telephone company to protect its systems which might be damaged or disrupted by the use of an alarm system.

“Appellant” means a person who presents an appeal pursuant to this chapter.

“Applicant” means a person, firm or corporation, who files an application for a permit as provided in this chapter.

“Audible alarm” means a device designed for the detection of an intrusion on premises, which generates an audible sound which can be heard off the premises when it is actuated.

“City” means the City of Claremont.

“Day” means a calendar day.

“False alarm” means the activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, accidental tripping, misoperation, malfunction, misuse or the neglect of the owner or lessee of an alarm system, or his or her employees or agents. Upon failure of the police department to find any evidence of intrusion, fire or other need or cause for activating an alarm system, a conclusive presumption of false alarm will be made. False alarm shall not include alarms caused by earthquakes, violent winds, malfunction of telephone line circuits, or external causes beyond the control of the owner or lessee of the alarm system.

“Person” means a person, firm, corporation, association, partnership, individual, organization or company.

“Proprietary alarm” means an alarm which is not regularly serviced by an alarm business. (78-43)

 

9.35.011 Permit for alarm system required.
No person shall possess, install or use an alarm system without first applying for and receiving an alarm permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (78-43)

 

9.35.012 Application for permit.
Applications for an alarm permit shall be filed with the Chief of Police on forms provided by the City and the applicant shall at that time pay the appropriate fee which may be established by resolution of the City Council. The application shall be signed and verified by the applicant and shall contain such information as may be deemed necessary by the Chief of Police. Permits provided for in this chapter shall be issued by the Chief of Police, and shall be nontransferable. Any permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for five years. (78-43)

 

9.35.013 Applicant for alarm permit—Investigation.
Upon receiving an application from any person for an alarm permit, the Chief of Police shall cause an investigation to be made of the system to be installed to determine if the system complies with the requirements of this chapter. If the proposed system complies with this chapter, the Chief of Police shall cause a permit to be issued. An alarm permittee may be allowed a direct connection to the alarm board in the Claremont police department, provided facilities are available for direct connection. The City Council may, by resolution, establish a direct connection fee which shall be paid on or before July 1st of each year by each alarm permit holder whose system directly connects to the Claremont police department. This section shall not be construed to permit telephonic alarm systems. (78-43)

 

9.35.014 Suspension and revocation of permits.
If at any time it shall come to the attention of the Chief of Police that the holder of a permit issued under this chapter has violated any provisions of this chapter, rules or regulations made pursuant to this chapter, including, but not limited to, false alarms which exceed the number established by resolution of the City Council, or by refusing to pay the false alarm prevention payment as provided pursuant to Section 9.35.016, the Chief of Police may suspend the permit.

If an alarm permit is suspended, the notice of suspension shall be deemed served when personally served upon the permittee or deposited in the United States Postal Service by registered mail. Upon failure of the permittee within ten days after service of the notice of suspension to cause the alarm system to be repaired, to be properly used and operated, and to pay any delinquent false alarm prevention payment, or to present an appeal to the appeals board, the permit shall be revoked. The effective date of the revocation of an alarm permit shall be ten days after service of the notice of suspension or the date of the appeals board action affirming revocation, whichever is later. If the alarm permit is revoked, the alarm system may not thereafter be used until a new permit is issued. (78-43)

 

9.35.015 Appeal to appeals board.
There is created an appeals board within the police department of the City. The members of the board shall be appointed by the Chief of Police, and there shall be three members.

In the event a permit is suspended as provided in Section 9.35.014 of this chapter, the permittee may present an appeal to the appeals board by filing a notice of appeal with the clerk of the board setting forth the facts and circumstances regarding the appeal. Said notice of appeal shall be filed not later than ten days after service of a notice of suspension as provided in Section 9.35.014 of this chapter.

The appeals board shall consider the appeal not later than fifteen days from the date on which such appeal is filed with the clerk of the board. The board shall hear all relevant evidence and shall determine the merits of the appeal. The board may affirm, overrule or modify the decision of the Chief of Police. (78-43)

 

9.35.016 False alarm—Prevention payment.
When emergency messages, signals or notices are received by the police department that evidence a failure to obtain a permit or comply with any other requirement under this chapter, the Chief of Police is authorized to demand that the owner or lessee of the alarm system initiating such message, signal or notice, or his or her representative, disconnect the alarm system until it is made to comply with said requirements.

Any person who maintains or has an alarm which has caused any signal, message or alarm to be transmitted to the police department, either by direct telephone or other direct communication, or by communication from an alarm agent, or an alarm business, or by a person responding to an audible alarm, and which is proven to be a false alarm, shall pay a false alarm prevention payment to the City as established by resolution of the City Council.

An alarm permit may be suspended or revoked as provided in Section 9.35.014, in addition to the payment of the prevention payment as provided in this section. (78-43)

 

9.35.017 Alarm standards and regulations.
All alarm systems and appurtenant equipment installed within the City shall meet or exceed the workmanlike standards of the industry and those standards which may hereafter be established by the City. The City reserves the right to inspect all systems installed within the City. (78-43)

 

9.35.018 Alarm requirements.
In addition to the information required in Section 9.35.012, the alarm permittee shall supply on his or her application for permit the names, addresses and phone numbers of the selling or installing alarm company, or if the permittee is not under a service contract with an alarm business, at least two persons to call in event of emergency. In the event the names, addresses and phone numbers change, the permittee shall apply the changes within ten days of the change. (78-43)

 

9.35.019 Automatic shutoff requirements—Audible alarms.
All audible alarm systems, excluding fire alarms which indicate the functioning of an automatic fire alarm or sprinkler system, shall include a device which will limit the generation of the audible sound of the system to not longer than fifteen minutes after activation when the alarm system is protecting a residential structure and fifteen minutes when the alarm system is protecting a commercial structure. (78-43)

 

9.35.020 Delay device requirements.
All burglary detection alarm systems installed after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter that directly transmit a signal to the police facility shall include a device which will provide a minimum of a thirty-second delay of the original transmission and activate a signal immediately in such a manner as to be perceptible to a person lawfully entering, leaving or occupying the premises. Such a device is intended to provide an opportunity for the person having lawful control of the alarm system to terminate its operation after activation but prior to the transmission of a false alarm. (78-43)

 

9.35.021 Power supply.
An alarm system shall be supplied with an uninterruptible power supply in such a manner that the failure or interruption of the normal utility electric service will not activate the alarm system. The backup power supply must be capable of at least four hours of operation. (78-43)

 

9.35.022 Testing alarm.
Permittees shall notify the Claremont police department prior to any service, test, repair, maintenance, adjustment, alterations or installations of systems which would normally result in a police response, which might activate a false alarm. Any alarm activated where such prior notice has been given shall not constitute a false alarm. (78-43)

 

9.35.023 Prohibitions.
It is unlawful to install or use an alarm system which upon activation emits a sound similar to sirens in use on emergency vehicles or for civil defense purposes. (78-43)

 

9.35.024 Prohibition of telephonic alarm systems.
No person shall operate or maintain a telephonic alarm system which automatically transmits a signal, message, or warning to the City police department by means of any public telephone line. (78-43)

 

9.35.025 Fees.
Fees prescribed heretofore in this chapter shall be in addition to any other lawful fees imposed by the City for doing or conducting business within the City. (78-43)

 

9.35.026 Limitation on liability.
The City is under no obligation or duty to any permittee or any other person by reason of any provision of this chapter, or the exercise, of any privilege by any permittee hereunder, including, but not limited to, any defects in the alarm board at the police department, any delay in transmission of an alarm message to any emergency unit or damage caused by delay in responding to any alarm by any City officer, employee or agent. (78-43)

 

9.35.028 Application of chapter.
Any person who, on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter possesses, has established, or uses an alarm system which requires a permit under this chapter, shall apply for an alarm permit, as provided in this chapter, within six weeks after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (78-43)

 

Chapter 9.48 TRESPASSING
9.48.010 Posting authorized—Description of signs.
Any person, governmental agency, department or instrumentality having possession or control of any of the facilities, plants or utility properties enumerated in this chapter, may post, at each entrance to any structure devoted to any use so enumerated, at each entrance to any fenced or enclosed area devoted to any such use, and at intervals of not more than three hundred feet around any area devoted to such use, substantial signs not less than one square foot in area, displaying prominently in addition to such other information as may be deemed desirable, the words “TRESPASSING-LOITERING-FORBIDDEN BY LAW” in legible letters not less than two inches in height; provided, however, that any public waiting room, dining room, office or other portion of any such structure or premises to which general public access is required in the normal use and operation thereof, or where materials are delivered to or received by the public, shall not be so posted. (Prior code § 14.23)

 

9.48.020 Posted boundary defined.
The “posted boundary” of any area shall be a line running from sign to sign, and such line need not conform to the legal boundary or legal description of any lot, parcel or acreage of land. (Prior code § 14.23)

 

9.48.030 Where posting is permitted.
The places which may be so posted are the following:

A.     Every airport, and every plant, field and structure used for the manufacture, assembling or testing of aircraft;

B.     Every tank farm, refinery, compressor plant or absorption plant, marine terminal, pipeline pumping station and reservoir, used for the bulk treatment, bulk handling or bulk storage of petroleum or petroleum products;

C.    Every reservoir, dam, pumping station, aqueduct, main canal or pipeline of a public water system;

D.    Every reservoir, dam, generating plant, receiving station, distributing station and transmission line of a company or agency furnishing electrical energy;

E.     Every gas generating plant, compressor plant, gas holder, gas tank and gas main used for the production, storage and distribution of gas;

F.     Every plant or vital part thereof or other principal property essential to rendering telephone or telegraph service;

G.    Every radio broadcasting central plant or station;

H.    Every railroad bridge or tunnel;

I.      Every plant for the bulk storage of dynamite, giant powder, gunpowder or other explosive. (Prior code § 14.23)

 

9.48.040 Trespass within posted boundary unlawful.
When any such premises is posted as provided in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to go upon or to remain upon any place within the posted boundary of any such premises, or to enter or to remain in any such posted structure without having upon his or her person the express written consent of the person, department or agency lawfully in possession or control thereof. (Prior code § 14.23)

 

9.48.050 Loitering with tools unlawful.
It is unlawful for any person to loiter in the immediate vicinity of any premises posted as provided in this chapter while having in his or her possession any explosive, tool or device of whatever character capable of doing harm or damage to any structure, machinery, equipment or other property of a similar or dissimilar character, installed or located upon such posted premises or area. (Prior code § 14.23)

 

9.48.060 Damaging signs.
No person shall tear down, deface or destroy, or cause to be torn down, defaced or destroyed, any sign placed or posted under the provisions of this chapter without the consent of the person, governmental agency, department or instrumentality having possession or control of the premises on which such sign has been erected. (89-16; prior code § 14.23)

 

9.48.070 Exemptions from provisions.
This chapter does not apply to any entry in the course of duty of any peace officer, nor to any person traversing an established and existing public sidewalk, street or highway. (Prior code § 14.23)

 

Chapter 9.50 USE OF CITY OWNED OR CITY OPERATED PARKING STRUCTURE(S)
9.50.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote, ensure, and maintain the use of City owned or City operated parking structures for their intended purpose of providing spaces for the parking of motor vehicles and/or bicycles by City residents, commuters, business patrons, students, people that work in the City, and people that are visiting the City. (20-09)

 

9.50.020 Limited uses of City parking structure(s)—All other uses prohibited.
A.     “Parking structure” is a building with the primary function of which is the provision and allocation of spaces for the parking of motor vehicles and/or bicycles.

B.     Parking structures owned or operated by the City shall only be used by members of the public for one or more of the following purposes:

1.     Parking and retrieving motor vehicles as the driver or as a passenger. This shall include waiting for a tow truck or other means of removing the vehicle from the parking structure in the event of a break-down, including changing a flat tire, provided that, vehicles may not be fixed, washed, or worked on within the parking structure.

2.     Parking and retrieving bicycles as the bicyclist, provided the parking structure has bicycle parking available. Bicycles may be ridden to and from such bicycle parking.

3.     Retrieving or placing personal property within a vehicle or bicycle parked within the parking structure and, thereafter, promptly exiting the parking structure.

4.     Walking uninterrupted from one sidewalk to another or walking uninterrupted to buildings that border the parking structure.

5.     Using restroom facilities located within the parking structure, if any, and, thereafter promptly exiting from the parking structure.

6.     Making deliveries to, and/or patronizing, a commercial business operating within and/or adjacent to the parking structure.

7.     Performing City business or maintenance of the parking structure pursuant to official duties as a City or agent.

8.     Engaging in a use expressly authorized by the City Council, the City Manager, or the Police Chief.

C.    No person shall remain within a city parking structure for more than the reasonable amount of time necessary to accomplish one of the expressly authorized and intended uses of such parking structure. (20-09)

 

9.50.030 Penalties.
Violations of this chapter shall be an infraction. This chapter shall be enforceable by any City employee granted authority to issue written administrative citations pursuant to Claremont Municipal Code Chapters 1.12 and 1.14. Pursuant to California Government Code Sections 36900 and 53069.4, the amount of the fine for a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be as follows:

A.     $100.00 for the first violation;

B.     $200.00 for a second violation committed within one year of the first violation; and

C.    $500.00 for a third violation or subsequent violation committed within one year of the first violation.

All citations issued for violations of this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of Claremont Municipal Code Chapters 1.12 and 1.14. (20-09)

 

Chapter 9.52 INTERFERING WITH FLOOD CONTROL
9.52.010 Tampering with protection works prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person, municipality or district to interfere with, destroy or use in any manner whatsoever any levee, embankment, channel, dam, reservoir, rain or steam gauges, telephone line, piling, fence or other stream protection works constructed by or on behalf of any public agency without a written permit therefor from City Council, which permit shall be revocable whenever in the opinion of the City Council the public interest and welfare require the revocation thereof. No permit to use any flood control protection work or rights-of-way owned or constructed by the County Flood Control District shall be effective unless a written permit to do so has also been obtained from the Board of Supervisors of the district. (Prior code § 14.6)

 

9.52.020 Placing rubbish in channels prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person, municipality or district to place or cause to be placed in the channel or bed of any river, stream, wash or arroyo or upon any property over which the County Flood Control District has an easement for flood control purposes duly recorded in the office of the County Recorder, any wires, fence, building or other structure, or any refuse, rubbish, tin cans or other matter that may impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of water in such river, stream, wash or arroyo, or that will catch or collect debris carried by such water, or that is placed where the natural flow of the storm and flood waters would carry the same downstream to the damage and detriment of either private or public property adjacent to the river, stream, wash, arroyo or channel. (Prior code § 14.7)

 

Chapter 9.56 TAMPERING WITH FIRE HYDRANTS
9.56.010 Injuring or tampering prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person, without authority of the owner or managing agent, to wilfully injure or tamper with any fire hydrant, or to wilfully turn on or attempt to turn on any water therefrom. (Prior code § 14.5)

 

Chapter 9.57 OBSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC THOROUGHFARES
9.57.010 Obstruction of public thoroughfares prohibited.
A person shall not willfully and maliciously loiter or stand in or upon any alley, highway, sidewalk, crosswalk, off-street parking area, private or public, or other private or public ways open for pedestrian or automobile traffic or otherwise occupy any portion thereof in such a manner as to obstruct or unreasonably interfere with the free passage of pedestrians or motorists. (90-28)

 

9.57.020 Penalty.
Every person who violates any provision of Section 9.57.010 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (90-28)

Division VI. CONSUMER PROTECTION
Chapter 9.68 SOLICITING PERSONAL INJURY VICTIMS
9.68.010 Soliciting victims unlawful.
It is unlawful for any person, or for the officers, agents, servants or employees of any such person, directly or indirectly, individually or by agent, servant or employee, to solicit any person injured as result of an accident, his or her administrator, executor, heirs or assigns for the purpose of representing such person in making claims for damages or prosecuting any action or cause of action arising out of any personal injury claim against any other person. (Prior code § 9.72)

 

Chapter 9.72 MARIJUANA USES
Note
*      Prior ordinance history: 16-02, 08-09.

 

9.72.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate personal, medical, and commercial marijuana uses. Nothing in this chapter shall preempt or make inapplicable any provision of state or federal law. (16-11; 16-09)

 

9.72.020 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

“Commercial marijuana activity” includes the cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, transportation, distribution, delivery or sale of marijuana and marijuana products for commercial purposes, but does not include any medical marijuana activity permitted by California law.

“Cultivation” means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of marijuana.

“Delivery” means the commercial transfer of marijuana or marijuana products to a customer. “Delivery” also includes the use by a retailer of any technology platform owned and controlled by the retailer, or independently licensed under California law, that enables customers to arrange for or facilitate the commercial transfer by a licensed retailer of marijuana or marijuana products.

“Distribution” means the procurement, sale, and transport of marijuana and marijuana products between entities for commercial use purposes.

“Licensee” means the holder of any state issued license related to marijuana activities, including but not limited to, licenses issued under Division 10 of the Business & Professions Code.

“Manufacture” means to compound, blend, extract, infuse, or otherwise make or prepare a marijuana product.

“Marijuana” means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin. It does not include:

1.     Industrial hemp, as defined in Section 11018.5 of the California Health & Safety Code; or

2.     The weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink, or other product.

“Marijuana accessories” means any equipment, products or materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, smoking, vaporizing, or containing marijuana, or for ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana or marijuana products into the human body.

“Marijuana products” means marijuana that has undergone a process whereby the plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but not limited to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing marijuana or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients.

“Person” includes any individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular.

“Private residence” means a house, an apartment unit, a mobile home, or other similar dwelling.

“Sale” includes any transaction whereby, for any consideration, title to marijuana is transferred from one person to another, and includes the delivery of marijuana or marijuana products pursuant to an order placed for the purchase of the same and soliciting or receiving an order for the same, but does not include the return of marijuana or marijuana products by a licensee to the licensee from whom such marijuana or marijuana product was purchased.

Any term defined in this section also means the very term as defined in the California Business & Professions Code or the California Health & Safety Code, unless otherwise specified. (16-11; 16-09)

 

9.72.030 Personal use—Cultivation.
A.     For purposes of this subsection, personal recreational use, possession, purchase, transport, or dissemination of marijuana shall be considered unlawful in all areas of the City to the extent it is unlawful under California or federal law.

B.     Outdoor Cultivation. A person may not plant, cultivate, harvest, dry, or process marijuana plants outdoors in any zoning district of the City. No use permit, building permit, variance, or any other permit or entitlement, whether administrative or discretionary, shall be approved or issued for any such illegal use or activity.

C.    Indoor Cultivation.

1.     A person may not plant, cultivate, harvest, dry, or process marijuana plants inside a private residence, or inside an accessory structure to a private residence located upon the grounds of a private residence, or inside any other enclosed structure within any zoning district of the City. No use permit, building permit, variance, or any other permit or entitlement, whether administrative or discretionary, shall be approved or issued for any such use or activity.

2.     To the extent a complete prohibition on indoor cultivation for personal use is not permitted under California law, a person may not plant, cultivate, harvest, dry, or process marijuana plants inside a private residence, or inside an accessory structure to a private residence located upon the grounds of a private residence, in excess of the limitations imposed by such state law. (16-11; 16-09)

 

9.72.040 Medical use.
A.     The prohibitions set forth in this chapter are not intended to interfere with the individual rights of qualified patients and primary caregivers to cultivate, obtain or use marijuana for medical purposes as provided for by the voters of the State of California under Proposition 215 and Senate Bill 420 of the California Legislature. Cultivation of medical marijuana shall be subject to the requirements of Section 11362.77 of the California Health & Safety Code. Cultivation for medical purposes in violation of Section 11362.77 is unlawful.

B.     The establishment or operation of any medical marijuana dispensary, delivery service, operator, or establishment shall be considered a prohibited use in all zoning districts of the City. No use permit, variance, building permit, or any other entitlement or permit, whether administrative or discretionary, shall be approved or issued for the establishment of any dispensary, delivery service, operator, establishment, or provider in any zoning district, and no person shall otherwise establish such businesses or operations in any zoning district. (16-11; 16-09)

 

9.72.050 Commercial use.
The establishment or operation of any business of commercial marijuana activity is prohibited. No use permit, variance, building permit, or any other entitlement or permit, whether administrative or discretionary, shall be approved or issued for the establishment or operation of any such business or operation. Such prohibited businesses or operations may include, but are not limited to:

A.     The transportation, delivery, storage, distribution, or sale of marijuana, marijuana products, or marijuana accessories;

B.     The cultivation of marijuana;

C.    The manufacturing or testing or marijuana, marijuana products, or marijuana accessories; or

D.    Any other business licensed by the state or other government entity under Division 10 of the California Business & Professions Code, as it may be amended from time to time. (16-11; 16-09)

 

9.72.060 Penalty for violations.
A.     No person, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, shall violate, cause the violation of, or otherwise fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Every act prohibited or declared unlawful, and every failure to perform an act made mandatory by this chapter, shall be a misdemeanor or an infraction, at the discretion of the City Attorney or the District Attorney. In addition to the penalties provided in this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is declared a public nuisance and may be abated as provided in this Municipal Code and/or under state law.

B.     As provided for in this Municipal Code, any provision of this chapter may be enforced by civil injunction issued by the Superior Court upon a suit brought by the City. As part of a civil action filed to enforce provisions of this chapter, this City may ask a court to assess a civil penalty of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500) per violation of any section of this chapter for each day during which any person commits, continues, allows or maintains a violation of any provision of this chapter.

C.    A prevailing party in any judicial action, administrative proceeding, or special proceeding to abate a nuisance or enforce any provision of this chapter may recover its reasonable attorneys’ fees, provided that the City elected, at the initiation of such individual action or proceeding, to recover its own attorneys’ fees. In no judicial action or administrative proceeding shall an award of attorneys’ fees to a prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the City in the judicial action or administrative proceeding. A judicial action includes, but is not limited to, any civil or criminal action, inspection or abatement warrant, administrative proceeding, or appeal from an administrative proceeding. “Abatement” shall include any action taken by the City to cause or otherwise obtain compliance with this chapter or other codes, as specified herein, even if the violation is ultimately corrected by the violator. Any recovery of attorneys’ fees for abatement of a nuisance shall be in accordance with this chapter. (16-11; 16-09)

Division VII. OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS
Chapter 9.80 CURFEW
9.80.010 Curfew restrictions for minors.
A.     It is unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen years, or for any parent or guardian of any minor under the age of eighteen years to knowingly permit, or by insufficient control allow, any minor to loiter or remain in or upon any public street, avenue, highway, road, curb area, alley, park, playground, any common area of any school, or other public ground, public place, or public building, place of amusement or eating place, vacant lot or unsupervised place between the hours of 10:00 p.m. on any day and sunrise of the immediately following day; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply:

1.     When the minor is accompanied by his or her parent or parents, legal guardian or other adult person having the legal care or custody of the minor, or by his or her spouse eighteen years of age or older; or

2.     When the minor is upon an errand directed by his or her parent or parents or legal guardian or other adult person having the legal care or custody of the minor, or by his or her spouse eighteen years of age or older, without any detour or stop; or

3.     When the minor is traveling directly to, returning directly home from, or attending a public meeting, or a place of public entertainment that is supervised by adults and sponsored by the City of Claremont, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, such as a movie, play, sporting event, dance, religious activity, or school activity; or

4.     When the presence of such minor in said public place or places is connected with or required with respect to a business, trade, profession, employment activity or occupation in which said minor is lawfully engaged; or

5.     When the minor is involved in, or acting in response to, an “emergency,” which means for this purpose, any unforeseen set of circumstances that calls for immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life, including, but not limited to, a fire, natural disaster, or automobile accident; or

6.     When the minor is on the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence; or

7.     When the minor is in a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; or

8.     When the minor is emancipated pursuant to law; or

 

9.     When the minor is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech or the right of assembly where the minor is not intentionally exercising such rights solely for the purpose of creating a defense to the enforcement of this section or traveling directly to or returning directly from, without any detour or stop, any such place for the purpose of exercising any such First Amendment rights; or

10.   Traveling from any activity listed in this section to another activity listed in this section, without any detour or stop.

B.     Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in the public place or on the premises of the establishment, as set forth in subsection A, during the curfew hours set forth in subsection A. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that a violation of this section has occurred and that, based on any responses and other circumstances, none of the exceptions or defenses listed in subsection A are present or applicable. Nothing in this section shall be construed in any way as to limit the power or right of a law enforcement officer(s) to make any investigation, detention or arrest as such law enforcement officer(s) would be permitted to make in the absence of this section.

C.    Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. (14-07)

 

9.80.020 Penalty for violations of curfew restrictions for minors.
Every minor under the age of eighteen years who violates any provision of Section 9.80.010 is guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be dealt with in accordance with juvenile court law and procedure. Every parent, guardian or other person having the legal care, custody, or control of any minor under the age of eighteen years who knowingly and willfully allows such minor to violate any provision of Section 9.80.010 is guilty of a misdemeanor. (14-07)

 

9.80.030 Daytime loitering.
A.     It is unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen years who is subject to compulsory education or compulsory continuation education, whether alone or in concert with others, to loiter or remain in or upon any public street, avenue, highway, road, curb area, alley, park, playground, or other public ground, public place or public building, place of amusement or eating place, vacant lot or unsupervised place when the student’s school site is in session, provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply when:

1.     The minor is accompanied by his or her parent or parents, legal guardian or other adult person having the legal care or custody of the minor, or by his or her spouse eighteen years of age or older; or

2.     The minor is on an errand directed by his or her parent or parents or legal guardian or other adult person having the legal care or custody of the minor, or by his or her spouse eighteen years of age or older; or

3.     The minor is traveling directly to, returning directly home from, or attending a school sponsored public meeting, such as a school sponsored movie, play, sporting event, dance or other school activity; or

4.     The minor is present in said public place or places connected with or required with respect to a business, trade, profession, employment activity or occupation in which said minor is lawfully engaged or when the minor is traveling directly to or from a medical appointment; or

5.     When the minor is involved in, or acting in response to, an “emergency,” which means for this purpose, any unforeseen set of circumstances that calls for immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life, including, but not limited to, a fire, natural disaster, or automobile accident; or

6.     The minor has permission to leave his or her school campus for lunch or a school-related activity and has in his or her possession a valid, school-issued, off-campus permit or other proof of such permission if such proof of permission is required by the school; or

7.     The minor is authorized to be absent from school pursuant to the provisions of California Education Code Section 48205, 48222, or 48224 or any other applicable State or Federal law, including, but not limited to, laws authorizing private schooling or private schooling at home; or

8.     The minor is emancipated pursuant to law; or

9.     The minor is in a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; or

10.   The minor is exercising his or her First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech or the right of assembly where the minor is not intentionally exercising such rights solely for the purpose of creating a defense to the enforcement of this section or traveling directly to or returning directly from, without any detour or stop, any such place for the purpose of exercising any such First Amendment rights; or

11.   Traveling from any activity listed in this section to another activity listed in this section, without any detour or stop.

B.     Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in the public place or on the premises of the establishment, as set forth in subsection A, during school sessions as set forth in subsection A. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that a violation of this section has occurred, that the minor is supposed to be in school, and that, based on any responses and other circumstances, none of the exceptions or defenses listed in subsection A are present or applicable. Nothing in this section shall be construed in any way as to limit the power or right of a law enforcement officer(s) to make any investigation or detention as such law enforcement officer(s) would be permitted to make in the absence of this section. Any such law enforcement officer(s) may issue a citation to any minor found to be in violation of this section and may detain any such minor, until the minor can be placed in the custody and care of a parent, legal guardian or other adult person having the legal care or custody of the minor, or by his or her spouse eighteen years of age or older.

C.    Each violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a separate offense and shall be an infraction, cited into juvenile traffic court in accordance with Sections 256 and 602 of the State of California Welfare and Institutions Code. (14-07)

 

9.80.040 Severability.
If any provision or clause of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect any other provision of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. (14-07)

 

Chapter 9.82 SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS
9.82.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them by this section:

“Hotel” means any commercial establishment that rents guest rooms or suite to the public on a nightly, weekly, or monthly basis, and shall include a motel and an inn that operates in such capacity.

“Multifamily dwelling” means a residential structure designed for the permanent residency of two (2) or more individuals, groups of individuals, or families living independently. This definition shall include a duplex, apartment house, and a condominium complex, but shall not include a hotel.

“Owner’s authorized agent” means any natural person, firm, association, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, organization, club, company, corporation, business trust or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, office or employee authorized to act for the property owner.

“Permanent resident” means any person who, as of a given date, obtained the right to occupy a dwelling, including, but not limited to, a single-family dwelling, multifamily dwelling, duplex, hotel or motel for more than thirty (30) consecutive days.

“Property owner” means the owner of record of real property, as recorded in the office of the County Registrar Recorder/County Clerk, as well as any partial owner, joint owner, tenant, tenant-in-common, or joint tenant, of such real property.

“Registered sex offender” means any person who is required to register under Section 290 of the California Penal Code and who is currently on parole. For purposes of this chapter, “registered sex offender” includes those who have failed to register pursuant to Section 290 of the California Penal Code.

“Responsible party” means a property owner and/or a property owner’s authorized agent.

“Single-family dwelling” means any lot designed for permanent residency and containing one and only one dwelling unit.

“Temporary resident” means any person who, for a period of thirty (30) days or less, obtained the legal right to occupy or reside in a single-family dwelling or multifamily dwelling, including, but not limited to, a hotel or motel. (18-01; 14-03; 10-01)

 

9.82.020 Reserved.
(18-01; 14-03; 10-01)

 

9.82.030 Sex offender violation/single-family and multifamily dwellings.
A registered sex offender shall be prohibited from renting or otherwise occupying a single-family dwelling or a unit in a multifamily dwelling with another registered sex offender, unless those persons are legally related by blood, marriage, or adoption. (18-01; 10-01)

 

9.82.035 Sex offender violation/hotels.
A registered sex offender shall be prohibited from renting or otherwise occupying the same guest room in a hotel with another registered sex offender, regardless of the permanent or temporary residential status of either registered sex offender, unless those persons are legally related by blood, marriage, or adoption. (18-01; 10-01)

 

9.82.040 Responsible party violation/single-family and multifamily dwellings.
A responsible party shall be prohibited from knowingly renting a single-family dwelling or a unit in a multifamily dwelling to be rented or otherwise occupied by more than one registered sex offender, regardless of the permanent or temporary residential status of either registered sex offender, unless those persons are legally related by blood, marriage, or adoption. (18-01; 10-01)

 

9.82.045 Responsible party violation/hotels.
A responsible party shall be prohibited from knowingly allowing a guest room in a hotel to be rented or otherwise occupied by more than one registered sex offender, regardless of the permanent or temporary residential status of either registered sex offender, unless those persons are legally related by blood, marriage, or adoption. (18-01; 10-01)

 

9.82.050 Eviction requirements.
If, in order to comply with this ordinance, a responsible party is required to terminate a registered sex offender’s tenancy or other occupancy, the responsible party shall comply with all applicable State law procedures and requirements governing the eviction of tenants of real property. If, in accordance with these procedures and requirements, a court determines that such termination is improper, the responsible party shall not be in violation of this chapter by allowing the sex offender to remain as a tenant or other occupant. (18-01; 10-01)

 

9.82.060 Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply in the following instances:

A.     Tenancies or other occupancies commenced prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or to the renewals of any such tenancy or occupancies.

B.     The first sex offender to establish a lawful residency shall not be in violation of this chapter if another sex offender attempts to establish residency within the prohibited location.

C.    The sex offender is confined within the City Jail. (18-01; 14-03; 10-01)

 

9.82.070 Offenses constituting nuisances.
A.     Any single-family dwelling, multifamily dwelling, or hotel or motel operated or maintained in a manner inconsistent with the occupancy requirements of this chapter is declared to be unlawful and is defined as and declared to be public nuisances per se that are injurious to the public health, safety, and welfare.

B.     In any civil action or proceeding, administrative proceeding, or special proceeding, including, but not limited to, those brought to abate a public nuisance, the prevailing party will be entitled to recovery of all costs, attorney’s fees and expenses, provided that attorneys’ fees will only be available in those actions or proceedings in which the City has provided notice at the commencement of such action or proceeding that it intends to seek and recover its own attorneys’ fees. In no action or proceeding will an award of attorneys’ fees exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the City in the action or proceeding.

C.    Monies due to the City pursuant to this chapter may be recovered in an appropriate civil action. Alternatively, such liability may be enforced by special assessment proceedings against the parcel of land upon which the nuisance existed, which proceedings must be conducted in a manner substantively similar to proceedings prescribed in this Code relating to assessment for abatement of property nuisances. (18-01; 10-01)

 

9.82.080 Enforcement and penalties.
A.     Notwithstanding any other penalty provided by this Code or otherwise by law, any person who violates this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, in addition, the City may enforce the violation by means of a civil enforcement process through a restraining order, a preliminary or permanent injunction, or by any other means available by law.

B.     Each day that a violation of this chapter exists shall be deemed a new and separate offense. (18-01; 10-01)

Division VIII. WEAPONS
Chapter 9.92 DISCHARGING OF WEAPONS
Note
*      Prior history: Prior code §§ 24.3, 24.4.

 

9.92.010 Discharge of weapons.
Except as otherwise provided in Section 9.92.020, no person shall fire or discharge, or cause to be fired or discharged anywhere within the City, nor shall any parent, guardian, or person having the care, custody, or control of any minor permit such minor to fire or discharge, or cause to be fired or discharged anywhere within the City:

A.     Any gun, rifle, pistol, or other firearm;

B.     Any BB gun, pellet gun, or any air gun, paintball or airsoft gun, blow gun, spring gun or pistol or slingshot;

C.    Any crossbow of any type, or any compound bow, or a bow of any length, or pointed or metal-tipped arrows;

D.    Any instrument of any kind, character, or description which throws or projects bullets or missiles of any kind to any distance by means of elastic force or air;

E.     Any explosive substance, or firecrackers, rockets or other fireworks, or dynamite, nitroglycerin, gun powder, or any such manufactured article within the City.

For purposes of this chapter, all of the above are considered weapons. (14-07)

 

9.92.015 Possession of weapons with intent to shoot or hunt.
No person shall possess or carry in public any weapon identified in Section 9.92.010 with the intent to shoot or hunt within the City. (90-14)

 

9.92.020 Exemptions from provisions.
The prohibitions of this chapter shall not apply to any of the following:

A.     To police, peace officers, or persons in military service using reasonable care in the discharge of their duties;

B.     To persons using firearms in necessary self-defense;

C.    To the use of bows and arrows in the teaching of the sport of archery by educational institutions or by the City’s recreational department as part of its regular program;

D.    To the discharging of firearms at a shooting range sponsored by the City police department or other law enforcement agency;

 

E.     To the discharging of air powered or spring operated guns, or the use of simple bows, not exceeding three feet in length, with blunt or practice arrows, when the shooter and the projectile remain within a completely fenced residential yard, provided that the shooting is by an adult or under adult supervision.

F.     City of Claremont’s annual Independence Day fireworks display. (12-01; 90-14)

TITLE 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 10.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 10.08 ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 10.12 REGULATIONS REQUIRING STATE APPROVAL
Chapter 10.16 ENFORCEMENT
Chapter 10.20 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
Chapter 10.24 TURNING MOVEMENTS
Chapter 10.28 ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
Chapter 10.32 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Chapter 10.36 MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING REGULATIONS
Chapter 10.40 PEDESTRIANS
Chapter 10.44 LOADING AND UNLOADING
Chapter 10.48 SPECIAL SPEED ZONES
Chapter 10.52 RESTRICTED USE OF CERTAIN STREETS
Chapter 10.56 HEAVY OR OVERSIZE VEHICLES
Chapter 10.60 BICYCLES AND BICYCLE WAYS
Chapter 10.64 TRAINS
Chapter 10.68 RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMIT ZONES
Chapter 10.69 CLAREMONT HILLSIDES WILDERNESS PARK AND THOMPSON CREEK TRAIL REGULATED PARKING LOTS

Chapter 10.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
10.04.010 Definitions.
A.     Whenever any words or phrases used in this chapter are not defined in this section, but are now defined in the state Vehicle Code, such definitions are incorporated herein and shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used in this title as though set forth herein in full.

B.     For the purposes of this title, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

“Bicycle way” means a public right-of-way designated for the exclusive use of bicycles. Crossflows by motor vehicles may be allowed.

“Central traffic district” means that area bounded on the west by the east line of Indian Hill Boulevard, on the north by the south line of Fifth Street, on the east by the west line of College Avenue and on the south by the north line of First Street.

“Coach” means any motor bus, motor coach, trackless trolley or passenger stage used as a common carrier of passengers.

“Commercial vehicle” means any motor vehicle that is designed, used, or maintained primarily for the transportation of property, or any vehicle used or maintained for the transportation of persons for hire, compensation, or for profit. A vanpool vehicle shall not be considered a commercial vehicle.

“Curb” means the lateral boundary of the roadway, whether such curb be marked by curbing construction or not so marked. The word “curb” as used in this title shall not include the line dividing the roadway of a street from parking strips in the center of a street, nor from tracks or rights-of-way of public utility companies.

“Divisional island” means a raised island located in the roadway and separating opposing or conflicting streams of traffic.

“Holidays” are the first day of January, the twelfth day of February, the twenty-second day of February, the thirtieth day of May, the fourth day of July, the first Monday in September, the ninth day of September, the eleventh day of November, the twenty-fifth day of December and Thanksgiving Day. If the first day of January, the twelfth day of February, the twenty-second day of February, the thirtieth day of May, the fourth day of July, the ninth day of September, the eleventh day of November or the twenty-fifth day of December falls upon a Sunday, the Monday following is a holiday.

“Loading zone” means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.

Official Time Standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this title, they mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in this City.

“Parkway” means that area between the sidewalk and the curb on any street, and where there is no sidewalk, that area between the edge of the roadway and the property line adjacent thereto. “Parkway” also includes any area within a roadway which is not open to vehicular traffic.

“Passenger loading zone” means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers and their personal baggage.

“Pedestrian” means any person afoot.

“Police officer” means every officer of the police department of this City, or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violation of traffic regulations.

“Stop,” when required, means complete cessation of movement.

“Street” includes “municipal parking lot.”

“Vehicle” means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, excepting a device moved exclusively by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.

“Vehicle Code” means the Vehicle Code of the state. (04-04; 85-12; prior code § 13.1)

 

10.04.020 Persons riding bicycles or driving animals.
Every person riding a bicycle or riding or driving an animal upon a highway has all of the rights, and shall be subject to all of the duties, applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this title, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application. (Prior code § 13.11)

 

10.04.030 Public employees to obey traffic regulations.
The provisions of this title shall apply to the operator of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States Government, this state, any county or city and it is unlawful for any such operator to violate any of the provisions of this title, except as otherwise permitted in this title or by the Vehicle Code. (Prior code § 13.14)

 

10.04.040 Exemptions for emergency vehicles.
A.     The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to vehicles operated by the police or fire department, any public ambulance or any public utility vehicle or any private ambulance, which public utility vehicle or private ambulance has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in this section is operated in the manner specified by the Vehicle Code in response to an emergency call.

B.     The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, relieve the operator of any such vehicle from obligation to exercise due care for the safety of others or of the consequences of his or her wilful disregard of the safety of others.

C.    The provisions of this title regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a City department or public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work, or any vehicle owned or operated by the United States Post Office Department while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of United States mail. (Prior code § 13.15)

 

10.04.050 Damage to public property—Report required.
A.     The operator of a vehicle or the person in charge of any animal involved in any accident resulting in damage to any property publicly owned or owned by a public utility, including but not limited to any fire hydrant, parking meter, lighting post, telephone pole, electric light or power pole, or resulting in damage to any tree, traffic-control device or other property of a like nature located in or along any street shall within twenty-four hours after such accident make a written report of such accident to the police department of this City.

B.     Every such report shall state the time when and the place where the accident took place, the name and address of the person owning and of the person operating or in charge of such vehicle or animal, the license number of every such vehicle and shall briefly describe the property damage in such accident.

C.    The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident shall not be subject to the requirements or penalties of this section if and during the time he or she is physically incapable of making a report, but in such event he or she shall make a report as required in subsection A of this section within twenty-four hours after regaining ability to make such report. (Prior code § 13.16)

Chapter 10.08 ADMINISTRATION
10.08.010 Police department—Enforcement duty.
It shall be the duty of the police department to enforce the street traffic regulations of this City and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this City; to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate traffic accidents; and to cooperate with the City Traffic Engineer and other officers of the City in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions and to carry out those duties especially imposed upon the police department by this title. (Prior code § 13.2)

 

10.08.020 Police department—Accident studies required.
Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the police department shall cooperate with the City Traffic Engineer in conducting studies of such accidents and determining remedial measures. (Prior code § 13.3)

 

10.08.030 Police department—Accident reports and recordkeeping.
The police department shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Such reports shall be available for the use and information of the City Traffic Engineer. (Prior code § 13.4)

 

10.08.040 Police department—Annual traffic safety report.
The police department shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the Council. Such a report shall contain information on traffic matters in this City as follows:

A.     The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the number of persons injured and other pertinent traffic accident data;

B.     The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data on the safety activities of the police;

C.    The plans and recommendations of the department for future traffic safety activities. (Prior code § 13.5)

 

10.08.050 Traffic engineer—Office established.
The office of City Traffic Engineer is established. The City Engineer shall serve as the City Traffic Engineer and he or she shall exercise the powers and duties with respect to traffic as provided in this title. For purposes of this title, the terms “City Traffic Engineer” and “City Engineer” are one and the same. All references in this title regarding the City Traffic Engineer shall mean the City Engineer. (14-07)

 

10.08.060 Traffic engineer—Powers and duties.
It shall be the general duty of the City Traffic Engineer to determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic-control devices and signals; to conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures; to conduct engineering and traffic investigations of traffic conditions, and to cooperate with other City officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of this City. Whenever by the provisions of this title a power is granted to the City Traffic Engineer, or a duty imposed upon him or her, the power may be exercised or the duty performed by his or her deputy or by a person authorized in writing by him or her. (Prior code § 13.7)

Chapter 10.12 REGULATIONS REQUIRING STATE APPROVAL
10.12.010 Regulation of state highways.
Any provision of this Code which regulates traffic or delegates the regulation of traffic upon state highways in any way for which the approval of the Department of Transportation is required by state law, shall cease to be operative six months after receipt by the City Council of written notice of withdrawal of approval of the Department of Transportation. (Prior code § 13.98)

 

10.12.020 Delegation of authority.
Whenever this Code delegates authority to a City officer, or authorizes action by the City Council to regulate traffic upon a state highway in any way which by state law requires the prior approval of the Department of Transportation, no such officer shall exercise such authority nor shall such action by the City Council be effective with respect to any state highway without the prior approval in writing of the Department of Transportation when and to the extent required by the Vehicle Code. (Prior code § 13.99)

Chapter 10.16 ENFORCEMENT
10.16.010 Authority of police and fire department officials.
Officers of the police department and such officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, audible or other signal in conformance with traffic laws and whenever necessary in the interest of safety or to expedite the flow of traffic, except that in the event of a fire or other emergency, or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrian officers of the police department, members of the fire department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions to the contrary contained in this title or the Vehicle Code. (Prior code § 13.8)

 

10.16.020 Interference with officers prohibited.
No person shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any police officer or other officer or employee of this City in their enforcement of the provisions of this title. The removal, obliteration or concealment of any chalk mark or other distinguishing mark used by any police officer or other employee or officer of this City in connection with the enforcement of the parking regulations of this title shall, if done for the purpose of evading the provisions of this title, constitute such interference or obstruction. (Prior code § 13.13)

 

10.16.030 Traffic direction authority.
No person other than an officer of the police department, or members of the fire department, or a person authorized by the Chief of Police, or a person authorized by law shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal, except that persons may operate, when and as provided in this title, any mechanical push button signal erected by order of the City Traffic Engineer. (Prior code § 13.9)

 

10.16.040 Authority of police in crowds.
At places where large numbers of people and vehicles are to gather or have gathered, nothing in this title shall be construed to prevent any police officer from prohibiting any person from parking any vehicle upon or using any street or sidewalk, or from prohibiting any pedestrian from using any street or sidewalk, and such police officer shall have authority to direct the parking of vehicles in any reasonable manner, way or direction, and it is declared to be unlawful for any person to fail to promptly obey such police officer’s order, signal or command, regardless of any other provision of this title. (Prior code § 13.12)

Chapter 10.20 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
10.20.010 Installation authority.
A.     The City Traffic Engineer shall have the power and duty to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official traffic-control devices when and as required to make effective the provisions of this title.

B.     Whenever the Vehicle Code requires for the effectiveness of any provision thereof that traffic-control devices be installed to give notice to the public of the application of such law, the City Traffic Engineer is authorized to install or cause to be installed the necessary devices subject to any limitations or restrictions set forth in the law applicable thereto.

C.    The City Traffic Engineer may also place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained such additional traffic-control devices as he or she may deem necessary or proper to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic, but he or she shall make such determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations, and in accordance with such standards, limitations, and rules as may be set forth in this title or as may be determined by ordinance or resolution of the Council. (Prior code § 13.18)

 

10.20.020 Traffic signals—Installation authority—Determination of locations.
A.     The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to install and maintain official traffic signals at those intersections and other places where traffic conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or to protect life or property from exceptional hazard.

B.     The City Traffic Engineer shall ascertain and determine the locations where such signals are required by field investigation, traffic counts and other traffic information as may be pertinent, and his or her determinations therefrom shall be made in accordance with those traffic engineering and safety standards and instructions set forth in the manuals issued by the Division of Highways of the state Department of Public Works. (Prior code § 13.21)

 

10.20.030 Hours of operation.
The City Traffic Engineer shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic-control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those cases where such hours or days are specified in this title. (Prior code § 13.25)

 

10.20.040 Signs—Placement required for enforcement.
No provision of the Vehicle Code or of this title for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate legible signs are in place giving notice of such provisions of the traffic laws. (Prior code § 13.19)

 

10.20.050 Roadway markings—Lanes.
The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to mark centerlines and lane lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles and may place signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the highway. (Prior code § 13.22)

 

10.20.060 Roadway markings—Placement authorized when.
The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to place and maintain distinctive roadway markings as described in the Vehicle Code on those streets or parts of streets where the volume of traffic or the vertical or other curvature of the roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side of such marking or signs and markings. Such marking or signs and markings shall have the same effect as similar markings placed by the state Department of Public Works pursuant to provisions of the Vehicle Code. (Prior code § 13.23)

 

10.20.070 School traffic-control signals.
A.     It is unlawful for any person driving, or operating, propelling or causing to be propelled, any vehicle to fail, refuse or neglect to stop within fifty feet prior to the nearest side of a school crosswalk or pedestrian lane where any signal device, police officer or any other authorized person is stationed giving warning that children are about to cross or are crossing the street; and it is further declared unlawful to start such vehicle into motion until such signal has stopped, raised, been removed or given an indication to proceed, or the police officer or other authorized person has given a signal to proceed or has left the locality.

B.     The signals referred to in this section and known hereafter as “school signals” shall be of the type as follows:

A yellow intermittent light shall be displayed during those hours in any one day as deemed necessary for the safety and welfare of school children, and shall be an indication to the operator of a vehicle of a school crosswalk, and a further indication to the operator of a vehicle to proceed with caution. The “school signal” shall display a constant yellow light upon being actuated by a remote control operated by a pedestrian, and shall be an indication to the operator of a vehicle that the constant red light alone is about to be displayed and shall be further indication to the operator of a vehicle that a complete stop within fifty feet prior to the crosswalk or pedestrian lane contiguous to the signal will be required. A constant red light shall be displayed immediately after the display of the constant yellow light by the “school signal,” which shall be an indication to the operator of a vehicle that a complete stop is required and the vehicle shall not be placed into motion prior to the “school signal” resuming the operation of an intermittent yellow light, which shall indicate to proceed with caution. (Prior code § 13.27)

 

10.20.080 Unauthorized painting of streets or curbs.
No person, unless authorized by this City, shall paint any street or curb surface; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the painting of numbers on a curb surface by any person who has complied with the provisions of any resolution or ordinance of this City pertaining thereto. (Prior code § 13.26)

 

10.20.090 Authority to remove, relocate or discontinue devices.
The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to remove, relocate or discontinue the operation of any traffic-control device not specifically required by the Vehicle Code or this title whenever he or she determines in any particular case that the conditions which warranted or required the installation no longer exist or obtain. (Prior code § 13.24)

Chapter 10.24 TURNING MOVEMENTS
10.24.010 Traffic-control devices indicating turning movements—Placement authority.
The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to place official traffic-control devices within or adjacent to intersections and indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and the City Traffic Engineer is authorized to locate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right or left hand turns, and the course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance. (Prior code § 13.28)

 

10.24.020 Turn signs—Placement authority.
The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. (Prior code § 13.29)

 

10.24.030 Right turns against stop signals authorized when.
A.     No driver of a vehicle shall make a right turn against a red or stop signal at any intersection which is sign-posted giving notice of such restriction as provided in this section.

B.     The City Traffic Engineer shall post appropriate signs giving effect to this section where he or she determines that the making of right turns against traffic signal “stop” indications would seriously interfere with the safe and orderly flow of traffic. (Prior code § 13.31)

 

10.24.040 Backing around corners prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to back a vehicle from one public street, highway or alley or portion thereof, around a corner onto another public street, highway or alley or portion thereof. (Prior code § 13.32)

Chapter 10.28 ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
10.28.010 Signs required—Placement authority—Contents.
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this City designates any one-way street or alley, the City Traffic Engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. (Prior code § 13.33)

Chapter 10.32 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
10.32.010 Applicability of provisions.
A.     The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times specified in this chapter, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device.

B.     The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code or the ordinances of this City prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. (Prior code § 13.51)

 

10.32.020 Restricted parking and stopping zones—Marking required—Placement authority.
A.     The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to maintain, by appropriate signs or by paint upon the curb surface, all no-stopping zones, no-parking areas and restricted parking areas, as defined and described in this chapter.

B.     When such curb markings or signs are in place, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign in violation of any other provisions of this chapter.

C.    The City Manager may issue temporary or permanent parking permits for a restricted parking zone in the parking lot located at 328 North Yale Avenue in order to implement the parking lease approved by the City Council. (84-13; prior code § 13.53)

 

10.32.025 Restricted parking—Street sweeping and collection of waste matter, garbage and/or recyclable materials.
A.     The City Engineer is authorized to restrict parking on residential streets on dates and at times scheduled for street sweeping and/or for collection of waste matter, garbage and/or recyclable materials.

B.     The City Engineer is authorized to place signs and/or markings upon any residential street indicating no parking during stated dates and times for scheduled street sweeping and/or for scheduled collection of waste matter, garbage, and/or recyclable materials.

C.    When official signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected on any residential street as authorized in this section, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign or marking. (14-07)

 

10.32.030 Emergency no-parking signs—Erection authority.
A.     Whenever the City Traffic Engineer determines that an emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings or functions, or for other reasons, the City Traffic Engineer shall have the power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the City Traffic Engineer shall direct during the time such temporary signs are in place. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency and the City Traffic Engineer shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter.

B.     When such signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs. (Prior code § 13.63)

 

10.32.040 Parking space markings—Installation and maintenance authority.
A.     The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to install and maintain parking space markings to indicate parking spaces adjacent to curbings where authorized parking is permitted.

B.     When such parking space markings are placed on the highway, subject to other and more restrictive limitations, no vehicle shall be stopped, left standing or parked other than within a single space, unless the size or shape of such vehicle makes compliance impossible. (Prior code § 13.68)

 

10.32.050 Thirty-minute parking limitation.
A.     When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by the City Traffic Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park for a period of time longer than thirty minutes at any time between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day except Sunday.

B.     When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by the City Traffic Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign in violation thereof. (Prior code § 13.64)

 

10.32.055 Twenty-minute parking limitation.
When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by the City Traffic Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle for a period of time longer than twenty minutes at any time between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sunday. (96-12)

 

10.32.060 Two-hour parking limitation.
A.     When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by the City Traffic Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any date except Saturday and/or Sunday, as expressly stated on such sign or curb markings, for a period of time longer than two hours, except as hereinafter specified.

B.     The City Manager may issue permanent parking permits for the parking spaces directly abutting the City hall building, and may issue temporary parking permits for the parking lot north and west of the City hall building. (09-15)

 

10.32.065 Three-hour parking limitation.
A.     When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by the City Traffic Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Saturday and/or Sunday, as expressly stated on such sign or curb markings, for a period of time longer than three hours, except as hereinafter specified.

B.     The City Manager may issue permanent parking permits for the parking spaces directly abutting the City hall building, and may issue temporary parking permits for the parking lot north and west of the City hall building. (09-15)

 

10.32.070 Diagonal parking regulations.
A.     On any of the streets or portions of streets established by resolution of the Council as diagonal parking zones, when signs or pavement markings are in place indicating such diagonal parking, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park such vehicle except:

1.     At the angle to the curb indicated by signs or pavement markings allotting space to parked vehicles and entirely within the limits of such allotted space;

2.     With the front wheel nearest the curb within six inches of such curb.

 

B.     The provisions of this section shall not apply when such vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading passengers, freight or goods, in which event the provisions in Section 10.32.080 shall be complied with. (Prior code § 13.67)

 

10.32.080 Parallel parking required on one-way streets—Exception.
A.     Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle may be stopped or parked within eighteen inches of the left-hand curb facing in the direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street, unless signs are in place prohibiting such stopping or standing.

B.     In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways, and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are in place permitting such standing or parking.

C.    The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to determine when standing or parking shall be prohibited upon the left-hand side of any one-way street, or when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any one-way roadway of a highway having two or more separate roadways, and shall erect signs giving notice thereof.

D.    The requirement of parallel parking imposed by this section shall not apply in the event any commercial vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading freight or goods, in which case such vehicle may be backed up to the curb; provided, that such vehicle does not extend beyond the centerline of the street and does not block traffic thereby. (Prior code § 13.66)

 

10.32.090 Parking on narrow streets.
A.     The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to place signs or markings indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs or markings when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty feet.

B.     When official signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized in this section, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign or marking. (Prior code § 13.60)

 

10.32.100 Parking on grades.
No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle unattended on a highway upon any grade exceeding three percent without blocking the wheels of such vehicle by turning them against the curb or by other means. (Prior code § 13.61)

 

10.32.110 Parking near fire hydrant on private road.
An operator of any vehicle shall not park within fifteen feet of a fire hydrant on any private road or alley. (Prior code § 13.54-1)

 

10.32.120 Blocking private road to access by emergency vehicles.
An operator of any vehicle shall not park on any private road or alley so as to block access of any emergency vehicle. (Prior code § 13.54-2)

 

10.32.130 Parking adjacent to schools.
A.     The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his or her opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation.

B.     When official signs are erected prohibiting parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. (Prior code § 13.59)

 

10.32.140 Stopping or parking in parkways.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any parkway. (Prior code § 13.52)

 

10.32.160 Washing or polishing vehicles for payment prohibited on public streets.
No person shall wash or cause to be washed, polish or cause to be polished, any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in this City when a charge is made for such service. (Prior code § 13.58)

 

10.32.170 Repairing vehicles on public streets prohibited—Exception.
No person shall construct or cause to be constructed, repair or cause to be repaired, grease or cause to be greased, any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in this City. Temporary emergency repairs may be made upon a public street. (Prior code § 13.57)

 

10.32.180 Parking of commercial vehicles in residential districts.
No person shall park or store any commercial vehicle having a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or more, or any special construction equipment vehicles or special mobile equipment vehicles incapable of movement under its own power, in any residential district, except as follows:

A.     For the purpose of making pick-ups or delivery of goods, wares, services, or merchandise from or to any building or structure located at, or adjacent to, the location where the vehicle is parked, for only the time necessary to complete such work.

B.     For the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling, or construction of any building or structure for which a building permit has previously been obtained.

C.    For the purpose of making repairs, for a period not to exceed five hours, when the need for the repairs arises suddenly and unexpectedly due to an accident or mechanical breakdown, while conducting business. (04-04; prior code § 13.71)

 

10.32.190 Parking commercial sales vehicles—Permit required.
A.     Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall stand or park any vehicle, wagon or pushcart from which goods, wares, merchandise, fruits, vegetables or foodstuffs are sold, displayed, solicited or offered for sale or bartered or exchanged, or any lunch wagon or eating car or vehicle, on any portion of any street within this City, except that such vehicles, wagons or pushcarts may stand or park only at the request of a bona fide purchaser for a period of time not to exceed ten minutes to any one place. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to persons delivering such articles upon order of, or by agreement with, a customer from a store or other fixed place of business or distribution.

B.     No person shall park or stand on any street any lunch wagon, eating cart or vehicle or pushcart from which tamales, peanuts, popcorn, candy or other articles of food are sold or offered for sale, without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the City Traffic Engineer which shall designate the specific location in which such cart shall stand.

C.    No person shall park or stand any vehicle or wagon used or intended to be used in the transportation of property for hire on any street while awaiting patronage for such vehicle or wagon, without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the City Traffic Engineer which shall designate the specific location where such vehicle may stand.

D.    Whenever any permit is granted under the provisions of this section, and a particular location to park or stand is specified therein, no person shall park or stand any vehicle, wagon or pushcart on any location other than as designated in such permit. In the event that the holder of any such permit is convicted in any court of competent jurisdiction for violating any of the provisions of this section, such permit shall be forthwith revoked by the City Traffic Engineer upon the filing of the record of such conviction with such officer, and no permit shall thereafter be issued to such person until six months have elapsed from date of such revocation. (Prior code § 13.62)

 

10.32.200 Parking for more than seventy-two hours prohibited.
No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street or alley for more than a consecutive period of seventy-two hours. (Prior code § 13.55)

 

10.32.210 Nighttime parking restricted—Exception.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle on any street for a period of time longer than one hour between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day. The provisions of this section shall not apply to vehicles in any of the following circumstances:

A.     A vehicle being used by a regularly licensed physician when actually engaged in making professional calls;

B.     A vehicle for which an exemption has been granted from the Police Chief or designee as follows:

1.     An exemption up to three nights, per vehicle, within a one-month period per dwelling by calling the Police Department or utilizing the online overnight parking (ONP) exemption system through the City’s Internet website and providing the required information to receive an exemption;

2.     A longer exemption may be granted upon written request demonstrating good cause as determined by the Police Chief or designee. (14-07)

 

10.32.215 Metrolink lot, Village parking structure, Village parking lot, and City-leased lot.
A.     No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle equipped with sleeping facilities, in the Metrolink parking lot (on the south side of First Street east of College Avenue) between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. For purposes of this subsection A only, a vehicle equipped with sleeping facilities may include any one of the following:

1.     A vehicle designed to be used on a highway, capable of human habitation for camping or recreational purposes;

2.     A vehicle attached to a structure designed to be mounted upon a motor vehicle in order to provide facilities for human habitation or camping or recreational purposes; or

3.     Any passenger or commercial vehicle which has been altered or equipped to provide facilities for human habitation.

B.     No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in the Village parking structure (on the south side of First Street west of Indian Hill Boulevard) between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 4:00 a.m. without a City-approved parking permit.

C.    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in the City-leased parking spaces in the parking lot on the northwest corner of Bonita Avenue and Grinnell Drive between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 4:00 a.m. This overnight parking restriction does not apply to any parking spaces marked and reserved for the property owner’s vehicles.

D.    An exemption for these parking facilities may be granted upon written request to the Chief of Police, or designee, demonstrating good cause. (19-06; 05-04)

 

10.32.220 Removal of vehicles authorized when.
Any regularly employed and salaried officer of the police department of this City may remove or cause to be removed:

A.     Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing upon a street or highway for seventy-two or more consecutive hours;

B.     Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., when such parking or standing is prohibited by ordinance or resolution of this City and signs are posted giving notice of such removal;

C.    Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway, or for the installation of underground utilities, or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic, or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided, that signs giving notice that such vehicle may be removed are erected or placed at least twenty-four hours prior to the removal;

D.    Any vehicle as provided in Section 22651 of the Vehicle Code;

E.     Any vehicle that is parked in a location within the City where parking is prohibited, as established through: (1) red curb striping; (2) no parking signage; (3) provisions of Chapters 10.32, 10.44, 10.68 and 10.69 of this Code; or (4) provisions of the California Vehicle Code, and where signs are posted giving notice of the removal. (13-09; prior code § 13.17)

 

10.32.230 No-stopping zones—Designation authority.
A.     The City Traffic Engineer shall designate established no-stopping zones by placing and maintaining appropriate signs indicating that stopping of vehicles is prohibited, and indicating the hours and days when stopping is prohibited.

B.     During the hours and on the days designated on the signs, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop such vehicle on any of the streets or parts of streets established by resolution of the Council as no-stopping zones. (Prior code § 13.69)

 

10.32.240 Stop signs—Required at through street intersections—Erection and placement authority.
Whenever the City Traffic Engineer designates any street or portion thereof as a through street, or at any intersection at which vehicles are required to stop at one or more entrances thereto, he or she shall erect and maintain stop signs as follows:

A stop sign shall be erected on each and every street intersecting such through street or portion thereof so designated and at those entrances of other intersections where a stop is required; provided, however, stop signs shall not be erected or maintained at any entrance to an intersection when such entrance is controlled by an official traffic-control signal. Every such sign shall conform with, and shall be placed as provided in the Vehicle Code. (Prior code § 13.34)

 

10.32.250 Through streets designated—Applicability of Sections 10.32.240 through 10.32.260.
A.     Those streets and parts of streets designated by the City Traffic Engineer are declared to be through streets for the purposes of Sections 10.32.240 through 10.32.260.

B.     The provisions of Sections 10.32.240 through 10.32.260 shall also apply at one or more entrances to the intersections as such entrances and intersections are designated by the City Traffic Engineer.

C.    The provisions of Sections 10.32.240 through 10.32.260 shall apply at those highway railway grade crossings as designated by the City Traffic Engineer, subject to the approval of the state public utilities commission. (Prior code § 13.35)

 

10.32.260 Stop required before entering sidewalk.
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway. (Prior code § 13.36)

 

10.32.270 Vehicles transporting hazardous materials.
A.     A vehicle transporting a hazardous material or substance as identified in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations must be attended at all times by its driver or a qualified representative of the motor carrier that operates it, and shall not be parked on any highway, highway shoulder, street, alley, public way or public place, or within five feet of the traveled portion thereof within a residential zone or within one thousand feet of any school, hospital, hotel, motel, convalescent home, or similar use where large numbers of people congregate and could not be readily evacuated; or any bridge or tunnel, except for brief periods when mechanical or equipment failure or disablement or malfunction of the vehicle, or the necessities of operation require the vehicle to be parked and make it impractical to park the vehicle in any other place.

B.     Repair, maintenance, refuse, utility, termite and pesticide vehicles, fuel delivery vehicles, and vehicles delivering life support and health commodities, while servicing residential areas or schools, are exempt from the provisions of subsection A of this section. Additionally, such exempt vehicles need not be attended while the drivers are performing duties that are evident and necessary as the operator of the vehicles or the provider of the service.

C.    For purposes of this section:

1.     A motor vehicle is attended when the person in charge of the vehicle is on the vehicle, awake, and not in a sleeper berth, or is within one hundred feet of the vehicle and has it within his or her unobstructed field of view.

2.     A qualified representative of a motor carrier is a person who:

a.     Has been designated by the carrier to attend the vehicle;

b.     Is aware of the nature of the hazardous material or substance contained in the vehicle he or she attends;

c.     Has been instructed on the procedures he or she must follow in emergencies concerning hazardous materials or substances;

d.     Is authorized to move the vehicle and has the means and ability to do so.

D.    The rules of this section do not relieve a driver from any obligation imposed by federal, state or local laws relating to the transportation of hazardous materials or explosives, motor carrier safety regulations, or the placement of warning signs or devices when a motor vehicle is stopped on a public street or highway. (80-5)

 

10.32.280 City parking lot restrictions.
When the City Council, after a public hearing, has adopted a resolution restricting the hours or location or both, of parking in any City-owned or operated off-street parking facility, and when signs have been placed by the City Engineer giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall park in violation of such restrictions. When the hours of operation of a City-owned or operated off-street parking facility are established in this Code, no operator of any vehicle shall park in such parking facility in violation of such hours of operation. (13-01; 91-5)

 

10.32.285 Restricted parking for vehicles connected to electric charging stations.
A.     Definitions. As used in this section, the below words shall have the meanings ascribed to them herein:

1.     “Designated space” shall mean a parking stall or space in an off-street parking facility owned or operated by the City designated by the City Council by ordinance or resolution to be used for the exclusive purpose of charging and parking a vehicle that is connected for electric charging purposes and that has posted an electric vehicle parking sign in conformity with this section.

2.     “Electric vehicle parking sign” shall mean a sign placed by the City Engineer or designee at an off-site parking facility containing a designated space. An electric vehicle parking sign shall be no less than 17 by 22 inches in size with lettering not less than one inch in height that clearly and conspicuously states the following: “Unauthorized vehicles not connected for electric charging purposes will be towed away at owner’s expense. Towed vehicles may be reclaimed at (Address) or by telephoning (Telephone # of City Police Dept.).” An electric vehicle sign shall be posted either: (a) immediately adjacent to, and visible from, a designated space; or (b) in a conspicuous place at each entrance to the off-street parking facility containing the designated space.

3.     “Garage” shall mean a building or other space wherein the business of storing or safekeeping vehicles of a type to be registered under the California Vehicle Code and which belong to members of the general public is conducted for compensation.

B.     A person shall not park or leave standing a vehicle in a designated space unless the vehicle is connected for electric charging purposes.

C.    A person shall not obstruct, block, or otherwise bar access to a designated space unless the vehicle is connected for electric charging purposes.

D.    The City, as owner or operator of the off-street parking facility containing a designated space, after notifying its police department, may cause the removal of a vehicle in violation of subsection B or C of this section from a designated space to the nearest garage that is owned, leased, or approved for use by the City.

E.     The provisions of this section do not exempt a person or his or her vehicle from compliance with any and all other parking regulations set forth in the Claremont Municipal Code, including, but not limited to, parking time limitations.

F.     Vehicles accessing a designated space for electric charging purposes shall be permitted to back-in to the designated space, including facilities where back-in parking is not otherwise permitted. (15-01)

 

10.32.290 Residential permit parking on Via Santa Catarina and surrounding streets.
A.     Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter limiting or restricting the parking or standing of vehicles on certain streets or highways, or portions thereof, during all or certain hours of the day, no vehicles shall park on Via Santa Catarina for those days/times as posted on the street except those vehicles displaying the appropriate preferential parking permit as hereafter provided, and said exempted vehicles shall not be subject to applicable parking limitations or restrictions;

B.     Residential permit parking will be allowed on surrounding streets, including, but not limited to High Point Drive, Via Montevideo, and Via Santo Tomas, if deemed necessary to control Wilderness Park parking by the Police Chief or his/her designee;

 

C.    The Police Chief or his/her designee shall issue a residential permit not to exceed four permits per dwelling, to persons whose residence is adjacent to Via Santa Catarina and surrounding streets, if deemed necessary. A fee shall not be required for issuance or reissuance of any preferential parking permit;

D.    The residential permit parking on Via Santa Catarina shall remain permanently in place, subject to evaluation and modification as follows: The permit parking shall be re-evaluated at such time when any of the following take place: (1) when the new parking lot is approved and constructed by others north of the current Mountain Avenue terminus; or (2) when evaluation is deemed necessary by the City Council or staff; or (3) when requested by the residents of Via Santa Catarina;

E.     The permit shall be displayed on the vehicle as directed by the Claremont Police Department; and

F.     Additional permits will be available for special occasions through the Claremont Police Department. (11-02; 08-10)

Chapter 10.36 MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING REGULATIONS
10.36.010 Driving through funeral procession prohibited.
No operator of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession or a parade; provided, that such vehicles are conspicuously so designated. The directing of all vehicles and traffic on any street over which such funeral procession or parade wishes to pass shall be subject to the orders of the police department. (Prior code § 13.37)

 

10.36.020 Commercial vehicles using private driveways.
No person shall operate or drive a commercial vehicle in, on or across any private driveway approach or sidewalk area of the driveway itself without the consent of the owner or occupant of the property if a sign or markings are in place indicating that the use of such driveway is prohibited. (04-04; prior code § 13.39)

 

10.36.030 Riding or driving on sidewalk prohibited.
No person shall ride, drive, propel or cause to be propelled any vehicle or animal across or upon any sidewalk excepting over permanently constructed driveways and excepting when it is necessary for any temporary purpose to drive a loaded vehicle across a sidewalk; provided further, that written permission shall be previously obtained from the City Traffic Engineer. (Prior code § 13.40)

 

10.36.040 Driving across fresh pavement prohibited.
No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted markings in any street when a barrier sign, cone marker or other warning device is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or markings, or when any such device is in place indicating that the street or any portion thereof is closed. (Prior code § 13.41)

 

10.36.050 Limited access roadways.
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are lawfully established. (Prior code § 13.42)

 

10.36.060 Restrictions on use of freeways.
No person shall drive or operate any bicycle, motor-driven cycle or any vehicle which is not drawn by a motor vehicle upon any street established as a freeway, as defined by state law, nor shall any pedestrian walk across or along any such street so designated and described except in space set aside for the use of pedestrians; provided, that official signs are in place giving notice of such restrictions. (Prior code § 13.43)

 

10.36.070 Traffic barriers and signs—Obedience required.
A.     No person shall operate a vehicle contrary to the directions or provisions of any barrier or sign erected:

1.     Pursuant to the provisions of any ordinance of the City;

2.     By any public utility;

3.     By any department of the City;

4.     By any other person pursuant to law or contract with the City.

B.     No unauthorized person shall move or alter the position of any such barrier or sign. (Prior code § 13.44)

 

10.36.080 Traffic barriers and signs—Unauthorized erection or removal prohibited.
No person, public utility or department in the City shall erect or place any barrier or sign on any street unless of a type approved by the City Traffic Engineer, or disobey the instructions, remove, tamper with or destroy any barrier or sign lawfully placed on any street by any person, public utility or by any department of this City. (Prior code § 13.45)

 

10.36.090 Unlawful operation of vehicles on public or private property.
A.     It is unlawful to operate any type of motorized vehicle, motorcycle or motor-driven cycle upon the private property of another without first obtaining the written permission of such owner. Persons who obtain permission from private property owners to operate motorized vehicles, motorcycles or motor-driven cycles thereon shall maintain in their possession such written permission at all times when operating such vehicles on such private property.

B.     No person shall operate a motorized vehicle, a motorcycle or a motor-driven cycle, other than a publicly owned vehicle, upon any public sidewalk, walkway, parkway, median island or in any public park or recreational area, or upon any other publicly owned property, except highways, within the City. This shall not be construed to prohibit the operation of such vehicles having a valid state vehicle registration, by any person possessing a valid state operator’s license, upon the public highways of the City.

C.    This section in no way prohibits the use of private property by:

1.     Emergency vehicles;

2.     Vehicles of commerce in the course of the conduct of normal business;

3.     Vehicles being operated on property devoted to commercial purposes where the general public is expressly or impliedly invited to such property, unless such property is not open for business;

4.     Vehicles operated on property actually used for residential purposes where such vehicle is there at the express or implied invitation of the owner or occupant. (Prior code § 13.46)

Chapter 10.40 PEDESTRIANS
10.40.010 Crosswalks—Established—Designation.
A.     The City Traffic Engineer shall establish, designate and maintain crosswalks at intersections and other places by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway as follows:

Crosswalks shall be established and maintained at all intersections within the central traffic district and at such intersections outside such district, and at other places within or outside such district, where the City Traffic Engineer determines that there is particular hazard to pedestrians crossing the roadway subject to the limitation contained in subsection B of this section.

B.     Other than crosswalks at intersections, no crosswalk shall be established in any block which is less than three hundred feet in length, and such crosswalk shall be located as nearly as practicable at mid-block.

C.    The City Traffic Engineer may place signs at or adjacent to an intersection in respect to any crosswalk, directing that pedestrians shall not cross in the crosswalk so indicated. (Prior code § 13.47)

 

10.40.020 Crosswalks—Use required.
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than by a crosswalk in the central traffic district or in any business district. (Prior code § 13.48)

Chapter 10.44 LOADING AND UNLOADING
10.44.010 Loading zones—Council authority—Markings.
A.     The City Council shall determine by resolution and thereafter the traffic engineer is authorized to mark passenger and loading zones as follows:

1.     At any place in the central traffic district or any business district;

2.     Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business, or in front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly.

B.     In no event shall more than one-half of the total curb length in any block be reserved for loading zone purposes.

C.    Loading zones shall be indicated by yellow paint upon the top of all curbs within such zones.

D.    Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by white paint upon the top of all curbs in such zones. (77-34; prior code § 13.72)

 

10.44.020 Loading zones—Curb markings required.
A.     The City Traffic Engineer is authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this chapter, to place, and when required herein shall place, the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations, and such curb markings shall have the meanings as herein set forth:

1.     “Red” means no stopping, standing or parking at any time except as permitted by the Vehicle Code, and except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus zone.

2.     “Yellow” means no stopping, standing or parking at any time between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sunday for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials; provided, that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more than three minutes, nor the loading or unloading of materials more than twenty minutes.

Loading zones shall be indicated by a yellow paint line, stenciled with black letters, “LOADING ONLY” upon the top of all curbs within such zones.

3.     “White” means no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers, or for the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mail box, which shall not exceed three minutes, and such restrictions shall apply between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sunday, except that where such zone is in front of a hotel or mailbox the restrictions shall apply at all times.

Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by a white line stenciled with black letters, “PASSENGER LOADING ONLY” upon the top of all curbs in such zones.

4.     “Green” means no standing or parking for longer than thirty minutes at any time between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day except Sunday.

B.     When the City Traffic Engineer as authorized under this chapter has caused curb markings to be placed, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking in violation of any of the provisions of this section. (Prior code § 13.73)

 

10.44.030 Loading zones—Restrictions.
A.     Permission herein granted to stop or stand a vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading materials shall apply only to commercial vehicles, and shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than twenty minutes.

B.     The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial deliveries, the delivery or pickup of express and parcel post packages and United States mail.

C.    Permission herein granted to stop or park for purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of personal baggage, but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than three minutes.

D.    Within the total time limits above specified, the provisions of this section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable loading or unloading, but without permitting abuse of the privileges granted. (Prior code § 13.74)

 

10.44.040 Bus zones.
A.     The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to establish bus zones opposite curb space for the loading and unloading of buses or common carriers of passengers and to determine the location thereof.

B.     The City Traffic Engineer shall paint a red line stenciled with white letters, “NO STANDING,” together with the word “BUS ZONE,” upon the top or side of all curbs and places as a bus zone.

C.    No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle except a bus in a bus zone. (Prior code § 13.78)

 

10.44.050 Special passenger loading zones.
A.     No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle in any special passenger loading zone when approved permanent or portable signs are in place as hereinafter provided, for any period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or unloading of passengers, and not to exceed three minutes.

 

B.     Special passenger loading zones, as used herein, shall be those areas adjacent to the curb, not more than sixty feet in length, located between two approved permanent or portable signs in front of or adjacent to, and within the projected real property boundaries of any church, theater, club or place of business or public gathering. Such signs shall be provided and paid for by the church, theater, club or place of business or public gathering for which they are used, and shall be approved by the City Traffic Engineer. (Prior code § 13.79)

 

10.44.060 Stopping in passenger loading zones prohibited when.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any passenger loading zone for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers for such time as is specified in Section 10.44.010. (Prior code § 13.76)

 

10.44.070 Stopping in alleys prohibited when.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of persons or materials in any alley. (Prior code § 13.77)

 

10.44.080 Stopping in yellow loading zones prohibited when.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any yellow loading zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or material for such time as is permitted in Section 10.44.020. (Prior code § 13.75)

Chapter 10.48 SPECIAL SPEED ZONES
10.48.010 Speed limits on certain streets.
A.     It is determined, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, that the speed permitted by state law upon the following streets is either:

1.     Less than is necessary for safe operation of vehicles thereon by reason of the designation and signposting of such streets as through highways, or by reason of widely spaced intersections; or

2.     Greater than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist upon such streets.

B.     It is declared that the prima facie speed limit shall be as set forth in this section on those streets or parts of streets designated in this section when signs are erected giving notice thereof:

 

ALAMOSA DRIVE

Mills Avenue to Padua Avenue                                                                                        30 mph

 

ARROW HIGHWAY

Cambridge Avenue to Indian Hill Boulevard                                                                     45 mph

Indian Hill Boulevard to College Avenue                                                                          40 mph

College Avenue to Claremont Boulevard                                                                         40 mph

 

AUTO CENTER DRIVE

Indian Hill Boulevard to End                                                                                             30 mph

 

BASE LINE ROAD

East City Limit to Mills Avenue                                                                                         45 mph

Mills Avenue to Indian Hill Boulevard                                                                               45 mph

Indian Hill Boulevard to Mountain Avenue                                                                       45 mph

Mountain Avenue to Towne Avenue                                                                                45 mph

Towne Avenue to West City Limit                                                                                    40 mph

 

BONITA AVENUE

Indian Hill Boulevard to Carnegie Avenue at westerly City Limit                                      35 mph

 

CAMBRIDGE AVENUE

Arrow Highway to Bonita Avenue                                                                                     35 mph

CLAREMONT BOULEVARD

Arrow Highway to First Street                                                                                           35 mph

First Street to Sixth Street                                                                                                40 mph

Sixth Street to Foothill Boulevard                                                                                     40 mph

Foothill Boulevard to Monte Vista Avenue                                                                       40 mph

 

COLLEGE AVENUE

First Street to Sixth Street                                                                                                25 mph

Sixth Street to Foothill Boulevard                                                                                     30 mph

 

FIRST STREET

College Avenue to Claremont Boulevard                                                                         40 mph

 

FOOTHILL BOULEVARD

East City Limit to Mills Avenue                                                                                         40 mph

Mills Avenue to Indian Hill Boulevard                                                                               40 mph

Indian Hill Boulevard to Mountain Avenue                                                                       40 mph

Mountain Avenue to Towne Avenue                                                                                40 mph

 

GAREY AVENUE

Arlington Drive to College Way                                                                                        40 mph

 

HARRISON AVENUE

Harvard Avenue to Indian Hill Boulevard                                                                         25 mph

 

INDIAN HILL BOULEVARD

American Avenue to San Jose Avenue                                                                            30 mph

San Jose Avenue to Arrow Highway                                                                                40 mph

Arrow Highway to First Street                                                                                           35 mph

First Street to Bonita Avenue                                                                                           25 mph

Bonita Avenue to Eighth Street                                                                                        30 mph

Eighth St. to Foothill Blvd.                                                                                                30 mph

Foothill Blvd. to Base Line Rd.                                                                                         35 mph

Base Line Road to Armstrong Drive                                                                                 40 mph

 

LASSEN AVENUE

Scottsbluff Drive to Lindenwood Drive                                                                             25 mph

 

MILLS AVENUE

Foothill Boulevard to Base Line Road                                                                              40 mph

Base Line Rd. to Alamosa Dr.                                                                                          40 mph

Alamosa Dr. to Mt. Baldy Rd.                                                                                           40 mph

 

MIRAMAR AVENUE

Mills Avenue to Padua Avenue                                                                                        30 mph

MONTE VISTA AVENUE

Claremont Blvd. to Base Line Rd.                                                                                    40 mph

 

MOUNTAIN AVENUE

Bonita Avenue to Harrison Avenue                                                                                  25 mph

Harrison Avenue to Foothill Boulevard                                                                             35 mph

Foothill Blvd. to Base Line Rd.                                                                                         35 mph

Thompson Creek to N’ly End                                                                                           30 mph

 

MT. BALDY ROAD

Mills Ave. to Padua Ave.                                                                                                  45 mph

 

OXFORD AVENUE

Colby Circle to Scripps Drive                                                                                            25 mph

 

PADUA AVENUE

Base Line Rd. to Alamosa Dr.                                                                                          40 mph

Alamosa Dr. to Mt. Baldy Rd.                                                                                           40 mph

 

SAN JOSE AVENUE

Mountain Avenue to Indian Hill Boulevard                                                                       35 mph

Indian Hill Boulevard to College Avenue                                                                          30 mph

 

SHENANDOAH DRIVE

Lindenwood Drive to Claremont Boulevard                                                                      25 mph

 

SIXTH STREET

Indian Hill Boulevard to College Avenue                                                                          25 mph

College Avenue to College Way                                                                                       25 mph

College Way to Mills Avenue                                                                                            30 mph

Mills Avenue to Claremont Boulevard                                                                              30 mph

 

SUMNER AVENUE

Briarcroft Road to Ridgefield Drive                                                                                   30 mph

 

TOWNE AVENUE

Foothill Boulevard to Base Line Road                                                                              40 mph

 

WILLIAMS AVENUE

Foothill Boulevard to College Way                                                                                   35 mph

 

(20-03; 18-12; 18-05; 17-04; 16-07; 16-06; 16-01; 15-02; 13-08; 13-07; 12-12; 11-09; 11-01; 09-07; 09-03; 05-06; 03-04; 03-02; 99-07; 98-08; 93-11; 93-9; 89-2; 79-31; 77-7; 75-9; prior code § 13.89)

 

10.48.020 Regulation of speed by traffic signals.
The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the district or at intersections, and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. (Prior code § 13.90)

Chapter 10.52 RESTRICTED USE OF CERTAIN STREETS
10.52.010 Designated routes for vehicles in excess of ten thousand pounds.
A.     Classification. The streets or portions thereof of the City are declared to be and they are divided and classified into two groups, and shall henceforth be known as and regulated as to heavy traffic by the name of such groups, together with the regulations appertaining thereto as set forth in this section. Such groups are designated as “unrestricted streets” and “restricted streets.”

B.     Unrestricted Streets. Any street or streets designated as follows in this subsection shall henceforth be known and designated as unrestricted streets, and the City imposes no weight restriction or regulation thereon, except as is contained in the California Vehicle Code: Foothill Boulevard, the San Bernardino Freeway, Base Line Road, Arrow Highway, Towne Avenue from Foothill Boulevard northerly, Indian Hill Boulevard from American Avenue to Arrow Highway, Padua Avenue from Base Line Road to Mt. Baldy Road, Mt. Baldy Road east of Padua Avenue, and Monte Vista Avenue from the City/County boundary line to Base Line Road.

C.    Restricted Streets. It is unlawful for any person owning or operating any commercial motor vehicles or truck-trailer combination exceeding a maximum gross weight of ten thousand pounds to drive or propel the same, or to cause or to permit the same to be driven or propelled, or to park or to permit to be parked, at any time upon, over or across any of the following streets designated as restricted streets: Any and all streets or portions of streets not otherwise classified as unrestricted streets or intermediate truck routes are classified as restricted streets. (98-07; 79-30; 77-24; 77-12; prior code § 13.83)

 

10.52.020 Exceptions to Section 10.52.010.
A.     Section 10.52.010 shall not prohibit any vehicle or truck-trailer combination exceeding the prescribed maximum gross weight limit, coming from an unrestricted or less-restricted street, having ingress and egress by direct route to and from such restricted streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structures located on such restricted streets and for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon such restricted street for which a building permit has previously been obtained therefor; but then only by such deviation from the nearest unrestricted or less-restricted street as is reasonably necessary. Such vehicles when making deliveries or in the performance of a service on said restricted streets shall be restricted by the provisions of Section 10.32.080.

B.     The provisions of Section 10.52.010 shall not apply to:

1.     Passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the public utilities commission;

2.     Any vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility;

3.     Emergency vehicles of the City; or

4.     School buses under the jurisdiction of any school district. (77-12; prior code § 13.84)

 

10.52.030 Signposting required.
The City Council, in accordance with Section 35701 of the Vehicle Code, determines that notice of Sections 10.52.010 through 10.52.040 will best be given by posting the specific streets affected and mentioned in this Code, and therefore the City Traffic Engineer is authorized to post appropriate signs on any street in the City, which signs shall state and declare the load limit established by Section 10.52.010. (Prior code § 13.85)

 

10.52.040 Weighing vehicles required when.
Any police officer shall have the authority to require any person driving or in control of any vehicle proceeding over a street to proceed to any public or private scale within a radius of five miles for the purpose of weighing and determining whether Section 10.52.010 of this Code has been complied with. (Prior code § 13.86)

 

10.52.050 Advertising vehicles prohibited where.
No person shall operate or drive any vehicle used for advertising purposes, or any advertising vehicle equipped with a sound-amplifying or loud-speaking device, upon any street or alley at any time within the central traffic district. (Prior code § 13.81)

 

10.52.060 Restricted use of cleated or studded tires—Exception.
Other than on vehicles actually engaged at the time in construction or repair work on public highways, no tire on any motor or other vehicle operated on or over any public street or bridge in the City shall have on its periphery any block, stud, flange, cleat, ridge, head or any other protuberance of metal or wood which projects beyond the tread or traction surface of the tire. This section shall not be so construed as to prohibit the use of tire chains of reasonable proportions on motor vehicles when required for safety because of snow, ice or other conditions tending to cause such motor vehicles to slide or skid; provided, however, that traction engines or tractors, the propulsive power of which is exerted not through wheels resting upon the ground, but by means of a flexible band or chain, known as a moveable track, may be operated upon the public streets with transverse corrugations upon the periphery of such moveable tracks, on condition that a permit shall first have been obtained from the City Traffic Engineer. (Prior code § 13.82)

Chapter 10.56 HEAVY OR OVERSIZE VEHICLES
10.56.010 Permits required for movement on City streets.
No person shall move or operate on any of the City streets any vehicle with a load or loads in excess of the weights or dimensions permitted by the Vehicle Code without a written permit from the City Traffic Engineer. The City Traffic Engineer may, by written permit, authorize a load or loads in excess of the weights or dimensions allowed for in the Vehicle Code if, in his or her judgment, the streets upon which such vehicle is to be operated can safely withstand the additional weight and provide sufficient clearance or if the applicant will guarantee to the City that all costs of repair to the streets or to the public property of the City damaged by the movement of such load or loads will be paid in full. Such permit shall be granted upon such conditions and depositing of such bond as the City Traffic Engineer in his or her discretion may require. (Prior code § 13.91)

Chapter 10.60 BICYCLES AND BICYCLE WAYS
10.60.010 Bicycle ways—Council authority.
Bicycle ways in the City shall be established by resolution of the City Council. (14-07)

 

10.60.020 Bicycle ways—Motor vehicles prohibited.
A.     No motor vehicle shall be driven within a bicycle way except as may be necessary to execute the following movements:

1.     Ingress to adjacent property;

2.     Egress to adjacent property;

3.     Entering at intersections;

4.     Leaving an intersection.

B.     In no case shall a motor vehicle be driven more than one hundred feet in the bicycle way during the execution of any of the above movements. (14-07)

 

10.60.030 Bicycle ways—Parking prohibited.
No motor vehicle shall be stopped in or across a bicycle way. (14-07)

 

10.60.040 Bicycle ways—Right-of-way.
A motor vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to a bicycle when the motor vehicle is crossing a bicycle way. (14-07)

 

10.60.050 Bicycle parking zones.
When the City Traffic Engineer determines that the establishment of a bicycle parking zone is reasonably necessary or desirable for the regulation of traffic, or to provide facilities for the temporary parking of bicycles being operated upon public streets, or to safeguard life or property, he or she is authorized to set aside a space on the street not more than thirty-six feet in length for the parking of bicycles during such hours of such days as are found by him or her to be best suited for the accomplishment of the purposes set forth in this section. When a bicycle parking zone is so established, the City Traffic Engineer shall cause appropriate signs to be posted thereat during such hours, giving notice that parking of other vehicles is prohibited. No person shall stop, stand or park any other vehicle in front of such zone while such signs are in place. (14-07)

Chapter 10.64 TRAINS
10.64.010 Trains blocking streets.
No person shall cause or permit any railway train or railway cars or similar vehicle on rails to stop or stand or to be operated in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street for the purposes of travel for a period of time longer than five minutes. This provision shall not apply to railway trains, cars or similar vehicles on rails which are blocking or obstructing a crossing because of an accident which requires the operator of the train, car or similar vehicle on rails to stop at or near the scene of the accident. (Prior code § 13.88)

Chapter 10.68 RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMIT ZONES
10.68.010 Purpose.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to Section 22507 of the California Vehicle Code to establish a program for residential parking permit zones.

 

10.68.020 Permit parking on designated residential streets.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to stand or park any vehicle on any street or portion thereof so restricted by resolution or ordinance of the City Council to permit parking only during all or certain portions of the day provided signs giving notice of said restrictions have been posed, unless a parking permit issued by the City is displayed on the vehicle as provided for in this chapter. This restriction shall not apply to any authorized emergency vehicle, City vehicle or vehicle owned by a public utility when such vehicle is being used for official business, or to any vehicle used for collection or delivery of United States mail.

 

10.68.030 Designation of residential parking permit zones.
The City Council shall adopt a residential permit parking policy, including, but not limited to, setting forth criteria and process for establishment and modification of permit zones, the processing and issuance of permits. The residential permit parking policy may be amended from time to time by majority vote of the City Council at a regularly scheduled City Council meeting.

 

10.68.040 City Engineer and signs.
The City Engineer is authorized to establish rules and procedures to produce signs, forms and other materials necessary or appropriate to implement the provisions of this chapter, provided that the establishment of such is consistent with the residential permit parking policy.

 

10.68.050 Violations.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to:

A.     Falsely represent him or herself as eligible for a residential parking permit or to furnish false information in an application therefor.

B.     Improperly use or display a permit or allow another person to use or display a permit that was not issued for the benefit of another person.

C.    Copy, produce or otherwise bring into existence a facsimile or counterfeit permit. (08-11)

Chapter 10.69 CLAREMONT HILLSIDES WILDERNESS PARK AND THOMPSON CREEK TRAIL REGULATED PARKING LOTS
10.69.010 Purpose.
This chapter is enacted to establish a parking permit program for the Claremont Hillsides Wilderness Park and Thompson Creek Trail parking lots. No person shall park a motorized vehicle in the Claremont Hillsides Wilderness Park parking lot or the Thompson Creek Trail parking lot unless a parking permit required by this chapter has been obtained and is properly displayed on such vehicle pursuant to Section 10.69.060. (13-01)

 

10.69.020 Authority of Community and Human Services Director.
The Community and Human Services Director is authorized to establish rules and procedures, to produce and post signs, and to prepare forms and other materials necessary or appropriate for the implementation of this chapter. (13-01)

 

10.69.030 Resident permit.
The City will issue resident parking permits to Claremont residents, which will permit parking in the Thompson Creek Trail parking lot, located at the corner of Mills Avenue and Mt. Baldy Road, free of charge. A maximum of two (2) parking permits may be issued per household. The resident parking permits authorized by this section will be issued in three (3) calendar year increments. Resident parking permits issued pursuant to this section must be renewed at the end of the third calendar year. (13-01)

 

10.69.040 Annual permit.
Annual parking permits may be purchased for a fee established by City Council policy, which will permit parking in both the Claremont Hillsides Wilderness Park and the Thompson Creek Trail parking lots. (13-01)

 

10.69.050 Metered permit.
Temporary parking permits may be purchased for a fee established by City Council policy at on-site meters in both the Claremont Hillsides Wilderness Park and Thompson Creek Trail parking lots. Temporary parking permits issued pursuant to this section will permit parking in both the Claremont Hillsides Wilderness Park and Thompson Creek Trail parking lots for up to four (4) hours. (13-01)

 

10.69.060 Parking lot hours.
A.     No person shall park a motorized vehicle in the Claremont Hillsides Wilderness Park parking lot during hours that the park is not open, as specified in Section 11.10.050(B), regardless of whether a parking permit has been issued or is displayed in such vehicle.

B.     No person shall park a motorized vehicle in the Thompson Creek Trail parking lot during hours that the trail is not open, as specified in Section 11.02.010(A), regardless of whether a parking permit has been issued or is displayed in such vehicle. (13-01)

 

10.69.070 Display of permit.
Parking permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be clearly displayed on the vehicle’s driver’s side rear window. (13-01)

 

10.69.080 Compliance with policy.
Use of the Claremont Hillsides Wilderness Park and Thompson Creek Trail parking lots shall be subject to and in compliance with the Claremont Hillsides Wilderness Park parking permit program policy, as adopted by the City Council. (13-01)

 

10.69.090 Violations—Penalties.
A.     It is a violation of this chapter for any person to:

1.     Falsely represent him or herself as eligible for a resident parking permit or to furnish false information in an application therefor.

2.     Improperly use or display a resident parking permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or allow another person to use or display a resident parking permit that was not issued to that person or to his or her household.

3.     Copy, produce or otherwise bring into existence a facsimile or counterfeit parking permit.

4.     Sell, loan or otherwise transfer to another person a resident parking permit issued pursuant to this chapter that was not issued to that person or to his or her household.

B.     Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor, unless the citing officer or the prosecuting attorney determines that it would be in the interests of justice to cite or prosecute the violation as an infraction. (14-07)

TITLE 11 PUBLIC PARKS AND FACILITIES
Chapter 11.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 11.02 PUBLIC PARKS AND FACILITY REGULATIONS
Chapter 11.04 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PARKS
Chapter 11.06 RESERVATIONS AND PERMITS FOR GROUP EVENTS IN PARKS
Chapter 11.08 LA PUERTA SPORTS PARK
Chapter 11.10 CLAREMONT HILLSIDES WILDERNESS PARK

Chapter 11.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
11.01.010 Use of parks.
The use of all public parks and other areas under the direction of the City is permitted under the rules and regulations hereinafter set forth in this title. (94-15)

 

11.01.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this title, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

“Human Services Director” means the Director of Human Services or any person designated by the City Manager or the Director of Human Services to perform the director’s duties under this title.

“Permit” means a certificate or written approval to engage in activities in public parks in the City as specified in this title. Unless otherwise expressly provided in this title, all permits required under this title shall be obtained from the Human Services Director.

“Public park” means a specific piece of ground, owned, operated, maintained or under the control of the City and set apart for the recreational use of the general public, whether developed or undeveloped, including natural parks, and that is usually, or may be, planted with trees, lawns and other shrubbery. A park may include within its boundary facilities for sports, entertainment, dancing, recreation, swimming, or a park may be planned for any beneficial use by the public. A park may have numerous facilities or consist of only a single facility. Facilities means any building, playground equipment, basketball court, tennis court, skate court, croquette court, volleyball court, baseball field, softball field, soccer field, wading pool, and/or recreation area which are owned or operated by the City, or for which the City has enforcement and/or maintenance responsibilities. (14-07)

Chapter 11.02 PUBLIC PARKS AND FACILITY REGULATIONS
11.02.010 Closing hours.
A.     No person shall remain, stay, or loiter in any public park, or in a building therein, or the park parking lot, or park a vehicle in any public park parking lot, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., or during any time that a park closure notice has been issued and posted pursuant to subsection B below, unless an exception permit has been issued by the City.

B.     The City Manager or his/her designee may issue a park closure order if he or she determines that there are threats to health, safety and welfare of the public or if use of the park by the public would cause damage to turf, landscaping or equipment. Once a park closure order is issued, City staff shall cause a park closure sign or notice to be placed in a prominent location within the park. (11-03)

 

11.02.020 Fires.
A.     No person shall light or maintain any fire, except in a stove, fire circle or other place provided for that purpose, without first having obtained a permit from the Human Services Director.

B.     Notwithstanding Subsection A of this section, on Thompson Creek Trail no person shall light any combustible material or start or maintain any fire including, but not limited to, smoking, camp stoves, candles, pyrotechnics or fireworks. No person shall possess any pyrotechnics, fireworks or flammable liquids on Thompson Creek Trail. (2017-01; 14-07)

 

11.02.030 Firearms.
No person shall possess, carry or discharge any firearms, airsoft guns, paintball guns, firecrackers, rockets or any other fireworks, air gun or slingshot in a public park in the City. (14-07)

 

11.02.040 Missiles, model rockets.
A.     No person shall throw along, upon or across any public highway or driveway within a public park any missile capable of causing personal injury or damage to personal property.

 

B.     No person shall operate a model rocket that utilizes a gas, electric or chemical engine within any public park or upon or across any public highway. (14-07)

 

11.02.050 Noise.
No person shall disturb the peace and quiet in a public park by any making undue, loud or unusual noise, or by tooting, blowing or sounding any automobile siren or signal, or by any tumultuous conduct or the use of any vulgar, profane or indecent language therein. (94-15)

 

11.02.060 Parking.
No person shall park or stand any vehicle on any road or path except at places designated by the City Traffic Engineer. No person shall park in any lot within the park in violation of posted restrictions. New restrictions effective after January 1, 1976, shall be adopted under the procedures of Chapter 10.32 of this Code. (94-15)

 

11.02.070 Roads.
No person shall ride or drive any horse or other animal or propel any vehicle, cycle or automobile in a public park other than on roads, trails or driveways provided for that purpose and in the directions posted. This section shall not apply to maintenance personnel, law enforcement personnel, or person responding to an emergency situation requiring vehicular access to the park area. (14-07)

 

11.02.080 Rubbish.
No person shall throw, discard, place or dispose of any garbage or refuse in a public park, in any place other than a garbage can or other receptacle maintained for that purpose. No person shall bring or transport garbage or refuse to a public park and place such garbage or refuse in a garbage can or other receptacle maintained for that purpose in a public park. (94-15)

 

11.02.090 Commercial enterprises.
Public parks in the City are intended as places for recreation and relaxation and the free exchange of ideas, but not as a forum for commercial enterprise. Therefore, no person shall sell, offer or solicit the sale of goods or services within a park, or pass out commercial handbills or advertising, or offer commercial teaching services within a park. This prohibition shall not apply to such activity when authorized by a special event permit, a sidewalk vendor permit, or other City permit. (19-04; 94-15)

 

11.02.100 Speed limits.
No person shall drive any vehicle in any public park at a speed greater than is reasonable for prudence, having due regard for the traffic on the roadway, and the surface and width of roadway. In any event, no vehicle shall be driven at a speed in excess of five miles per hour. (94-15)

 

11.02.110 Vandalism.
No person shall:

 

A.     Pick, dig, remove, destroy, injure, mutilate or cut any tree, plant, shrub, bloom or flower, or any portion thereof growing in a public park;

B.     Cut, break, deface or injure any building, monument, sign, fence, bench, equipment or property in a public park;

C.    Cut or remove any wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand or gravel in a public park. (94-15)

 

11.02.120 Dogs.
No person shall:

A.     Take or permit any dog within any public park in the City. Such prohibition shall apply irrespective of whether or not the dog may be restrained by a leash; provided, however, that the provisions of this section may be waived for activities or events of a recreational nature authorized and/or supervised by the Human Services Department. This section shall apply only where prohibitory signs are erected.

B.     In areas within City parks designated by the City Council as off leash areas, dogs are permitted off-leash under the rules in Section 11.02.125.

C.    Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, dogs that are restrained by a leash shall be permitted on Thompson Creek Trail and solely upon those areas of the Padua Park Trail that are adjacent to the soccer fields and adjoining sidewalks. Any person having care or custody of a dog on Thompson Creek Trail or Padua Park Trail shall remove any waste product left by such dog(s).

D.    This section shall not apply to police service dogs engaged in law enforcement duties or to a service animal that is accompanied by its handler and following the leashing requirements in Section 6.12.180 of this Municipal Code. (14-07; 12-04; 11-03; 08-12; 96-06; 94-15)

 

11.02.125 Off-leash areas for dogs.
The following rules apply within off-leash areas:

A.     No dog is permitted in the off-leash area except in the care, custody and control of a person thirteen years old or older. No person may have more than two dogs in the off-leash area at any one time. All dogs must be under the voice control of their caretakers at all times. No dogs are permitted in the off-leash area except during posted hours of operation.

B.     All dogs must be at least four months of age, vaccinated for rabies, and have a current animal license. No dog that is sick, in heat, or aggressive is permitted in the off-leash area.

C.    Any person having care or custody of a dog in the off-leash area shall quiet the dog if it barks and shall promptly remove the animal’s litter.

D.    No animals other than dogs are permitted in an off-leash area. No dog obedience classes may be conducted in an off-leash area.

E.     The use of an off-leash area by a dog’s owner or other person having care, custody, or control of that dog shall constitute agreement by the dog’s owner and the person having care, custody or control of that dog to follow the rules in this section and a waiver of liability of the City, and his or her agreement to protect, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City from any claim, injury or damage arising from or in connection with such use.

F.     It shall be unlawful for any person to have a dog in an off-leash area between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. (01-07; 96-06)

 

11.02.130 Golf.
No person shall take part in or abet the playing of a game of golf or the practice thereof, nor cause to be propelled objects such as balls or stones by use of a golf club or similar instrument within any public park in the City. The provisions of this section may be waived for activities of a recreational nature authorized and/or supervised by the Human Services Department. (14-07)

 

11.02.140 Smoking prohibited.
In accordance with Chapter 8.18 of this Code, smoking is prohibited in any public park within the City of Claremont. (08-15)

Chapter 11.04 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PARKS
11.04.010 Permit required.
No person shall enter, be or remain in any public park while in possession of, transporting, purchasing, selling, giving away or consuming any alcoholic beverage except as permitted by this chapter. (94-15)

 

11.04.020 Use of alcoholic beverages in park buildings.
Alcoholic beverages may be dispensed and consumed in Taylor Hall, Garner House, Alexander Hughes Community Center, and Joslyn Senior Center, when these facilities are being used for private parties such as weddings, anniversaries, birthday parties, and similar uses. Alcoholic beverages may also be sold and consumed for organizational fund-raising activities of nonprofit organizations, church functions, political fundraising dinners, and parties and other similar noncommercial uses. (00-06)

 

11.04.030 Alcohol permit and fees.
Prior to the use of alcoholic beverages as permitted in Section 11.04.010 of this chapter, the applicant shall obtain an alcohol permit from the Human Services Director. The applicant shall also pay a fee in addition to the building rental fee for the alcoholic beverage permit. Such fee shall be determined pursuant to an alcoholic beverage permit fee schedule adopted by resolution of the City Council. The applicant shall also obtain any permit or license required by the California Alcoholic Beverage Control Board prior to dispensing or consuming alcohol at public park facilities as permitted in Section 11.04.010 of this chapter. (14-07)

 

11.04.040 Restrictions.
Alcoholic beverages shall not be allowed and a permit shall not be issued for any function where alcohol will be served, in a public park or building, primarily designated for people under the age of twenty-one years, nor for any profit-making organization or individual wherein an admission fee is charged and is open to the general public. (94-15)

Chapter 11.06 RESERVATIONS AND PERMITS FOR GROUP EVENTS IN PARKS
11.06.010 Intent.
The use of public parks in the City by large groups causes wear and tear on the turf, park equipment, and facilities, and it requires staff time to provide coordination. Additional supplies, restroom cleaning and trash service are required. Such uses can subject neighboring residents to excessive noise and traffic, particularly when the park is small or use is particularly intense. Groups wishing to use a park sometimes find that their use is in conflict with that of another group, and on occasion, group use is so intense that casual use by families and individuals, which is one of the principal purposes of the parks, is not possible. Because the parks are attractive and well maintained, their use is intensifying, particularly for such activities as employee picnics, by groups from other cities. These groups do not contribute to the maintenance of the parks through the payment of property taxes and assessments. If the City does not regulate the intensity of group use of its parks, and provide for the payment of fees where appropriate, it will not be able to maintain the very qualities in its parks that make them attractive. (94-15)

 

11.06.020 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them below:

“Group event” means an organized picnic, exhibit, show, class, or similar gathering at which food is served, or for which the group brings to the park furniture and equipment such as tables, booths, tents or play equipment. It does not include City-sponsored or co-sponsored events. A group event shall be considered Claremont-based if the applicant is a City resident, a business or school located in the City, or a nonprofit community organization, a majority of whose member or board are City residents, or which provides services to a significant number of City residents on a continuing basis. All other group events shall be considered nonresident group events.

“Human Services Director” means the Director of Human Services or any person designated by the City Manager or the Director of Human Services to perform the director’s duties under this chapter. (14-07)

 

11.06.030 Permit—Required for group events.
No group of fifty or more individuals shall use a public park for a group event without first obtaining a park permit from the Human Services Director. (14-07)

 

11.06.040 Permit—Application.
Applications for group event permits shall be made in writing on forms provided by the Human Services Director, and shall be filed with the Human Services Director together with such application fees as may be established from time to time by resolution of the City Council. The application shall accurately identify the applicant, the nature of the event, the preferred date, time and location, the attendance at it, the activities proposed, and any furniture, equipment, banners, or sound amplification proposed, together with such other information as the Human Services Director shall determine is necessary to determine if the application should be issued under the standards of this chapter. (14-07)

 

11.06.050 Permit—Review and issuance.
A.     The City Council shall, by resolution, establish time limits within which applications must be filed or reservations made, establishing and designating those portions of public parks for which reservations and permits shall be allowed or required for group events, setting insurance requirements, setting priorities among categories of City-based and nonresident group events, length of time for which an area may be reserved, and otherwise establishing the procedures and standards for group events. No park may be entirely reserved for group events.

B.     The Human Services Department shall provide notice to owners of property within three hundred feet of any public park when the Human Services Department approves any park use by any group of three hundred or more or by any group which wishes to use amplified sound.

C.    The Human Services Director shall issue a group event permit upon determining that the proposed group event can be accommodated at the time and date requested, and at a location in which it can take place without damaging the park landscaping and equipment, overloading any restroom and other facilities, conflicting with other events, or creating traffic congestion or excessive noise in the neighborhood. In allocating sites for group events, the director shall consider both the impact of the particular group event and the cumulative impact of events in that location. The permit shall be issued with such conditions as are necessary to carry out the intent of this chapter, and may include a requirement that City staff be present during the event. Equipment and activities that may damage the park or adversely impact the neighborhood may be prohibited. While applicants may designate a preferred location, the decision as to which site may be used shall be made by the Human Services Director.

D.    A permit shall be denied if the findings of subsection C of this section cannot be made, and it may be denied if, within the past two years, the applicant or the group has failed to abide by the terms of a previously issued permit, or has otherwise violated the provisions of this title.

E.     The Human Services Director’s decision may be appealed to the Community and Human Services Commission by filing an appeal, in writing, with the Human Services Department within the time limits established by resolution of the City Council. (14-07; 12-04; 00-06)

 

11.06.060 Fees.
The City Council shall from time to time, by resolution, set the application fee for group event permits and the park use fee for group event permits. Such fees shall not exceed the reasonable costs of providing the services. Fee for nonresident group events shall reflect the fact that nonresident groups do not contribute to the support of the City’s public parks through the payment of real property taxes and assessments. (94-15)

 

11.06.070 Signs.
This chapter shall only apply in parks where signs are erected advising of the requirement of permits for group events. (94-15)

Chapter 11.08 LA PUERTA SPORTS PARK
11.08.010 Lighting of athletic fields.
The athletic fields at La Puerta Sports Park shall be lighted only for use at youth soccer practice sessions. The lights may be used every year from September 1st through March 31st only. They may be used Monday through Thursday only, between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. only. (95-01; 94-15)

*      Editor’s note: Ordinance 95-01 amended subsection (A) of § 9.44.170, which was repealed by 94-15 and recodified as § 11.08.010.

 

11.08.020 Use of fields on Sunday.
No formally organized sports competitions may be held in La Puerta Sports Park on Sundays unless a permit has been authorized by the Community and Human Services Commission; provided, that when games originally set for other days must be rescheduled because of rain, they may be played on Sunday without obtaining a permit up to four times in any calendar year. Permits may be issued only after notice as provided in this section. Before authorizing the manager to issue the permit, the Community and Human Services Commission shall determine that the park is adequate to accommodate the proposed use, that the traffic generated by it can be properly managed, and that the proposed use will not have any adverse effect on adjacent property. In making these findings, the Community and Human Services Commission shall consider the frequency with which such permits have been issued and their cumulative impact on the neighborhood. The decision of the Community and Human Services Commission may be appealed to the City Council at its next regular meeting following the action of the Community and Human Services Commission on the proposal by filing a notice of such appeal with the City Clerk or by the request of any City Council member at such meeting. (12-04; 94-15)

 

11.08.030 Amendment of this chapter.
This chapter may be amended only after a public hearing before the City Council. Notice of the public hearing shall be posted at La Puerta Sports Park and mailed to the owners of each home within three hundred feet of the park, as listed on the latest assessor’s roll, at least ten days before the hearing. (94-15)

Chapter 11.10 CLAREMONT HILLSIDES WILDERNESS PARK
11.10.010 Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to provide additional rules and regulations concerning the public’s use of the Claremont Hillsides Wilderness Park from the time of its acquisition by the City. This chapter shall not apply to the Padua Hills Theater. The use of the Claremont Hillsides Wilderness Park is permitted under the rules and regulations hereinafter set forth in this chapter. (96-03)

 

11.10.020 Permitted uses.
Permitted uses within the park area shall include:

A.     Recreational activities such as hiking, running, bicycling, horseback riding, photography and picnicking provided they are restricted to established trails, roads, and rest areas.

B.     Conservation projects, student research or other educational programs involving the study of nature, ecology or earth sciences with prior City approval.

C.    Outdoor programs, lectures, and organized community activities. (96-03)

 

11.10.030 Entry to park.
No person shall enter the park area from any point other than an officially designated entrance location as identified by the City. No person shall enter the park area in a motorized vehicle. This section shall not apply to maintenance personnel, law enforcement personnel or persons responding to an emergency situation requiring vehicular access to the park area. (96-03)

 

11.10.040 Vehicle parking.
A.     No person entering the park area shall park or stand any motorized vehicle on any road, path, or property except that designated by the City as parking for the park area. This section shall not apply to maintenance personnel, law enforcement personnel or persons responding to an emergency situation requiring vehicular access to the park area.

B.     No person shall park, caused to be parked or stand any vehicle in the Claremont Hillsides Wilderness Park parking lot during hours that the park is not open as specified in Section 11.10.050 or during any time the park or parking lot have been closed pursuant to Section 11.10.050. (13-01; prior code § 96-03)

 

11.10.050 Hours of the park and parking lot.
A.     No person shall enter, remain, stay, or loiter within any area of the Claremont Hillsides Wilderness Park or in the adjacent or nearby City-owned or operated parking lot when the park or parking lot is closed.

B.     Claremont Hillsides Wilderness Park and parking lot are open during the following hours:

January

6:30 a.m. – 5:00 p.m.

February

6:30 a.m. – 5:30 p.m.

March

6:30 a.m. – 6:30 p.m.

April

6:00 a.m. – 7:30 p.m.

May

5:30 a.m. – 8:00 p.m.

June

5:30 a.m. – 8:30 p.m.

July

5:30 a.m. – 8:30 p.m.

August

6:00 a.m. – 8:00 p.m.

September

6:30 a.m. – 7:00 p.m.

October

6:30 a.m. – 6:00 p.m.

November

6:00 a.m. – 5:00 p.m.

December

6:30 a.m. – 5:00 p.m.

 

C.    The City Manager may authorize access to or use of the Claremont Hillsides Wilderness Park and/or its parking lot during hours that the park and/or parking lot are otherwise closed as stated herein for special events or uses for which other related permits required under the Code have been obtained from the City.

D.    Overnight camping is prohibited. The City Manager or designee may authorize the closure of the Claremont Hillsides Wilderness Park and/or the north parking lot for reasons of public health and safety. (13-01; prior code § 96-03)

 

11.10.060 Fires and matches.
No person shall light any match or start or maintain any fire including smoking, camp stoves, pyrotechnics and fireworks. Flammable liquids are not permitted within the park. (96-03)

 

11.10.070 Weapons.
No person shall possess, carry or discharge any firearms, airsoft guns, paintball guns, bow and arrow, compound bow, firecrackers, rockets or any other fireworks, air gun or slingshot or other weapons. (14-07)

 

11.10.080 Horses and bicycles.
No person shall ride or drive any horse or propel any bicycle other than on roads or trails provided for that purpose and in the directions posted. Bicycles shall yield to horses on all roads and trails. (96-03)

 

11.10.090 Littering.
No person shall throw, discard, place or dispose of any garbage or refuse in any place other than a designated waste container or other receptacle maintained for that purpose. All persons using the park area shall carry out of the area all garbage or refuse that they bring into the park area. (96-03)

 

11.10.100 Glass containers.
No person shall bring into the park area glass containers or bottles. (96-03)

 

11.10.110 Vandalism.
No person shall:

A.     Pick, dig, remove, destroy, injure, mutilate or cut any tree, plant, shrub, bloom or flower, or any portion thereof growing;

B.     Cut, break, deface or injure any building, monument, sign, fence, bench, equipment or property;

C.    Cut or remove any wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand or gravel;

D.    Perform any action that creates a nuisance, poses a real or immediate threat to, results in damage to, or destruction of the parks resources or other public property;

E.     Removal or the intentional destruction of archeological materials for any reason;

F.     Conservation and management activities undertaken by the City, other public agencies, or by members of the public in accordance with written authorization from the City, shall not be a violation of this section. (96-03)

 

11.10.120 Animals.
No person shall:

A.     Take or permit any dog, horse or other exotic pet within the park area unless the animal is restricted by a leash or other restraint.

B.     Fail to clean up any waste products left by their dog(s), horse(s) or other exotic pet(s).

C.    Graze livestock including the use of natural forage for commercial purposes.

D.    This section shall not apply to police service dogs engaged in law enforcement duties. (14-07)

 

11.10.130 Hunting.
All forms of hunting, trapping and the use of poisonous baits are prohibited. (96-03)

 

11.10.140 Commercial services.
Commercial services such as those provided by concessionaires or equestrian outfitters and guides are prohibited. (96-03)

 

11.10.150 Groups and group events.
A.     No group of more than twenty (20) individuals, and no organized group event, shall use the park for any purpose, including, but not limited to, hiking and field trips, without first notifying and obtaining written permission from the Human Services Director at least ten (10) business days before the visit or event is scheduled. Permission shall be denied if the visit or event is determined by the Human Services Director to have an adverse impact on the park, park environment, adjacent properties, or public safety.

B.     No organized group event of fifty (50) or more individuals is permitted in the park area without first obtaining a park permit from the Human Services Director. No park permit shall be issued if the event is determined by the Human Services Director to have an adverse impact on the park, park environment, adjacent properties, or public safety.

C.    Competitive group event, including, but not limited to, bicycle races, horse races, or foot races, are prohibited. (14-07)

 

11.10.160 Violations—Penalties.
Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor unless the citing officer or the prosecuting attorney determines that it would be in the interests of justice to cite or prosecute the violation as an infraction. (13-01)

 

11.10.170 Crosswalks—Use required.
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than by a crosswalk on that portion of Mills Avenue, north of Mt. Baldy Road. (13-05)

TITLE 12 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Chapter 12.04 EXCAVATIONS
Chapter 12.08 OBSTRUCTING STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Chapter 12.12 UTILITY PIPELINE INSTALLATION
Chapter 12.16 DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 12.20 HOUSE NUMBERING
Chapter 12.24 PARKWAYS
Chapter 12.26 CITY TREES
Chapter 12.28 NEWSRACKS
Chapter 12.30 SKATEBOARDS AND ROLLER SKATES
Chapter 12.32 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Chapter 12.36 STREET SWEEPING
Chapter 12.42 SPECIAL EVENTS

Chapter 12.04 EXCAVATIONS
12.04.010 Permit—Required.
It is unlawful for any person to make or cause or permit to be made any excavation in or under the surface of any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public place for the installation, repair or removal of any pipe, conduit, duct or tunnel, or for any other purpose, without first obtaining from the street superintendent a written permit to make such excavation. (Prior code § 20.15)

 

12.04.020 Permit—Deposit.
Applicants for the permit required by Section 12.04.010 shall make a deposit to cover the cost of inspection and of restoring the public street, alley, sidewalk or other public property to its original condition, together with the incidental expenses in connection therewith, as provided by this chapter. (Prior code § 20.16)

 

12.04.030 Permit—Application—Contents.
The street superintendent, before issuing the permit required by Section 12.04.010, shall require a written application to be made and filed with the street superintendent wherein the applicant shall set forth the name and residence and business address of the person making such application and shall state in detail the location and area of such excavation intended to be made and the purpose for which the excavation is to be made and used. (Prior code § 20.17)

 

12.04.040 Permit—Application—Plat required when.
The application required by Section 12.04.030 shall be accompanied by a plat showing the location of each proposed excavation and the dimensions thereof and such other details as the street superintendent may require to be shown upon such plat; provided, that the filing of plats shall not be required when excavations are made for service connections for the location of trouble in conduits or pipes or making repairs thereto. (Prior code § 20.18)

 

12.04.050 Permit—Application—Legal authority for excavation.
The applicant for a permit to make an excavation shall show legal authority to occupy and use, for the purposes mentioned in the application, the streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public places wherein excavations are proposed to be made. (Prior code § 20.19)

 

12.04.060 Permit—Application—Work to conform to application description.
It is unlawful for any person to make, or to cause or permit to be made, any excavation, or to install or maintain or to cause or permit to be installed or maintained any tank, pipe, conduit, duct or tunnel in or under the surface of any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public place at any location other than that described in the application and shown on the plats filed by such person as required by the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 20.20)

 

12.04.070 Permit—Application—Approval.
When the application to excavate and the details shown upon the accompanying plat, when such plat is required, comply with the terms of this chapter, the application and plat shall be approved by the City Engineer. After such approval, the plat shall be filed in the office of the City Engineer as a public record. (Prior code § 20.21)

 

12.04.080 Permit—Application—Special deposit.
The application for an excavation permit shall be filed with the City Engineer together with a special deposit covering the cost of pavement or sidewalk replacement as estimated by the City Engineer; provided, that no deposit shall be less than one dollar and fifty cents per square foot of excavation or fifty dollars, whichever is greater. (79-23; prior code § 20.22)

 

12.04.090 Permit—Issuance or denial.
Upon receiving a written application as required by Section 12.04.030 and the plat, when such plat is required by Section 12.04.040, each bearing the approval of the City Engineer and the general or special deposit required by Section 12.04.080, the street superintendent shall issue a permit to make such excavation and shall open and keep an account thereof; provided, however, that the street superintendent shall not issue such permit unless the applicant has legal authority to occupy and use for the purposes mentioned in the application the streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public places covered by the application; provided further, that the street superintendent shall not issue any permit to make any excavation for the purpose of installing any tank, pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel or other structure in any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public place at any parallel point in, upon or along any portion of such street, alley, sidewalk or other public place for which a permit to excavate for any and all of such purposes has been issued and is still in force and effect, except permits for house connections or for the necessary repairs to any tank, pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel or other structure and except permits to excavate in, upon and along that portion or side of such street, alley, sidewalk or other public place lying between the centerline thereof and the property line, for which a permit to excavate has been issued and is still in force and effect. If the street superintendent denies an application for a permit, he or she shall provide to the applicant a detailed explanation of the reasons for the denial. The applicant may appeal a denial by following the appeal procedures set forth in Chapter 16.321. (14-07)

 

12.04.100 Permit—Contents.
The permit issued under the provisions of Section 12.04,090 shall state whether the work to be done is covered by a general or a special deposit and, if a special deposit, shall state the amount thereof and shall be a receipt therefor. It shall also specify the person to whom the same is issued, the street, alley or other public place and the particular portion thereof to be excavated and the extent of such excavations. No permit shall be transferable. (Prior code § 20.24)

 

12.04.110 Permit—Display required.
Any person engaged in the making or filling of any excavation in any public street, alley or other public place shall, at all times while such work is in progress, keep at the place where such fill or excavation is located the original permit for such fill or excavation and must on demand, exhibit the same to the street superintendent, or to any of his or her inspectors or other employees, or to any police officer. (Prior code § 20.40)

 

12.04.120 Permit—Expiration—Extension.
Every permit, except for making house connections to sewers or for making repairs to the same, shall become and be void unless the excavation to be made pursuant thereto is completed within sixty days from the date of issuance of such permit. Every permit for making a house connection to a sewer or for making repairs to the same shall become void unless all work to be done pursuant thereto shall be done and the excavation refilled in the manner required by this chapter, within thirty days after the date of such permit; provided, however, that the street superintendent may grant an extension of time for a period not exceeding thirty days for the performance of such work and the refilling of such excavation whenever the street superintendent shall deem that good cause exists therefor. If any such extension of time is granted, such permit shall become and be void unless all such work is done and such excavation is refilled in the manner required by this chapter within three days after inspection of the pipe by the street superintendent, if a pipe has been laid, or within three days after the date of the permit, if no pipe is laid, and nothing herein contained shall be deemed or construed to allow a longer period of time therefor. (79-23; prior code § 20.25)

 

12.04.130 Failure to complete work—City authority.
If any person fails, refuses or neglects to complete the making of any house connection to a sewer or to refill any excavation within the time required by Section 12.04.120, or within the period of any such extension of time if any such extension is granted, then the street superintendent shall complete the refilling of such excavation in the manner required by this chapter and the City shall retain the special deposit made for such excavation, if a special deposit has been made. (79-23; prior code § 20.26)

 

12.04.140 Methods of filling excavations.
A.     All excavations shall be filled in the following manner:

1.     The trench shall be filled in layers of not more than six inches each in depth, each layer to be well rammed with rammers weighing not less than one pound per square inch of face.

2.     One worker shall be furnished to tamp for each worker engaged in filling the trench.

B.     An alternate method of filling the trench shall be as follows:

1.     The trench shall be filled to within not less than one foot from the surface and shall then be thoroughly flooded and the material settled by poling or by using shovels.

2.     If so directed by the street superintendent, the filling shall be settled with water at not more than two intermediate depths, to be determined by the street superintendent, before it is brought to within one foot of the surface.

3.     After the material has been allowed to settle, it shall be filled to the surface and again flooded and allowed to settle. It shall then be filled to the surface of the street.

C.    All excavations shall be promptly refilled in the most workmanlike manner and surplus material removed without delay. It is unlawful for any person to fail, refuse or neglect to comply with any of these regulations, or with any regulations of the street superintendent governing the refilling of excavations. (Prior code § 20.27)

 

12.04.150 Replacement of street surface.
The street surface excavated or damaged shall be replaced to the satisfaction of the City Engineer prior to the release of any special deposit as provided in Section 12.04.080. (Prior code § 20.28)

 

12.04.160 Vehicular and pedestrian crossings.
It shall be the duty of every person making any excavation in any public street, alley or other public place to maintain safe crossings for vehicular traffic at all street intersections and safe crossings for pedestrians at intervals of not more than three hundred feet. If any such excavation is made across any public street or alley, at least one safe crossing shall be maintained at all times for vehicles and pedestrians. (Prior code § 20.29)

 

12.04.170 Storage of excavated materials.
All materials excavated shall be laid compactly along the side of the trench and kept trimmed up so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible to public travel. If the street is not wide enough to hold the excavated materials without using part of the adjacent sidewalk, the person making the excavation shall erect a tight board fence upon and along such sidewalk and keep a passageway at least six feet in width open upon and along such sidewalk. (Prior code § 20.30)

 

12.04.180 Access to fire hydrants and watergates.
During the course of making excavations, free access must be provided to all fire hydrants and watergates. (Prior code § 20.31)

 

12.04.190 Gutter maintenance.
All gutters shall be maintained free and unobstructed for the full depth of the adjacent curb and at least one foot in width from the face of such curb at the gutter line. Wherever a gutter crosses an intersecting street, an adequate waterway shall be provided and at all times maintained. (Prior code § 20.32)

 

12.04.200 Barriers and lights required.
It shall be the duty of every person making any excavation in any public street, alley or other public place to place and maintain barriers at each end of such excavation and at such places as may be necessary along the excavation to prevent accidents, and also to place and maintain lights at each end of such excavation and at distances of not more than fifty feet along the line thereof, from sunset each day to sunrise of the next day, until such excavation is entirely refilled. It is unlawful for any person to fail, refuse or neglect to comply with any requirement contained in this section. (Prior code § 20.33)

 

12.04.210 Notice to complete work.
After an excavation is commenced, the work of making and refilling the same shall be prosecuted with due diligence and so as not to obstruct the street or other public place or travel thereon more than is actually necessary therefor. If the work is not so prosecuted, or if the work of refilling does not in the judgment of the street superintendent comply with the terms of this chapter, the street superintendent shall notify the person named in the permit that the work is not being prosecuted with due diligence or that the refilling of such excavation has not been properly done, and shall require such person, within three days after the service of such notice, to proceed with the diligent prosecution of such work, or properly to complete the same, as the case may be. Such notice shall be written or printed, and shall be served personally or by leaving the same at the residence or place of business of such person. If such person cannot be found and such place of business or residence is unknown or is outside of the City, such notice may be served by depositing the same in the post office in a sealed envelope, postage fully prepaid, addressed to such person at such place of business or residence, if known, or if unknown at the City. If such notice is not complied with, the street superintendent shall do such work as may be necessary to refill such excavation, and restore the street, or other public place, or part thereof excavated, to as good a condition as the same was in before such excavation was made. (Prior code § 20.34)

 

12.04.220 Work performed by City—Statement of amount due City.
The street superintendent shall cause a statement showing the amount due the City from every person for any work performed by the City pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to be mailed to every such person or to his or her agent in the City on or before the twelfth day of any month for any and all such work performed during the previous month. The amount due the City as shown by any such statement shall be paid by every such person to the street superintendent of City, on or before the twenty-fifth day of the month in which any such statement is mailed. In case of a special deposit, the balance shall be returned within thirty days after the street surface has been replaced by the street superintendent. The City shall deduct the cost of any work done or repairs made by the street superintendent from any and all deposits then on hand belonging to any person under the provisions of this chapter. (79-23; prior code § 20.35)

 

12.04.230 Work performed by City—Street superintendent authority.
The decision of the street superintendent as to the cost of any work done or repairs made by him or her under his or her direction pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be final and conclusive as to the cost thereof. (Prior code § 20.36)

 

12.04.240 Refund of moneys.
All moneys refunded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be paid upon demands audited and paid in the same manner as other demands against the City are audited and paid. (Prior code § 20.37)

 

12.04.250 Removing gravel from unimproved streets—Permit required.
It is unlawful for any person to make, or to cause or permit to be made, any excavation in any unimproved public street, alley or other public place for the purpose of removing soil or gravel therefrom, or to remove or to cause or permit to be removed therefrom any soil or gravel, without first obtaining a permit in writing from the street superintendent of the City to do so. (Prior code § 20.38)

 

12.04.260 Filling unimproved streets—Permit required.
It is unlawful for any person to make, or cause or permit to be made any fill in any unimproved public street, alley or other public place, for the purpose of placing, or causing or permitting to be placed thereon, any soil or gravel, without first obtaining a permit in writing from the street superintendent to do so. (Prior code § 20.39)

 

12.04.270 Excavations in sidewalks and alleys—Restrictions.
It is unlawful for any person to make, or to cause or permit to be made, any excavation under, or to remove, or to cause or permit to be removed, any earth, dirt or other formation from under that portion of any sidewalk lying between the outer curbline and any point in such sidewalk four feet distant from such curbline, or under any alley within three feet of the centerline of such alley, or to construct or cause or permit to be constructed any wall or other structure under any sidewalk within four feet of such curbline or under any alley within three feet of the centerline of such alley. The street superintendent may, in his or her discretion, issue permits for the making of excavations under that portion of any sidewalk lying between the outer curbline and any point in such sidewalk four feet distant from such curbline and under that portion of any alley, within three feet of the centerline of such alley, and may, in his or her discretion, issue permits for the construction of a wall or other structure under any such sidewalk within four feet of such curbline and under any such alley within three feet of the centerline thereof. Any permits issued under the provisions of this section may be revoked by the street superintendent at any time it may become necessary to construct any sewer, water main or pipeline or conduit or other public work of any kind along, in or through the excavation constructed or maintained under the authority of such permit, and the City shall have the right to use any portion of such excavation for the construction and maintenance of any such sewer, water main, pipeline, conduit, or other public work or improvement. Any such excavation shall be so constructed and maintained as to afford lateral, sub-lateral, adjacent and overhead support of the surrounding embankments and structures satisfactory to the street superintendent. Before any such permit is issued a detailed plan of such excavation showing the proposed location thereof, and all appurtenances thereto, shall be filed in the office of the street superintendent. (Prior code § 20.41)

 

12.04.280 Applicability of chapter provisions—Work done under state law or City contract.
None of the provisions of this chapter shall apply to any work done or to be done in, along or upon any public street, alley or other public place pursuant to any law of the state providing for the improvement thereof or to any work done or to be done in, along or upon any such street, alley or other public place pursuant to any contract for improvement authorized by the City Council; provided, that the provisions contained in Sections 12.04.160 through 12.04.200 shall apply to all such work and to all excavations to be made in, along or upon any public street, alley or other public place. The provisions contained in Sections 12.04.140 and 12.04.150 shall apply to all such work and to all excavations made or to be made in, along or upon any public street, alley or other place whenever the specifications for such work so provide. (Prior code § 20.42)

 

12.04.290 Applicability of chapter provisions—Work done by City.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to excavations made by any department, board or officer of the City in the discharge of its or his or her official duties. (Prior code § 20.43)

 

12.04.300 Emergency excavations.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prevent any person maintaining any pipe or conduit in any public street, alley or other public place by virtue of any law, ordinance or permit from making such excavation as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property when such necessity arises during such hours as the offices of the City are closed; provided, that the person making such excavation shall obtain a permit therefor within four hours after the offices of the City are first opened subsequent to the making of such excavation. (Prior code § 20.44)

 

12.04.310 Rights of City reserved.
Every permit for an excavation in or under the surface of any public street, alley or other public place shall be granted subject to the right of the City or of any person entitled thereto, to use that part of such street, alley or other public place for any purpose for which such street, alley or other public place may lawfully be used. (Prior code § 20.45)

Chapter 12.08 OBSTRUCTING STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
12.08.010 Obstructions—Prohibited—Exception.
It is unlawful for any person to obstruct any sidewalk, gutter, street, alley or public place in the City by placing, permitting to be placed or maintaining thereon any rock, dirt, rubbish or other substance, material or obstruction of any kind or description, except as otherwise provided in this Code and other ordinances of the City. (Prior code § 20.10)

 

12.08.020 Obstructions—Building materials—Permit required.
It is unlawful for any person to obstruct any street of the City by placing building materials of any kind therein, or otherwise to a greater distance and extent than one-half of the width of the street adjoining the buildings for which the materials are intended, and in no case shall more than one-third the width of the sidewalk be so obstructed, unless a special permit therefor shall have been obtained from the City street superintendent, who in his or her discretion is authorized to grant such permits. (Prior code § 20.11)

 

12.08.030 Obstructions—Building materials—Rapid removal required.
Any person placing materials for building in the streets as provided by Section 12.08.020 must proceed with the construction of the building for which the material is intended as rapidly as the weather and obtainable supply of workers and material will permit and shall remove the material and debris thereon with all possible dispatch. (Prior code § 20.12)

 

12.08.040 Obstructions—Building materials—Lighting required.
Any person placing or causing to be placed any building materials or other obstructions in City streets shall place two lighted lanterns upon the material, one on each end thereof, two feet from the ground and arranged so as to keep burning from one-half hour after sunset until one-half hour before sunrise of each day. (Prior code § 20.13)

 

12.08.050 Obstructions—Building materials—Removal after completion of building.
Every portion of the building material and the debris thereof must be removed within three days after the completion of the building and the street placed and left in as good condition as it was before the material was placed therein. (Prior code § 20.14)

Chapter 12.12 UTILITY PIPELINE INSTALLATION
12.12.010 Connection to utility pipelines—Required prior to street improvements.
Whenever the City Council authorizes any street or alley in the City to be graded and graveled or paved with concrete, asphalt, crushed rock, oil macadam or any substance other than the natural soil of the street or alley, it shall be the duty of the owner of each separate lot, piece or parcel of land abutting on any such street or alley, which is not then connected with any water, gas or other main or conduit in the street or alley, to immediately connect the lot or parcel of land to the property line thereof with the water, gas or other main or conduit. (Prior code § 20.4)

 

12.12.020 Connection to utility pipelines—Notice of street improvements—Work required.
The street superintendent shall immediately notify in writing the owners of the lots or parcels of land coming under the provisions of Section 12.12.010 whenever a street improvement work is authorized by the City Council. The notice shall be delivered to the owner, or his or her agent personally, or posted on the lot or parcel of land, and shall specify what work is required to be done by the lot owners and that the work must be completed prior to a certain date, which date shall be not less than ten days nor more than thirty days from the time the notice is served or posted. (Prior code § 20.5)

 

12.12.030 Connection to utility pipelines—Excavation unlawful when.
After the expiration of the time mentioned in the notice by Section 12.12.020, it is unlawful for the owner of any lot or parcel of land to make or cause to be made any excavation in any such street or alley for the purpose of doing any work which was required to be done in the notice, unless the City Council shall by a two-thirds vote give permit therefor. (Prior code § 20.6)

 

12.12.040 Pipelines beneath streets—Map required.
It is unlawful for any person to have, lay, use or maintain any pipelines in any street, alley or other public place in the City unless such person files with the City Clerk and City Engineer a map showing the location of such pipelines in such street, alley or other public place. Such map shall contain a legend showing the size, character and material used in the construction of such pipelines. (Prior code § 20.7)

 

12.12.050 Pipelines beneath streets—Depth.
It is unlawful for any person to install, or to cause or permit to be installed, any service pipe or main pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel or other structure, except manholes, culverts and catch basins, in any public street, alley or other public place at a distance of less than two feet below the established grade of the gutter of such public street or alley, or less than two feet below the surface of such other public place. (Prior code § 20.8)

Chapter 12.16 DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION
12.16.010 Permit—Required.
Every person who constructs or establishes, causes, permits or allows to be constructed or established any driveway, entrance or exit connecting a street with private property wherever curb and sidewalk are maintained, shall first file an application with the engineering department in the manner provided in Section 12.16.020 and be issued a permit therefor. (Prior code § 20.49)

 

12.16.020 Permit—Application.
Any person, or his or her duly authorized representative, who applies for a permit to construct or establish a driveway, entrance or exit shall file an application with the engineering department signed and setting forth as follows:

A.     The name and address of applicant;

B.     The name and address of authorized representative, if any;

C.    Location of proposed driveway by street number and by designating that portion, in feet of the lot or property to be used;

D.    The proprietary interest of applicant in lot or property;

E.     The overall width of proposed driveway. (Prior code § 20.50)

 

12.16.030 Permit—Cash deposit—Refund.
A cash deposit of twenty-five dollars shall be paid to the City Clerk before a permit is issued under this chapter, which money shall be held by the City Clerk in trust, conditioned upon the completing of the driveway and the cutting and finishing of the curb according to the specifications and requirements of the City. Upon certification by the engineering department that all work has been completed in full conformity with the provisions of this chapter and the standards and specifications of the City, the City Manager shall, upon the expiration of thirty days thereafter, authorize the return to the applicant of the unexpended portion of the deposit, retaining the sum of five dollars for costs of issuing the permit and inspections, plus any sums expended by the City for completion to required standards. No permit to cut curbs or to construct driveways shall be issued until the deposit required in this chapter has been properly made. (Prior code § 20.51)

 

12.16.040 Permit—Approval or denial.
An application for a permit to construct or establish any driveway, entrance or exit as defined and referred to in this chapter shall be filed with the engineering department. If the bottom width of the proposed driveway, entrance or exit is twelve feet or less, the engineering department may issue the permit forthwith; provided, however, should the requested bottom width be greater than twelve feet, the City Manager may deny a permit and refer the application to the City Council at the next regular or adjourned meeting. Final action of the Council at any subsequent meeting shall be governed by a report of the Police Chief and the Fire Chief, which report shall determine the extent, if any, of public inconvenience or hazard, created by such construction. (Prior code § 20.52)

 

12.16.050 Permit—Conditions.
Any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter to construct in any business district any driveway, entrance or exit shall provide that within ninety days after the termination of any use for which the permit was issued, the permittee, owner or lessee shall, at his or her own expense, remove such driveway, entrance or exit and restore to their original condition all sidewalks, curbs and streets so damaged or displaced. If the permittee, owner or lessee fails to comply with this section within ninety days after the termination of the use of such driveway entrance or exit, the City Manager shall so report to the City Council and the Council may instruct the City Manager to abate such hazardous or inconvenient condition in the manner provided by law. (Prior code § 20.53)

 

12.16.060 Specifications and requirements.
Every driveway, entrance or exit constructed or established connecting a street with private property, wherever a curb and sidewalk are maintained, shall be constructed as follows:

A.     Where Sidewalk Abuts Property Line. The floor or apron shall have a thickness not less than six inches, and such driveway shall be continued from such sidewalk on a straight line gradient through a cut in the curb to the flow line of the gutter of such street.

B.     Where Sidewalk Abuts Curb. The existing sidewalk shall be removed for the entire width of the apron or floor of the proposed driveway, entrance or exit. The apron or floor shall have a thickness of six inches and shall be constructed on a straight line gradient from the flow line of the gutter to the midline of the existing sidewalk and continue thence on the same pitch as the remaining sidewalk to the rear line of such sidewalk.

C.    Curb Return Not Required. In either case a “curb return” shall not be required. However, the bottom of the curb shall be made one inch above the flow line of the gutter and terminate in a forty-five degree slope at either end of the cut. The sides of the floor or apron shall conform to this angle at the curb and feather out at the junction with the sidewalk in the situation enumerated in subsection A of this section, and at the midline of the sidewalk in the situation enumerated in subsection B of this section. Both specifications are on file in the office of the City Engineer.

D.    Construction Shall Conform. All such construction shall be in conformity with the established standards and specifications of the City and subject to the approval of the engineering department. (Prior code § 20.46)

 

12.16.070 Width.
Every driveway, entrance or exit constructed or established connecting a street with private property, wherever curb and sidewalk are maintained, shall be restricted in width overall to fifty percent or less of the frontage of that portion of such private property as is directly involved in the use of the driveway. If, in the discretion of the City Council sitting as a body in regular or adjourned session, such restriction as to overall width of such driveway, entrance or exit will not endanger the public in person or property or interfere with the public convenience in the use of the sidewalk and street, the City Council may waive the restriction as to the overall width. Private convenience in the use of such driveway shall not be the basis for the waiving of the restriction as to overall width. (Prior code § 20.48)

 

12.16.080 Location in relation to fire hydrants.
Every driveway, entrance or exit constructed or established connecting a street with private property shall be so constructed or established that no portion of such driveway, entrance or exit shall approach or pass within six feet of any fire hydrant. (Prior code § 20.47)

 

12.16.090 Violations.
No person shall construct or establish or cause, permit or allow to be constructed or established any driveway, entrance or exit connecting a street with private property where curb and sidewalks are maintained by the City without first having obtained a permit as required by this chapter. (89-16; prior code § 20.54)

Chapter 12.20 HOUSE NUMBERING
12.20.010 Lots and buildings designated.
All lots and buildings within the City shall be known and designated in the following manner:

A.     All lots and buildings on all streets running north and south, north of First Street shall be numbered from south to north, commencing at First Street as the base line, and all lots and all buildings on all streets running north and south, south of First Street, shall be numbered from north to south commencing at First Street as the base line.

B.     All lots and buildings on all streets running east and west, west of College Avenue shall be numbered from east to west commencing at College Avenue as the base line, and all lots and buildings on all streets running east and west, east of College Avenue, shall be numbered from west to east, commencing at College Avenue as the base line.

C.    As near as may be, twenty feet shall be allotted to each number. (Prior code § 20.55)

 

12.20.020 Amount of numbers in blocks.
One hundred numbers shall be assigned insofar as possible and practical to each and every block within the City. (Prior code § 20.56)

 

12.20.030 Figures used for house numbers.
Figures used for house numbers shall be not less than three and one-half inches in height and shall be placed immediately over or by the side of one of the doors next to the street or other place of building, freely visible from the street. (Prior code § 20.57)

 

12.20.040 Odd and even numbers designated.
Lots and buildings on the south and east side of all streets shall be designated by even numbers and lots and all buildings on the north and west side of all streets by odd numbers. (Prior code § 20.58)

 

12.20.050 Assignment of numbers—Building inspector authority—Certificate issuance.
Upon application to him or her for a proper number of premises, it shall be the duty of the building inspector to assign to each and every building, store or residence the proper number and to deliver to each and every owner or occupant, free of charge, the certificate designating the number to be placed on each building, store or residence. (Prior code § 20.59)

 

12.20.060 Failure to number a building.
Any person who received a certificate provided for in Section 12.20.050 shall, within thirty days, number any building in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. (89-16; prior code § 20.60)

 

12.20.070 Applicability of chapter provisions.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all buildings in the City, including those constructed after May, 1954. (Prior code § 20.61)

Chapter 12.24 PARKWAYS
12.24.010 Definition of parkway.
“Parkway,” “easement” or “right-of-way” means land owned by another over which the City has an easement or right-of-way for street and related purposes. “Parkway” refers to that portion of a street right-of-way which is available for landscaping, and not for curb, gutter or pavement. (95-04)

 

12.24.020 Permission required to surface.
It is unlawful for any person to surface any portion of the City-owned streets or parkways at any location in the City by paving the same with concrete, asphalt, masonry, or any other hard surface, without first obtaining a public works permit and an encroachment permit. (95-04)

 

12.24.030 Permission required for excavation.
No person shall excavate within the public right-of-way any ditches, tunnels, trenches or irrigation lines without first obtaining a public works permit. (95-04)

 

12.24.040 Criteria for denial of permits.
Permits shall not be granted if it is determined that the planting, surfacing or excavation would compromise the health of a City tree, would interfere with utilities such as sewer laterals of or the access to utilities, or would impede safe pedestrian or vehicular access. (95-04)

 

12.24.050 Height limitations on parkway vegetation.
It is unlawful for any person to have in any public parkway of any public street any plant material, such as shrubs or ground cover, that is more than thirty-six inches above the sidewalk level, and no growth shall be allowed to obstruct any portion of an adjoining sidewalk; provided, however, that the limitations contained in this section shall not apply to street trees which may exceed the height limitation of thirty-six inches, and which may branch over the sidewalk at a minimum height of seven feet. (95-04)

 

12.24.060 Shrubbery obstructing intersection visibility—Removal required.
Whenever the City Traffic Engineer finds that any hedge, shrubbery or tree growing within the public right-of-way obstructs the view of any intersection, or any traffic upon the streets approaching such intersection, he or she may cause the hedge, shrubbery or tree to be removed or reduced in height. (95-04)

 

12.24.070 Duties of private property owners.
Except in those specific areas where the City has formally accepted maintenance through a development agreement or another instrument, the duties of any owner of private property whose property has a City parkway or easement on its street and related purposes are as follows:

A.     To maintain and water any vegetation planted in the public easement area to no more than twelve inches, and to reduce the height of no more than thirty-six inches in compliance with Section 12.24.050; provided however, this section shall not apply to City trees; and

B.     To remove all vegetation, garbage, and debris from any sidewalk, swale (improved or unimproved), or trail in the right-of-way easement over his or her property. (09-06)

Chapter 12.26 CITY TREES
12.26.010 Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter.

“Compaction” is the compression of the soil structure or texture by any means that creates an upper layer that is impermeable.

“Designated Street Tree List” means a list of specific tree species which have been designated by the Community and Human Services Commission for each City street, or part of it, as the species of tree to be planted and maintained within the City easement of that street.

“Director” means the Director of the Community Services Department or designee.

“Drip line area” means the suggested minimum area within X distance from the trunk of a tree in a typical location, measured from the perimeter of the trunk of the tree at 54 inches above natural grade, where X equals a distance ten times the diameter of the trunk at 54 inches above natural grade, or the distance to the outermost edge of the tree canopy, whichever is the lesser distance.

“Easement,” “parkway” or “right-of-way” means land owned by another over which the City has an easement or right-of-way for street and related purposes. “Parkway” refers to that portion of a street right-of-way, which is available for landscaping, and not for curb, gutter or pavement.

“Heritage trees” are any trees within the City’s easement or on City-owned property which have been found to be of significance to the community or of notable historic interest and are so designated by action of the Community and Human Services Commission.

“Maintain” or “maintenance” means and includes root pruning, trimming, spraying, watering, fertilizing, mulching, treating for disease or injury, or any other similar act, which promotes growth, health, beauty and life of any tree.

“Pruning,” “trimming” or “thinning” means to reduce the size of a tree using professionally accepted standards, as established by the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA), Tree Care Industry Association (TCIA) or American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Section A300, to control the height and spread of a tree, lessen the wind resistance, preserve its health and natural appearance, produce fuller branching and shaping, aid in disease prevention by allowing more light and air passage within the branches, or make adjustments which will increase its longevity in an urban environment.

“Public tree” or “City tree” means any tree which is located within any public park, City easement, or on any other City-owned property.

“Topping,” “heading back,” “stubbing” or “pollarding” means a severe type of pruning which usually produces less desirable results than more moderate pruning with respect to the tree’s natural form and which is generally hazardous to the overall health and stability of the tree.

“Tree Policy Manual” means a document prepared by the Community Services Department which states policies (approved by the City Council), procedures and other relevant information regarding the selection, planting, maintenance and removal of all City trees.

“Urban forest” or “urban forestry” means the ecology of native and nonindigenous plantings creating a forest in the human living environment, and emphasizing the practice of wise, professional, planned management of all tree resources within an urban area for multiple use and benefit of the entire community. (14-07; 12-04; 07-04)

 

12.26.020 Duties of Community and Human Services Commission.
The Community and Human Services Commission serves as the City’s tree advisory board. The commission shall:

A.     Study the problems and determine the needs of the City in connection with its tree planting and maintenance programs; establish and revise the designated street tree list; and hold discussions of tree-related issues at public meetings.

B.     Hear and determine appeals from staff decisions regarding street tree removal. The Commission may grant an appeal if it finds that the staff decision would result in a burden on the property owner that substantially outweighs the benefit to the public. The Commission’s decision may be appealed to the City Council if a written appeal, setting forth the grounds, is filed with the City Clerk within ten days of the Commission decision. If no timely appeal is filed, the decision shall be final. (12-04; 07-04)

 

12.26.030 Duties of Director of Community Services.
The powers and duties of the Director of Community Services, or designee, under this chapter are as follows:

A.     To designate a particular place within the City easement or on any City-owned property where a City tree will be planted.

B.     To recommend to the Community and Human Services Commission any changes or additions to the designated street tree list.

C.    To draft a tree policy manual that states policies and procedures concerning the selection, planting, maintenance and removal of trees in public places to promote a viable urban forest.

D.    To grant or deny the issuance of permits in accordance with the terms of this chapter. (14-07)

 

12.26.040 Duties of private property owners.
The duties of any owner of private property whose property has a City easement on it for street purposes are as follows:

A.     To accept, protect and provide adequate water to any City tree planted in the public easement over his or her property, and not to interfere with the City’s provision of water to such trees, whether by water truck or other means;

B.     To notify the Community Services Department of any suspected tree hazards or maintenance needs of any City tree on his or her property;

C.    To remove any vines from City street trees planted in the easement over his or her property;

D.    To remove all fallen leaves and other deadfall from any City tree planted in the public easement over his or her property, and to properly dispose of the deadfall in an appropriate waste receptacle. (14-07; 12-04; 09-06; 07-04)

 

12.26.050 Street trees.
No tree shall be planted within a parkway other than the species designated as the street tree for that particular street, or portion of a street, by the Community and Human Services Commission. No street tree shall be planted, except by the City, until a tree permit has been issued for it as provided in Section 12.26.070 of this chapter. (12-04; 07-04)

 

12.26.060 Tree planting in subdivisions.
Any subdivider of land shall install City trees in accordance with the requirements of Title 16 of this Code and any related resolutions. (07-04)

 

12.26.070 Permits.
A.     No person shall plant or otherwise disturb any City tree without first obtaining a permit from the Director of Community Services.

B.     Applications for permits must be made to the Community Services Department on forms provided by the department, and shall include such information as the Director deems necessary to review the application.

C.    Work undertaken by the permittee or his or her agents may be stopped immediately and the permittee’s permit may be revoked by oral or written order of the Director when the Director determines that the program of work or conditions outlined in the permit are not being complied with.

D.    The Director’s decision may be appealed to the Community and Human Services Commission if a written appeal, setting forth the grounds, is filed with the Community Services Department within ten days of the Director’s decision. If no timely appeal is filed, the decision shall be final. (14-07)

 

12.26.080 Fees.
Fees for permits and appeals shall be established by resolution of the City Council. Any previously adopted resolution establishing fees in relation to prohibited activities shall be repealed. (07-04)

 

12.26.090 Protection of City trees.
A.     It is unlawful for any person to injure, cut, damage, carve, transplant, prune, root prune or re-move any public tree.

B.     It is unlawful for any person to attach, cause to be attached or keep attached to any public tree, or to the guard or stake of a public tree, any rope, wire nails, tacks, staples, advertising posters, decorations, ornaments, flags, toys, swings, lights or any other contrivance whatsoever without first obtaining a permit or explicit approval from the City.

C.    It is unlawful for any person to cause or allow any poison or other substance harmful to tree life to lie, leak, pour, flow or drip upon or into the soil within the drip line of any public tree; or set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or heat thereof will injure any portion of any public tree; or to operate any equipment, such as mechanical weeding devices, in such a manner as to cause damage to a public tree in any way.

D.    No person shall injure any public tree located within an easement or public right-of-way on his or her private property by neglecting to provide the necessary amount of water, as determined by the Tree Policy Manual and the terms of this chapter, required for said tree’s continued good health and viability.

E.     No person shall impact the drip line area of a City tree in a way that may reasonably be expected to damage the root system, compact the soil over the roots, or impede free passage of water, air or fertilizer to the roots of any public tree.

F.     Special consideration shall be afforded public trees determined by the Community and Human Services Commission to be heritage trees. Such trees shall be removed only when public interest served by removal outweighs the interest in preservation and heritage status.

G.    All trees of any species or variety of the genus Ulmus which are found to be infected with Ceratocystis ulmi (Dutch Elm disease) in the City are a threat and a hazard to all trees of the genus Ulmus in Claremont. This section requires that all aboveground portions of such infected trees be destroyed or properly disposed of as provided in this chapter.

H.    No person shall possess, store or transport into the City all or any part of the trees of the genus Ulmus infected with Ceratocystis ulmi (Dutch Elm disease); provided, however, that wood, branches and roots of such trees may be transported either to a safe place for burning or burial, under a minimum of two feet of earth, within five days following the discovery of such infection, or to such sites, and under such conditions, as are approved by the Community and Human Services Commission for the processing and subsequent elimination of the disease hazard. Infected trees may be treated in a manner approved by the County Agriculture Commissioner to effect a cure for the disease if and when an effective cure becomes known.

I.      During the construction, repair, alteration, moving or removal of any building, structure of any other type of construction in the City, no person in control of such work shall leave any public tree, shrub or plant in the vicinity of such activity without sufficient guards or protectors as identified in the tree policy manual to prevent injury to the tree, shrub or plant in connection with such construction, repair, alteration, moving or removal. The costs of any such protection shall be borne by the person responsible for the improvement. (12-04; 09-06; 07-04)

 

12.26.100 Interference with Director of Community Services.
No person shall hinder, prevent, delay or interfere with the Director or any of his or her agents while engaged in carrying out the execution or enforcement of this chapter. Provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed as an attempt to inhibit the pursuit of any remedy, legal or equitable, in any court of competent jurisdiction for the protection of property rights by the owner of any property within the City. (14-07)

 

12.26.110 Violation—Penalty.
A.     Any violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor or infraction at the discretion of the City Attorney or district attorney.

B.     Irrespective of and cumulative to any criminal conviction for a violation of this chapter, the City may, pursuant to Government Code Section 36901, impose a civil penalty in an amount not exceeding one thousand dollars on any person who commits a violation of this chapter. The City may recover the penalty either through an administrative hearing or a civil action brought either by the City Attorney or a designated employee of the City.

C.    Irrespective of whether the City pursues criminal and/or civil action under this chapter, nothing in this chapter shall prevent the City from seeking restitution for damage to City property as an alternative to criminal action and/or civil action to recover a civil penalty in accordance with subsection B of this section. (07-04)

Chapter 12.28 NEWSRACKS
12.28.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:

“Newsrack” means any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser, installed, used or maintained for the display and sale of newspapers or news periodicals.

“Parkway” means that area between the sidewalks and the curb of any street, and where there is no sidewalk, that area between the edge of the roadway and the property line adjacent thereto. Parkway also includes any area within a roadway which is not open to vehicular travel.

“Roadway” means that portion of a street improved, designed and ordinarily used for vehicular travel.

“Sidewalk” means any surface provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians.

“Street” means that area dedicated to public use for public street purposes and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, parkways, alleys and sidewalks. (76-5)

 

12.28.020 Placement prohibitions.
No person shall install or maintain any newsrack which rests upon or projects onto the roadway of any public street.

No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public sidewalk or parkway, when such installation, use or maintenance endangers the safety of persons or property, or when such site or location is used for public use, or when such newsrack unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicle, the ingress into or egress from any residence or place of business, or the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes or other objects permitted at or near such location, or when such newsrack interferes with the cleaning of any sidewalk by the use of mechanical sidewalk cleaning machinery. The Public Works Director shall be required to assure that no newsrack violates these prohibitions. (76-5)

 

12.28.030 General requirements.
A.     Any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public sidewalk or parkway in the village area as shown on the map attached to Ordinance 76-5, on file in the City Clerk’s office, shall comply with the following provisions:

1.     No newsrack shall be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to any property not owned by the owner of the newsrack, or to any permanently fixed object.

2.     No newsrack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes other than that dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the newspaper or news periodical sold therein.

3.     Each newsrack shall be maintained in a clean, neat and attractive condition and in good repair at all times.

B.     The design, style, location and method of installation of all newsracks in such area must be in accordance with standards on file in the office of the Director of Public Works. (76-5)

 

12.28.040 Numerical limitations.
A.     No more than eight newsracks shall be located on any public right-of-way within a space of two hundred feet in any direction within the same block of the same street; provided, however, that no more than sixteen newsracks shall be allowed on any one block. As used herein, “block” means one side of a street between two consecutive intersecting streets. This shall not limit the utilization of an individual newsrack in connection with a publication or distribution office within the City limits, such design, location and installation subject to approval by the Director of Public Works.

B.     In determining which newsracks shall be permitted, the Director of Public Works shall be guided solely by the following criteria:

1.     First priority shall be given to those newsracks existing on the public sidewalk or parkway as of February 10, 1976, except that racks will be limited to one per publication per location;

2.     Second priority shall be given newsracks used for the sale of publications which have been adjudicated to be newspapers of general circulation for Los Angeles County, pursuant to the procedures set forth in Division 7, Article 2 of the State Government Code;

3.     Third priority shall be given to newsracks used for the sale of daily publications (those published on five or more days in a calendar week) which have not been adjudicated to be newspapers of general circulation for Los Angeles County;

4.     Fourth priority shall be given to newsracks used for the sale of weekly publications (those published on at least one but less than five days in a calendar week) which have not been adjudicated to be newspapers of a general circulation for Los Angeles County;

5.     Fifth priority shall be given to newsracks for which the newspaper publisher demonstrates to the Director of Public Works that there is insufficient capacity in one newsrack at a particular location and a second rack is necessary. (76-5)

 

12.28.050 Encroachment permit required.
Within thirty days after May 6, 1976, any person or other entity shall obtain an encroachment permit from the public works department for any newsrack installed on any public right-of-way of the City. Such permit shall contain the name, address and telephone number of the person or entity responsible for the maintenance of the newsrack. (Ord. 76-5)

 

12.28.060 Indemnification statement required.
Every person or custodian who places or maintains a newsrack on a public sidewalk or parkway in the City shall file a written statement with the City Clerk satisfactory to the City Attorney, whereby he or she agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the City, its officers, directors or employees from any loss or liability or damages, including expenses and costs, for bodily or personal injury and property damage sustained by any person as a result of the installation, use, maintenance, removal or storage of such a machine within the City. (76-5)

 

12.28.070 Abandonment.
In the event any newsrack installed pursuant to this chapter is not serviced with the publication it is designed to disseminate for a period of fourteen days, the City reserves the right to remove the same pursuant to the procedure set out in Section 12.28.090. For purposes of this section, abandonment shall include, but is not limited to, circumstances where no publication is in the rack for a period of fourteen days. (76-5)

 

12.28.080 Existing newsracks.
The Director of Public Works shall not be required to remove or cause the removal of any existing newsrack from a public sidewalk or parkway by reason of the failure of the owner to comply with the provisions of Section 12.28.030 until thirty days from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter have first elapsed. The Director of Public Works is directed to send written notice as soon hereafter as practicable to the owners, occupiers and users of all existing news racks located on a public sidewalk or parkway in the City of the content of this chapter. (76-5)

 

12.28.090 Violations—Removal of rack.
A.     Any newsrack installed, used or maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter may be summarily removed and stored in any convenient place by the Director of Public Works or his or her designated representative. Prior to removal he or she shall take reasonable steps to notify the owner thereof. Upon failure of the owner, following notice, to claim such newsrack and pay the expenses of removal and storage within thirty days after such removal, such newsrack shall be deemed to be unclaimed property in possession of the Public Works Department and may be disposed of pursuant to law.

B.     In the case of violations of this chapter relative to restrictions upon attachments of newsracks to property other than that owned by the owner of the newsrack, to fixed objects or each other, and upon location of newsracks, the Director of Public Works or his or her designated representative may, as an alternative to removal under subsection A of this section, remove such attachment and/or move such rack or racks in order to restore them to a legal condition. (76-5)

Chapter 12.30 SKATEBOARDS AND ROLLER SKATES
12.30.010 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter only, the following definitions shall apply:

“Official sign” means a sign which meets the specifications set by the police department and which prohibits operating skateboards or roller skates on the property.

“Roller skates” means any footwear or device which may be attached to the foot or footwear to which wheels are attached and such wheels may be used by the wearer in moving, including in-line skates known as roller blades. The definition of these terms shall include a single roller skate, or parts thereof, used by the wearer in moving.

“Skateboard” or “skateboards” includes any board of any material which has wheels attached to it where such wheels may be used for movement or propulsion. (92-12)

 

12.30.020 Skateboards and roller skates—Prohibited in the village shopping district and certain other areas.
It is unlawful for any person to skate, ride or be propelled upon roller skates or skateboards upon or along any sidewalk within those portions of the City described as follows:

A.     Within the village shopping district: on the north by the north property line of 4th Street, from the south by the centerline of Santa Fe Railroad, on the east by the west property line of College Avenue and on the west by the east property line of Indian Hill Boulevard.

B.     On portions of Mountain Avenue: on the surface of Mountain Avenue, and/or sidewalks as they may be constructed, from Thompson Creek Flood Control Channel to its northerly terminus. (92-12)

 

12.30.030 Skateboards and roller skates prohibited in places where posted.
It is unlawful for any person upon roller skates or skateboards, to go upon and/or ride upon any public or private property, public or private parking lot or shopping center parking lot, or any applicable portion thereof, provided official signs prohibiting such acts are erected in accordance with Section 12.30.040. (92-12)

 

12.30.040 Posting procedure.
Persons who own, lease, rent or otherwise have control over real property, and who wish to post signs prohibiting the use of roller skates or skateboards on such property must obtain and post official signs, prohibiting the use of skateboards and roller skates, on the property. Such official signs must be posted in plain view at all entrances to the property, or at all entrances to that portion of the property for which the use of skateboards and roller skates is prohibited. Public property shall be posted using the same procedure. (92-12)

 

12.30.050 Designated areas.
A.     The City Council may, from time to time, designate certain areas for the use of skates and/or skateboards. Such areas shall be designated by resolution of the City Council and posted with signs which are consistent with the standards for signs adopted by Title 18 of this Code.

B.     All persons using a skateboard in an area designated for the use of roller skates and/or skateboards are required to wear a helmet, elbow pads and knee pads pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 25906. Failure to wear the required helmet, elbow pads and knee pads results in a violation of this section as provided in Section 12.30.070. Areas designated by resolution of the City Council as areas for the use of roller skates and/or skateboards shall have signs posted stating that all persons using a skateboard in the area must wear a helmet, elbow pads and knee pads and that failure to wear such a helmet, elbow pads and knee pads will result in a citation pursuant to Section 12.30.070 of the Claremont Municipal Code.

C.    The following regulations shall apply within the designated skateboarding areas:

1.     No person shall skate or skateboard at times other than those established as the hours of operation. The hours of operation shall be 6:00 a.m. until 10:00 p.m.

2.     No person shall use the skateboarding areas for uses other than for skateboarding and in-line skating.

3.     No person shall use the designated skateboarding areas unless they wear proper safety equipment including a helmet, elbow pads, and knee pads.

4.     No person shall ride or cause bicycles to be on the skating surface of the skateboarding area.

5.     No person shall use alcohol or drugs in the designated skateboarding area.

6.     All persons using the skateboarding area must place trash in cans provided by the City or such persons shall be removed from the designated skateboarding areas.

7.     No person shall cause graffiti or tagging on the skateboarding areas.

8.     No person shall skate on the curbs and driveways of the City-owned area surrounding the skateboarding areas. (98-09; 92-12)

 

12.30.060 Skateboarding or roller skating as nuisance.
No person shall use a skateboard or roller skates in a manner which creates a nuisance. For purposes of this section, “nuisance” is defined as an activity which:

A.     Threatens injury to person or property;

B.     Creates an obstruction or presents a hazard to the free use of public or private property by pedestrians or motorists; or

C.    Generates loud or unreasonable noise. (92-12)

 

12.30.070 Violation as infraction.
A violation of any section in this chapter is deemed to be an infraction and is punishable as such according to the provisions of this Code and state law. (98-09; 92-12)

Chapter 12.32 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
12.32.010 Injuring curbs and gutters.
It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, break down or otherwise injure or destroy any dirt, wood, rock or cement curb or gutter by driving over, plowing, cultivating or otherwise within the City. (Prior code § 20.9)

Chapter 12.36 STREET SWEEPING
12.36.010 Fees—Establishment—Classes.
The City Council may by resolution determine, fix and establish fees or charges to be paid the City for providing and making available a service in the sweeping of streets, curbs, and gutters. Such charges may be established by classification for single-family dwellings, for all apartments of less than five units, and for commercial establishments, churches, schools, apartments of five or more units, and any other sources other than residential. (78-20; prior code § 11.40)

 

12.36.020 Fees—Property owner liability—Special exemptions.
The fees established by the City Council shall be billed to and paid for by the owner of the premises; provided, however, that the owner shall have the right to reimbursement from the respective occupants for whose benefit the charge is paid; and provided further, that such fees may be billed to and paid for by the owner, proprietor, or occupant of commercial establishments, churches, schools and any other source other than residential.

All owners of places and premises in the City are made liable for the fees as prescribed by this chapter except upon special exemption by the City Council. (78-20; prior code § 11.41)

 

12.36.030 Bills—Due and payable when—Late charge.
All fees for sweeping of streets, curbs, and gutters may be billed semiannually and shall be payable upon presentation date at the office of the City Clerk, and shall be delinquent thirty-one days after the date of such presentation. Such bills shall be issued by the City Clerk and may be combined with statements for other services. Fees shall be calculated in the same manner provided by this section for monthly charges, except the charges shall be increased by six times the amount of the monthly charge.

There shall be added to all delinquent fees a late charge in order to cover extra administration costs for failure to pay the fees before delinquency to be computed as follows: ten percent of the amount of the fee, plus one percent for each month or portion of a month, after the delinquent date. (78-20; prior code § 11.42)

 

12.36.040 Delinquent accounts—Collection procedure.
Any fees authorized pursuant to this chapter which remain unpaid for a period of six or more months after the date upon which they are billed may be collected thereafter by the City as provided in Section 8.08.160 of this Code. (78-20; prior code § 11.43)

Chapter 12.42 SPECIAL EVENTS
12.42.010 Intent.
It is the intent of the City to encourage special events, such as parades, races, runs, walks, on or in a part of the right-of-way, as they express pride in the City and support for community organizations. The City supports such events to the degree they create and maintain a safe, clean and maneuverable environment for participants and the citizens of the City. However, it is the City’s desire that such events do not detract from normal City operations and services provided to the citizens-at-large. These special events need to pay for their impacts on City services in order not to hinder or cause a drain on the City’s limited resources. (89-18)

 

12.42.020 Definitions.
The following words and phrases are defined for use in this chapter:

“Block party” means a one-day social gathering of neighbors in which the associated residential street is temporarily closed.

“Director” means Director of Community Development and the Director’s designee.

“Person” is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind.

“Right-of-way” is any sidewalk, parkway, median and street.

“Special event” means any parade, march, race, walk, procession, or gathering of any kind or similar display that necessitates the exclusive temporary use and/or closure of a public right-of-way, publicly-owned parking lot, or other public place in the City, excluding parks and parking lots adjacent to parks (04-04; 89-18)

 

12.42.030 General requirements.
A.     A special event permit shall be obtained from the City prior to the start of any special event. City and/or chamber of commerce sponsored special events shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter.

B.     A street closure permit may be required as a condition of approval. If this is necessary, then the event sponsor shall coordinate with the engineering division for its issuance.

C.    Section 10.16.030 requires that only police personnel direct vehicular traffic. No event participant, official, etc., is allowed to direct the traffic at any time. If the police department determines traffic control is necessary, then this will be provided by the police and billed at the rate outlined in Section 12.42.040(E)(2).

D.    Events that require closure of the village area to traffic or streets designated as secondary arterials or greater in the general plan, should generally not be conducted during primary business hours or peak traffic times.

E.     The applicant shall defend the City, its agents, officers, officials and employees against any legal proceeding in law or equity, and further shall indemnify and hold harmless the City and its agents, officers, officials and employees from any costs, awards, fees, including attorney fees, or judgments which arise from any act or omission, whether intentional or negligent, or from strict liability arising from the conduct of any participant, invitee, attendee, sponsor or any third person who is or is not an invitee, attendee, participant, or sponsor of the event.

F.     A permit holder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. The event chair or other person heading or leading the activity shall carry the event permit upon his or her person during the course of the event. (89-18)

 

12.42.040 Application.
A.     Submittal Requirements. A person seeking a special event permit shall file ten copies of the complete application on City forms with the Department of Community Development not less than forty-five calendar days nor more than one hundred eighty calendar days prior to the date of the proposed event. The application shall contain the information below. Additional information may be required depending on the size and scope of the event. Each permit application must contain the following:

1.     The name, address and phone number of the event sponsor and/or individual(s) responsible for its conduct;

2.     A written description of the event and its purpose;

3.     The date, the place of assembly, start and finish times of the event;

4.     A written narration of the route to be traveled, including the assembly and parking areas, and the start and termination points;

5.     A detailed map of the route to be traveled delineating which part of the right-of-way to be traveled, how street crossings are to be accomplished (i.e. use of barricades, police traffic control, etc.), assembly and parking areas;

6.     The approximate number of persons (participants and spectators), and the number and type of vehicles (if any) which will constitute the special event;

7.     The number and location of any rest stop/aid stations and the facilities to be provided (i.e. restrooms, refreshments, first aid, etc.);

8.     If the event is to be conducted for or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization;

9.     An indication of any route marshals to be provided by the event sponsor. If so, the map shall indicate their location along the route.

B.     Application Fee. The applicant shall pay a fee as set forth from time to time by resolution of the City Council.

C.    Waiver of Fees and/or Deposits. The City Council may waive a part or all of the fees if it can be shown that the City will benefit in some tangible way and such action will not cause a drain on public resources.

D.    Proof of Insurance. The applicant shall submit proof of insurance in the amount determined by the Director naming the City as an insured party.

E.     Security Deposit.

1.     Depending on the size, scale and location of the event, the Director may require a deposit to cover the costs of clean-up. The amount of the deposit will be commensurate with the size of the event and determined by the Department of Human Services. If the sponsor cleans up the route/course to the satisfaction of the Department of Human Services, then the deposit will be refunded. If clean-up is not to Department of Human Services’ satisfaction, then the sponsor will forfeit the deposit and be billed at one and one-half times the pay rate of the City crews to complete the clean-up.

2.     If a department finds that the special event will detract from normal City operations to such an extent that additional personnel or equipment is needed, that department shall so notify the Director, indicating the estimated costs created by the special event, and the Director shall require a security deposit to cover such costs in an amount equal to one and one-half times the applicable pay rate. Upon completion of the special event, the applicant shall be refunded any unused funds or billed for the services provided in excess of the deposit.

F.     Notice Requirements. At the time of submittal, a public notice shall be placed in the local paper specifying the date and time of the special event along with the map of the route. The notice shall also state the time frames of the review period. In addition, notice to residents and/or merchants adjacent to route/course may be required by the Director depending on the size, location and time of event. (14-07; 12-04; 89-18)

 

12.42.050 Review process.
A.     The Director shall review all applications within seven calendar days from the time of submittal. If the application is deficient, then the sponsor shall be informed and the processing will cease until the application is complete.

B.     Once the application is deemed complete, the Director shall forward copies of the application with the map to the following divisions/departments for review and comment. Each department shall evaluate the event’s impact on its respective area of responsibility and respond accordingly.

1.     City Manager;

2.     Police;

3.     Fire;

4.     Human Services;

5.     Engineering division;

6.     Any other affected department.

C.    Responses shall be returned to the Director within fourteen calendar days. If a project review committee meeting is scheduled within the response time, the item may be reviewed at this monthly in-house technical committee.

D.    The director shall act upon an application for a special event permit within twenty-one calendar days after the application is deemed complete. A letter specifying the action and the appeal period shall be sent to the event sponsor and any concerned citizen.

E.     If the event is of a size and type that warrants special consideration, staff may refer the item to the next scheduled meeting of the Traffic and Transportation Commission as a public hearing item for action. If this were to occur, the twenty-one day time frames will not apply. The traffic and transportation action would be subject to the appeal procedures outlined in Section 12.42.070.

F.     A special event permit shall be issued when it can be found that:

1.     The conduct of the special event will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic in the City or damage public property;

2.     The special event is scheduled to move from its place of beginning to its place of termination without unreasonable delays en route;

3.     The special event is not held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, good or event for private profit;

4.     The special event provides a specific benefit to the City or to the business community, or to a recognized community organization;

5.     The conduct of the special event will not require the diversion of so many police officers of the City to properly police the line of movement as to prevent normal police protection to the City;

6.     The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles in and about the special event will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection in the area. (14-07; 12-04; 89-18)

 

12.42.060 Contents of permit.
Each special event permit shall state the conditions of approval, the starting and ending time of the event, the portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the event, the maximum length of the event, and such other information as the Director shall find necessary to the enforcement of this chapter. (89-18)

 

12.42.070 Appeal procedure.
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the Director’s decision on a special event permit (approval, denial, alternative route) to the City Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within five calendar days after the action. The appeal shall be placed on the next regular City Council meeting after the appeal is filed and the City Council’s determination shall be final. (89-18)

 

12.42.080 Alternative route—Time—Date.
The director, in denying an application for a special event permit, may authorize the conduct of the event on a date, at a time, or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant wishing to accept an alternate permit shall file a written notice of acceptance with the City Clerk within five calendar days after notice of the action. An alternate special event permit shall have the effect of a special event permit under this chapter. (89-18)

 

12.42.090 Notice to City and other officials.
Immediately upon the issuance of a special event permit, the Director shall send a copy of the permit to the City Manager, Chief of Police, Fire Chief, and the Director of Community and Human Services, the City Engineer, each public transportation system whose vehicles will be affected by the route of the proposed special event, and any other public officials the Director wishes to notify. (12-04; 89-18)

 

12.42.100 Public conduct during event.
No person shall tamper, obstruct, or interfere with any special event or assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in the special event. No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising the special event when the vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a special event. If the City Engineer has posted temporary signs restricting the parking, operation, or standing of vehicles in the area pursuant to Chapter 10.32 of this Code, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate, park, or leave standing any vehicle in violation of such posted signs. (89-18)

 

12.42.110 Revocation of permit.
The Director shall have the authority to revoke a special event permit if the event and/or participants are not complying with the conditions of the permit. (89-18)

 

12.42.120 Permit exemptions.
No permit shall be required for funeral processions, school field trips or block parties. (89-18)

TITLE 13 SEWERS
Chapter 13.02 CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 13.04 SEWER CONNECTIONS
Chapter 13.08 SERVICE FEES
Chapter 13.16 PERMITTED AND PROHIBITED DISCHARGES
Chapter 13.20 MANHOLE REGULATIONS

Chapter 13.02 CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS
13.02.010 Available sewers.
For the purposes of this chapter, “available sewers” are public sanitary sewers within two hundred lineal feet of the nearest point of the parcel with respect to which availability is being determined, which sewers have the capacity to accept sewage discharged from that parcel. (82-12)

 

13.02.020 Existing construction.
Plumbed buildings lawfully connected to private sanitary systems as of December 9, 1982, shall connect to the public sanitary systems in the following circumstances:

A.     Availability of Sewers. All plumbed buildings shall be required to connect to public sanitary sewers within six months of availability. The six-month period shall commence when the City Engineer mails written notice to the record owner of the property. The City Engineer may extend this period for up to an additional one hundred eighty days if he or she determines that a shorter period of time is impractical.

B.     Grant Areas. All existing construction located in areas of the City served by sewers funded through public grants shall be subject to any mandatory connection criteria established by such grants, in addition to the requirements of subsection A of this section.

C.    Failed Septic Systems. All existing plumbed buildings experiencing failed septic systems shall connect to an available public sewer immediately upon such failure.

D.    Exemptions. The Planning Commission may grant exemptions from the requirements of subsection A or C of this section if the Commission determines, upon application of the property owner, based upon the application and such additional relevant scientific and engineering information as the Commission may require the applicant to provide, that connection to public sewers will involve unusual logistical hardship (for example, a significant difference in grade level). As a condition of granting the exemption, the Planning Commission may require the installation of dry sewers and consent to participate in a sewer assessment district. (95-06; 82-12)

 

13.02.030 Land subdivisions.
As a condition of approval of any subdivision of land into two or more parcels after December 9, 1982, public sanitary sewers shall be made available to the new parcels by the landowner in the following circumstances:

A.     A division of land creating three or fewer additional parcels shall be required to make public sanitary sewers available when the nearest public sanitary sewers are within a distance equal to two hundred lineal feet plus two hundred lineal feet per additional parcel created.

B.     A division of land creating four or more additional parcels shall be required to provide public sanitary sewers for all parcels.

C.    In determining the number of parcels, all parcels created since December 9, 1982, from the subject property, or from contiguous property under common ownership on December 9, 1982, or at the time of application shall be included, as it is the intent of this chapter that property owners be treated in like fashion and that successive re-subdivisions shall not be a means for evading the intention of this chapter to eliminate unsewered development in the City.

D.    Upon recommendation of the City Engineer, this requirement may be satisfied by an election to participate in a sewer assessment district, or the posting of bonds, or both. (82-12)

 

13.02.040 New construction.
All new construction permitting increased occupancy, in the case of nonresidential property, or involving the creation of additional bathrooms, laundry rooms or kitchens in the case of residential property, shall connect to public sanitary sewers before the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, in the case of new structures, or before permission is granted to connect to utilities, in the case of remodeling or renovations. The Planning Commission may grant an exemption from this requirement for the construction of the first dwelling unit on a parcel zoned for residential development if the Commission determines, based upon the application from the property owner and such additional relevant scientific and engineering information as the Commission may require the applicant to provide, the following:

A.     That public sanitary sewers are not available. If the property was one of two or more contiguous undeveloped parcels in common ownership as of December 9, 1982, or as of the date of application, sewers shall be deemed available if they are within a distance of two hundred feet times the number of such parcels; or

B.     It can be demonstrated to the City’s satisfaction that connection to public sewers will involve unusual logistical hardship (e.g., a significant difference in grade level).

As a condition of granting the exemption, the Planning Commission may require the installation of dry sewers at the time of construction, approval of the proposed septic system design and location by the City Engineer or his or her designee, consent to participation in a sewer assessment district, and such other conditions as may encourage the eventual installation of public sanitary sewers to serve the property. (95-06; 82-12)

 

13.02.050 Annexation 52-A.
In that portion of the City including Annexation 52-A, the following rules shall apply and shall take precedence over the rest of the requirements of this chapter. In this area, connection to sewers shall be required only in the following circumstances:

A.     Existing Construction. An existing plumbed building experiencing a failed septic system shall connect to a public sewer immediately upon such failure if there is a sewer available within two hundred fifty lineal feet from the proposed point of connection to a main line. Connection may also be required if a public health agency determines that the defective system is a health hazard.

B.     Land Subdivision.

1.     A division of land involving more than five gross acres shall connect to public sewers.

2.     A division of land involving five or fewer gross acres need not connect to public sewers if the nearest public sewer is more than two hundred fifty feet away and no public health agency has determined that development without sewers would constitute a public health hazard. If subdivision is permitted without sewers, the installation of dry sewers shall be required, and provision shall be made for participation in a sewer assessment district at such time as the City may require it.

3.     In determining the size of a subdivision, all contiguous land in common ownership as of the date of annexation shall be included, as it is the intent of this chapter that property owners be treated in like fashion and that successive re-subdivision shall not be a means for evading the intention of this chapter. (82-12)

 

13.02.080 Maintenance of sewer laterals.
All sewer laterals shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition and in good working order, by the owner of the property served by such sewer lateral. All necessary maintenance, repair and replacement of the sewer lateral are the sole responsibility of the property owner. The sewer lateral is that length of sewer pipe located between the building being served on the property and the City’s main sewer line. (12-01)

Chapter 13.04 SEWER CONNECTIONS
13.04.010 Connection—Permit required.
It is unlawful for any person to make or cause to be made any excavation in public property or to install or cause to be installed any sewer therein, or to make or cause to be made any connection to a public sewer, without first having made application to, and having obtained the proper permit therefor from the engineering department of the City. (Prior code § 19.1)

 

13.04.020 Connection—Application—Connection fee.
All persons desiring to connect to the municipal sanitary sewer system shall make application to the engineering division of the City. The following fees are established, prescribed, and imposed to be paid to the City for sewer connections. The City Engineer shall not permit a sewer connection to the sewer lines without the fees being paid to the treasurer of the City the sum determined by this section.

A.     Single-family residence, five hundred dollars per family unit;

B.     Multiple dwelling units, three hundred dollars per unit;

C.    Commercial/industrial, one hundred dollars per one thousand square feet or portion thereof; minimum of five hundred dollars;

D.    Use not otherwise classified, to be determined by the City Engineer;

E.     Major building additions to existing connections, to be determined by the City Engineer;

F.     All connections, twenty-five dollars per average front foot as reimbursement for sewer main constructed by the City, unless party requesting connection can verify previous payment for sewer main installation. (90-26; 88-2; 76-2; prior code § 19.29)

 

13.04.040 Tapping public sewer where no “Y” branch is installed.
Whenever it becomes necessary to connect a house connection sewer to a public sewer at a point where no special “Y” branch has been installed in the public sewer, the connection shall be made in the presence of an inspector of the engineering department of the City and in the following manner:

A.     A hole shall be made in the public sewer by cutting into the pipe and then inserting a standard saddle which shall be made for the particular size of pipe on which it is to be placed and which must fit snugly against the exterior wall of the public sewer pipe.

B.     The “Y” saddle shall be placed in the side of the public sewer pipe with the “Y” branch upward at approximately forty-five degrees from the horizontal and so pointed as to direct the flow from the house connection sewer downstream in the public sewer.

C.    After fitting the saddle to the exterior of the public sewer pipe, any portion of the lip of the saddle found to extend beyond the interior surface of the public sewer pipe shall be removed before such saddle is bound in place.

D.    The saddle shall be fastened in place by heavy twelve-gauge galvanized, asphalt-painted iron wire bound around the main line pipe and the flange of the saddle.

E.     After the saddle is in place an imbedment of cement concrete shall be placed under and around the joint so as to entirely encase the saddle and the public sewer pipe.

F.     The inside of the joint between pipe and saddle shall be painted with 1:2 cement mortar. (Prior code § 19.4)

 

13.04.050 House connection required.
Four-inch house connection sewer service shall be provided in the street for each lot and the depth shall be sufficient to provide a connection to the lowest and farthest point of the lot with a cover of one foot and a grade of not less than two percent. (Prior code § 19.5)

 

13.04.060 Street repaving charges.
Before any permit to excavate is issued, a deposit to cover the fixed charges for repairing or replacing any street or portion thereof damaged or removed by any person pursuant to a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be made with the City Clerk. The fixed charges shall be determined by the City Engineer and based on current pavement replacement costs, being a minimum of one dollar and fifty cents per square foot of excavation. (79-23; prior code § 19.6)

 

13.04.070 Easement required for connections through adjoining property—Affidavit.
A house connection sewer from any building or other structure shall not be connected to any public sewer, if such connection or any portion thereof is in, under or upon any lot other than that lot on which such building or structure is located; provided, however, that if a lot or parcel of land requiring a sewer connection is so situated that access to the public sewer is not possible, except across some other lot or parcel of land, a sewer connection may be placed in a recorded easement, which shall include the right to lay and maintain such connection and is appurtenant to the lot or parcel of land to be served by such sewer connection; provided further, that a permit as required by Section 13.04.010 for the above-mentioned house connection sewer shall not be issued unless and until the application for a permit is accompanied by an affidavit, notarized, and setting forth that the required private easement has been granted to the lot requiring such sewer connection and that such easement has been recorded with the County.

A copy of the affidavit shall be attached to a copy of the permit when issued, and shall become a part of the record of the engineering department of the City. (Prior code § 19.7)

Chapter 13.08 SERVICE FEES
13.08.010 Fees established—Schedule.
A.     Pursuant to the authorization contained in Section 5470 et seq. of the Health Safety Code, the following fees are established, prescribed, and imposed to be paid to the City for services and facilities furnished by the City in connection with its sanitary sewerage system. These fees are established as a fixed cost per year and may be billed annually, semi-annually, quarterly, bi-monthly or monthly as determined by the Administrative Services Director.

 

Classification

Sewer Service Fee

Single-family residences (includes PUDs, duplexes, triplexes, fourplexes, condominiums and apartments)

$50.35/year per dwelling unit

Dormitories, rest homes, hospitals, and institutional buildings

$8.70/year per resident

Colleges, private, and public schools

$0.34/year per student

Hotels, motels, businesses and industrial establishments

$0.134/ccf of water usage

Religious facilities

$16.00/year per building

Low income (20% discount)

$40.28/year per dwelling unit

Notes:

1.    One ccf equals one hundred cubic feet of water.

2.    Religious facilities used for child care to be assessed the additional fee spelled out for private schools.

3.    A minimum fee of $13.40 will be charged for hotels, motels, businesses and industrial establishments.

 

B.     Low-Income Discount. Effective the billing period after completion and submittal of an application to the City’s Administrative Services Department, occupants of single-family dwellings shall be eligible for a twenty percent fee reduction as long as the occupant receives a billing for service and meets one of the following conditions:

1.     The combined gross income of all members of the residence has been demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Administrative Services Director or his/her designee to be less than the amount established for Los Angeles County by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development for very low-income families for the applicable household size.

2.     The occupant has qualified for the utility user’s tax exemption. In such case, eligibility for this discount is automatic and the occupant need not submit an application. (01-05; 90-30; 88-3; 75-3; prior code § 19.13)

 

13.08.020 Exemptions from provisions of Section 13.08.010.
All homes and buildings which are not connected to the City sewer system will be exempted from the service charges provided for in Section 13.08.010, upon the filing of an affidavit with the City Manager, setting forth that such buildings or homes are not connected to the City sewer system; provided, however, that the City Manager shall have the right to verify such fact. (Prior code § 19.14)

 

13.08.030 Fees—When due.
A.     The service fees established by this chapter shall be charged on an annual basis and shall be billable annually, semi-annually, in two installments, quarterly in four installments, bi-monthly in six installments, or monthly in twelve installments. Those fees that have a fixed rate will be billed in equal installments. The period of billing shall be established by the Administrative Services Director.

B.     All bills are due upon receipt and shall become delinquent thirty days after said receipt.

C.    Any new service connection made during the fiscal year shall be charged a fee based upon the applicable provisions of this chapter, prorated on the annual rate, beginning with the first day of the month of connection, and no credit will be allowed for a portion of a month’s service. (01-05; 90-30; 88-3; prior code § 19.15)

 

13.08.040 Fees—Collection.
The fees provided for by this chapter may be collected by the City through its own services and employees, by any publicly or privately owned public utility with which the City may contract for such collection, by any bank, or through the County in accordance with State law, including the lien provisions of the California Health and Safety Code. The City is hereby authorized to contract with any public or private entity for collection services. In such cases, the delinquency may include the assessment of a reasonable collection fee for such services. All statements for such fees shall be sent by United States mail, postage prepaid, to the person responsible for such fees at his/her last address shown upon the City records or in accordance with applicable provisions of State law. (01-05)

 

13.08.050 Penalty for delinquency.
There shall be added to all fees provided for by this chapter a penalty for failure to pay the fees before delinquency, to be computed as follows: ten percent of the amount of the fee, plus one-half percent for each month, or portion of a month, after the delinquent date. (Prior code § 19.16)

 

13.08.060 Delinquent accounts—Collection—Costs to become lien when.
Any fees authorized pursuant to Section 13.08.010 which remain unpaid for a period of six or more months after the date upon which they were billed may be collected thereafter by the City as provided as follows:

A.     The City Council shall cause a report of delinquent rubbish and sewer fees to be prepared periodically. The Council shall fix a time, date and place for hearing the report and any objections or protests thereto.

B.     The Council shall cause notice of the hearing to be mailed to the landowners listed on the report not less than fourteen days prior to the date of the hearing.

C.    At the hearing the Council shall hear any objections or protests of landowners liable to be assessed for delinquent fees. The Council may make such revisions or corrections to the report as it deems just, after which, by resolution, the report shall be confirmed.

D.    The delinquent fees set forth in the report as confirmed shall constitute special assessments against the respective parcels of land and are a lien on the property for the amount of such delinquent fees plus late charges and cost of lien. A certified copy of the confirmed report shall be filed with the City Clerk, or auditor appointed by the City Council, for the amounts of the respective assessments against the respective parcels of land as they appear on the current assessment roll. The lien created attaches, upon recordation in the office of the County Recorder of a certified copy of the resolution of confirmation. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary City ad valorem property taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for such taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of City ad valorem property taxes shall be applicable to such assessment. (Prior code § 19.20)

 

13.08.070 Deposits to insure collection.
The City Council shall have the right to require any person liable to pay any charge fixed by this chapter, to make a reasonable deposit with the City Manager to insure collection. (Prior code § 19.21)

 

13.08.080 Deposit of moneys collected—Recordkeeping.
The City Treasurer shall be responsible for all moneys collected and shall deposit the same in the sewer improvement fund of the City. He or she shall keep an accurate record showing the service and collections at each location. (Prior code § 19.18)

 

13.08.090 Use of fees collected.
All sewerage service fees collected shall be used for the purposes, and only for the purposes, prescribed or permitted by Section 5471 of the Health and Safety Code. (Prior code § 19.19)

Chapter 13.16 PERMITTED AND PROHIBITED DISCHARGES
Note
*      Prior history: Ord. No. 82-3 and prior code §§ 19.8, 19.9, 19.22, 19.23, 19.24.

 

13.16.010 Adoption.
The wastewater ordinance of the Sanitation District of the County, enacted April 1, 1972, as amended November 1, 1989, is adopted by reference as the uniform wastewater ordinance for the City, subject to the exceptions contained in Sections 13.16.020 and 13.16.030. (90-27)

 

13.16.020 Definitions.
The definitions contained in the County Sanitation Districts’ wastewater ordinance shall control the construction and interpretation of this chapter with the following exceptions:

A.     The Chief Engineer shall mean the City Engineer;

B.     The district shall mean the City of Claremont;

C.    The local agency shall mean the City of Claremont;

D.    The Board of Directors shall mean the City Council. (90-27)

 

13.16.030 Exceptions.
The following sections of the County Sanitation Districts’ wastewater ordinance are excepted from inclusion under Section 13.16.010: Sections 208, 209, 210, 211, 212, 213, 214, 215, 218, 408, 409, 410, 411, 412, 414, 415, 416, 418, 419, 421, 422, 423, 424. (90-27)

 

13.16.040 Penalties.
Every person who violates any provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction is punishable as provided by law. Each day during which any violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. (90-27)

Chapter 13.20 MANHOLE REGULATIONS
13.20.010 Opening manholes deemed misdemeanor when.
Any person not holding a valid permit to do so, or who is not a bona fide employee of the City in line of duty, who opens or enters, or causes to be opened or entered, any manhole in any public sewer to dispose of garbage or other deleterious substances, or stormwater or surface water or for any other purpose whatsoever, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 19.10)

TITLE 14 RESERVED

TITLE 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 15.02 HOUSING CODE
Chapter 15.04 BUILDING CODE
Chapter 15.05 ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS CODE
Chapter 15.06 BUILDING SECURITY REGULATIONS
Chapter 15.08 ELECTRICAL CODE
Chapter 15.12 MECHANICAL CODE
Chapter 15.16 PLUMBING CODE
Chapter 15.18 ENERGY CODE
Chapter 15.20 FIRE PREVENTION
Chapter 15.22 GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
Chapter 15.24 PUBLIC WORKS CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS
Chapter 15.28 MOVING BUILDINGS
Chapter 15.30 WORK/LIVE REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 15.32 TRAILERS AND TRAILER COACHES
Chapter 15.36 SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND RESERVOIRS
Chapter 15.40 WATER WELL STANDARDS
Chapter 15.42 CROSS-LOT DRAINAGE
Chapter 15.46 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Chapter 15.50 SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM EXPEDITED REVIEW PROCESS
Chapter 15.54 ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING SYSTEMS EXPEDITED, STREAMLINED PERMITTING PROCESS

Chapter 15.02 HOUSING CODE
15.02.010 Adoption.
A.     The Uniform Housing Code, 1997 Edition, published by the International Conference of Building Officials, with the changes, additions, and deletions set forth in this chapter, is adopted by reference as the housing code of the City.

B.     At least one copy of said housing code has been deposited in the office of the Building Official and shall at all times be maintained by the Building Official for use and examination by the public. (02-05; 96-01; 93-15; 89-24; 89-23)

 

15.02.020 Amendments.
Section 1103.1.1.2 of the Uniform Housing Code is hereby amended by adding a paragraph at the end to read as follows:

However, no structure or structure(s) that are listed on the Register of Structures of Historical or Architectural Merit of the City shall be demolished unless the provisions of Chapter 15.04 of the Claremont Municipal Code have been complied with.

(02-05; 96-01; 93-15; 89-24; 89-23)

 

15.02.030 Violations.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or demolish, equip, use or maintain any building or permit the same to be done in violation of this chapter. No person, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, shall violate, cause the violation of, or otherwise fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Unless a different penalty is prescribed for violating a specific provision of this chapter, every act prohibited or declared unlawful, and every failure to perform an act made mandatory, shall be a misdemeanor or an infraction, at the discretion of the City Attorney or the district attorney. In addition to the penalties provided in this chapter, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared a public nuisance, and may be abated by any procedures authorized by law. The expense of such abatement proceedings may, by resolution of the City Council, be declared to be a lien against the property on which such nuisance is maintained, and such lien shall be made the personal obligation of the property owner, unless the City chooses another design method of recovering abatement cost permitted by law. (02-05; 96-01; 93-15; 89-24; 89-23)

 

15.02.040 Penalties for violations.
A.     Misdemeanor Penalty. Every violation of this chapter which is prosecuted as a misdemeanor shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000), or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

B.     Infraction Penalty. Every violation of this chapter which is prosecuted as an infraction shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense, a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second offense of the same provision within one (1) year, and a fine not exceeding five hundred ($500.00) for each additional offense of the same provision within one (1) year.

As used in this section the term “year” means any consecutive twelve-month period.

As used in this section, the term “offense” includes any violation of the chapter which is cited or charged and which does not result in:

1.     Acquittal;

2.     A finding of “not guilty”;

3.     A dismissal of charges by the City or the court. (02-05; 96-01; 93-15; 89-24; 89-23)

 

15.02.050 Continuing violations.
Each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate crime for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm or corporation and shall be punished accordingly. (02-05; 96-01; 93-15; 89-24; 89-23)

Chapter 15.04 BUILDING CODE
15.04.010 Adoption.
A.     The California Building Code, 2019 Edition, Volumes 1 and 2, which incorporates and amends the International Building Code, 2018 Edition published by the International Code Council, including Chapter 1, Appendix F, Appendix I, and Appendix J based on the International Building Code, the California Residential Code 2019 Edition, which incorporates and amends the International Residential Code, with changes, additions, and deletions set forth in this chapter, are adopted by reference as the building code of the City.

B.     At least one (1) copy of said codes is on file in the office of the Building Official and shall at all times be maintained by the Building Official for use and examination by the public. (19-08; 16-13, 13-10)

 

15.04.020 Chapter 1 amended—Administrative.
The following portions and sections of Chapter 1 of the California Building Code and Chapter 1 Division II of the California Residential Code are hereby amended to read as follows:

A.     Sections 105.2 and R105.2 are hereby amended as follows:

1.     Item 1 of “Building” is hereby amended to read as follows:

One-story, detached, accessory buildings used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses, and similar uses, provided the projected floor area does not exceed 120 square feet, and is designed as a portable building, which shall be easily disassembled or removed without cause for demolition, and which does not contain any utilities. Said building shall comply with construction methods, setbacks, fire resistive standards, and other provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this City.

2.     Item 2 of “Building” is hereby amended to read as follows:

Fences/Walls not over 36 inches high.

3.     Items 3, 4, 5, and 10 of “Building” are deleted in their entirety.

B.     Sections 105.3 and R105.3 are hereby amended by adding the following paragraph at the end of the section to read as follows:

No demolition permit shall be issued to demolish any structure listed on the Register of Structures of Historical or Architectural Merit of the City of Claremont, as adopted by resolution of the City Council, until ninety (90) days after application for a demolition permit has been made to the City. If the Director of Community Development determines that failure to issue the permit before the expiration of ninety (90) days presents an immediate hazard to the safety of human beings, he or she shall authorize the issuance of a permit immediately.

C.    Sections 109.2 and R108.2 are hereby amended to read as follows:

Schedule of permit fees. The fee for each permit shall be established by resolution of the City Council, and at the time of issuance, shall be paid to the Building Official.

D.    Sections 111.3 and R110.4 are hereby amended by adding the following paragraph at the end of the section to read as follows:

The Building Official may require bonds in such form and amounts as may be deemed necessary to assure that the remaining work will be completed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and within the prescribed time stated on the temporary certificate of occupancy.

(19-08; 16-13, 13-10)

 

15.04.030 Chapter 7A amended—Materials and Construction Methods for Exterior Wildfire Exposure.
The following portions and sections of Chapter 7A of the California Building Code and Chapter 3 of the California Residential Code are hereby amended to read as follows:

Sections 705A.2 and R337.5.2 are amended to read as follows:

Roof coverings. Where the roof profile allows a space between the roof covering and roof decking, the spaces shall be constructed to prevent the intrusion of flames and embers, be firestopped with approved materials or have one layer of No. 72 ASTM cap sheet installed over the combustible decking. Wood-shingle and wood shake roofs are prohibited in Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zones (VHFHSZ) regardless of classification.

(19-08; 16-13, 13-10)

 

15.04.040 Chapter 9 amended—Fire Protection Systems.
The following portions and sections of Chapter 9 of the California Building Code are hereby amended to read as follows:

Section 903.2. is hereby amended to read as follows:

903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems shall be provided in the locations described in this section:

1.     In buildings over three stories in height; provided, however, the respective increases in area and height specified in Sections 503 and 504, and the substitution for one-hour fire-resistive construction specified in Table 601 shall be permitted.

2.     In all new non-residential buildings and additions constructed hereafter which have a total floor area of 5,000 square feet or more. The total floor area of the building or additions shall be computed without regard to the fire walls as outlined in Chapter 7, except fire walls of not less than four (4) hour fire-resistive construction without openings. EXCEPTION: This requirement shall not apply to Group S Division 2 Open Parking Garages, which are within the area, height, and type of construction limits set forth in Table 503.

3.     Throughout existing non-residential buildings whenever any remodeling or additions increase the floor area by 5,000 square feet or more within any twelve (12) month period. The total floor area of buildings shall be computed without regard to fire walls as outlined in Chapter 7, except fire walls of not less than four (4) hour fire-resistive construction without openings.

4.     If the existing building which exceeds 5,000 square feet has a change in occupancy classification such that the proposed use is more hazardous, based on life and fire risk, than the existing use.

(19-08; 16-13, 13-10)

 

15.04.045 Chapter 15 and Chapter 9 amended—Fire Classification and Roof Classification.
The following portions and sections of Chapter 15 of the California Building Code and Chapter 9 of the California Residential Code are hereby amended to read as follows:

A.     Sections 1505.1.3 and R902.1.3 is hereby amended to read as follows:

Roof coverings within all other areas. All new structures, and every existing structure within the City shall have at least a Class B fire retardant roof covering unless otherwise specified in Section 1505.1.1 of the California Building Code/Section 902.1.1 of the California Residential Code.

This section is applicable when twenty-five (25) percent or more of the total roof area is reroofed within any twelve (12) month period.

The installer of the roof covering shall provide certification of the roof covering classification to the building owner, and, when requested, to the inspection authority having jurisdiction.

B.     Table 1505.1 is hereby amended, in its entirety, to read as follows:

TABLE 1505.1

MINIMUM ROOF COVERING CLASSIFICATIONS

TYPES OF CONSTRUCTION

IA

IB

IIA

IIB

IIIA

IIIB

IV

VA

VB

B

B

B

B

B

B

B

B

B

(19-08; 16-13, 13-10)

 

15.04.050 Appendix J amended—Grading.
Appendix Chapter J, portions and sections are hereby amended as follows:

A.     Whenever the use of the title “Building Official” is referenced as the administrative authority in Appendix J, it shall be replaced with the title “City Engineer.” (19-08; 16-13, 13-10)

 

15.04.055 Violations.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, or maintain any building or permit the same to be done in violation of this chapter. No person, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, shall violate, cause the violation of, or otherwise fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Unless a different penalty is prescribed for violating a specific provision of this chapter, every act prohibited or declared unlawful, and every failure to perform an act made mandatory, shall be a misdemeanor or an infraction, at the discretion of the City Attorney or the District Attorney. In addition to the penalties provided in this chapter, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provision of this chapter is hereby declared a public nuisance and may be abated by any procedures authorized by law. The expense of such abatement proceedings may, by resolution of the City Council, be declared to be a lien against the property on which such nuisance is maintained, and such lien shall be made the personal obligation of the property owner, unless the City chooses another design method recovering abatement cost permitted by law. (19-08; 16-13, 13-10)

 

15.04.060 Penalties.
A.     Misdemeanor Penalty. Every violation of this chapter which is prosecuted as a misdemeanor shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

B.     Infraction Penalty. Every violation of this chapter which is prosecuted as an infraction shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense, a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second offense of the same provisions within one (1) year, and a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional offense of the same provision within one (1) year.

As used in this section, the term “year” means any consecutive twelve (12) month period.

As used in this section, the term “offense” includes any violation of the chapter which is cited or charged and which does not result in:

1.     Acquittal;

2.     A finding of “not guilty”;

3.     A dismissal of charges by the City or the court. (19-08; 16-13, 13-10)

 

15.04.070 Continuing violations.
Each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate crime for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm or corporation and shall be punished accordingly. (19-08; 16-13, 13-10)

Chapter 15.05 ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS CODE
15.05.010 Adoption.
A.     The Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition, published by the International Conference of Building Officials, with changes, additions, and deletions set forth in this chapter, is adopted by reference as a supplement to the building code of the City.

B.     At least one copy of said code has been deposited in the office of the Building Official, and shall at all times be maintained by the Building Official for use and examination by the public. (02-05; 96-01; 93-15; 89-24; 89-23)

 

15.05.020 Amendments.
Section 403.1.1.2 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is hereby amended by adding a paragraph at the end to read as follows:

However, no structure or structures or structures that are listed on the Register of Historical or Architectural Merit of the City of Claremont, shall be demolished unless the provisions of Chapter 15.04 of the Claremont Municipal Code have been complied with.

(02-05; 96-01; 93-15; 89-24; 89-23)

 

15.05.030 Violations.
No person, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, shall violate, cause the violation of, or otherwise fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Unless a different penalty is prescribed for violating a specific provision of this chapter, every act prohibited or declared unlawful, and every failure to perform an act made mandatory, shall be a misdemeanor or an infraction, at the discretion of the City Attorney or the district attorney. In addition to the penalties provided in this chapter, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared a public nuisance, and may be abated by any procedures authorized by law. The expense of such abatement proceedings may, by resolution of the City Council, be declared to be a lien against the property on which such nuisance is maintained, and such lien shall be made the personal obligation of the property owner, unless the City chooses another design method of recovering abatement cost permitted by law. (02-05; 96-01; 93-15; 89-24; 89-23)

 

15.05.040 Penalties.
A.     Misdemeanor Penalty. Every violation of this chapter which is prosecuted as a misdemeanor shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000), or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

B.     Infraction Penalty. Every violation of this ordinance which is prosecuted as an infraction shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense, a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second offense of the same provisions within one (1) year, and a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional offense of the same provision within one (1) year.

As used in this section, the term “year” means any consecutive twelve-month period.

As used in this section, the term “offense” includes any violation of the chapter which is cited or charged and which does not result in:

1.     Acquittal;

2.     A finding of “not guilty”;

3.     A dismissal of charges by the City or the court. (05-05; 96-01; 93-15; 89-24; 89-23)

 

15.05.050 Continuing violations.
Each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate crime for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm or corporation and shall be punishable accordingly. (02-05; 96-01; 93-15; 89-24; 89-27)

Chapter 15.06 BUILDING SECURITY REGULATIONS
15.06.010 Building security regulations.
The following security regulations are hereby adopted by the City of Claremont and shall be applicable to all structures constructed after April 1, 1979. (79-10)

 

15.06.011 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth minimum standards of construction for the resistance to unlawful entry. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all new construction for which application for a building permit is made after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (79-10)

 

15.06.012 Limitations.
No provision of this chapter shall impose or be construed to impose any requirements contrary to the provisions contained in Chapter 33 of the Uniform Building Code. (79-10)

 

15.06.013 Alternate security provisions.
When approved by the Director of the Department of Building and Safety, site security systems may be provided in lieu of the specific security provisions of this chapter. The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the use of any device or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this chapter when such alternate provides equivalent security and has been approved by the Director of the department of building and safety. (79-10)

 

15.06.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms used herein are to have the following definitions:

“Cylinder guard” means a hardened ring surrounding the exposed portion of the lock cylinder or other device, which is so fastened as to protect the cylinder from wrenching, prying, cutting or pulling by attack tools.

“Deadbolt” means a bolt which has no automatic spring action and which is operated by a key cylinder, thumb-turn or lever, and is positively held fast when in the projected position.

“Deadlocking latch” means a latch in which the latch bolt is positively held in the projected position by a guard bolt, plunger or auxiliary mechanism.

“Latch” means a device for automatically retaining the door in a closed position upon its closing.

“Light panel” means any glazed opening whether glazed with glass, plastic, metal, wood, or composition sheets or panels, or similar materials, and shall include windows, skylights, view ports or view panels, and similar openings. (79-10)

 

15.06.030 Exterior doors.
A.     Exterior doors and doors leading from the outside into garages of private residences and multiple-dwelling units shall be of solid core construction and shall be no less than one and three-eighths inches in thickness.

B.     Exterior doors and doors leading from the outside into garages of private residences of multiple-dwelling units shall have a deadlocking latch device with a minimum throw of one-half inch and a deadbolt lock with a cylinder guard, a hardened steel insert and a minimum throw of one inch. Both locking mechanisms shall be interconnected so that both may be disengaged by turning the doorknob from the inside.

C.    An interviewer or peephole shall be provided on the front door of each individual residence or dwelling unit.

D.    Exterior doors swinging out shall have non-removable hinges.

E.     All in-swinging exterior doors shall have rabbeted jambs.

F.     Jambs for all doors shall be so constructed or protected as to prevent violation of the function of the strike from the outside.

G.    Light panels in exterior doors or within forty-eight inches of the inside activating device shall be of laminated security glass which is a minimum of five-sixteenth inch in thickness with a 0.060 inch vinyl interlayer of one-quarter inch polycarbonate, or their equivalent.

H.    Garage doors shall have an inside slide bolt lock or its equivalent located at the bottom of the garage door on the inside. (79-10)

 

15.06.040 Sliding glass doors.
Sliding glass doors opening onto patios or balconies which are less than one story above grade or are otherwise accessible from the outside shall be secured as follows:

A.     All sliding glass doors shall have a hookbolt deadlock which is no less than one-eighth inch in thickness, and which has a minimum throw of one-half inch.

B.     The hookbolt deadlock and the strike shall be made of hardened steel.

C.    All sliding glass doors shall have a secondary bolt lock mounted on the bottom of the door. The bolt lock shall be no less than one-quarter inch in thickness and shall have a minimum throw of one-half inch. The bolt for such secondary lock shall be made of hardened steel and shall be securely fastened to frame or floor.

D.    Sliding glass doors shall be installed so that the door does not have more than one-sixteenth inch play between the top of the door and the frame when the door is in the closed position.

E.     Double sliding patio doors shall be capable of being locked at the meeting rail and shall meet the requirements set forth in subsections A, B and C of this section. (79-10)

 

15.06.050 Window security.
A.     All sliding glass windows shall have a vertical hookbolt deadlock, or if a vertical hookbolt is not used as a primary lock, a secondary bolt lock will be required.

1.     If a vertical hookbolt deadlock is used, it shall be of hardened steel and shall have a minimum thickness of one-eighth inch. The strike used for the vertical hookbolt deadlock shall be made of hardened steel. When the vertical hookbolt deadlock is in the closed position, it shall be at least one hundred eighty degrees around the strike.

2.     If a secondary lock is used, along with a lock other than a vertical hookbolt deadlock, the secondary lock shall be mounted on the bottom of the window. The secondary lock shall be a bolt lock and shall be no less than one-eighth inch in thickness, and shall have a minimum throw of one-half inch.

B.     All sliding glass windows shall have the movable section of the window on the inside of the fixed portion of the window.

C.    Sliding glass windows shall not have more than one-sixteenth inch play between the top of the window and the pane when the window is in the closed position. Windows meeting ANSI A134.1 or 134.2 may be used.

D.    Louvered windows shall not be used within eight feet of ground level. (79-10)

 

15.06.055 Address, location and specifications.
A.     Residence numbers shall be located in a visible location on the front of the house directly facing the street.

B.     All address numbers shall be lighted and shall be a minimum of four inches in height.

C.    The numbers shall be black in color, with the background being illuminated in white. (79-10)

 

15.06.060 Commercial burglary security.
All exterior doors shall be secured as follows:

A.     Single doors shall be secured with security-type panic hardware or a double-cylinder deadbolt or a single-cylinder deadbolt without a turnpiece which has a cylinder guard, a hardened steel insert, and a minimum throw of one inch. A hook or expanding bolt may have a throw of three-quarter inch.

B.     All double doors shall be separated by an astragal that is a minimum of four inches in diameter.

C.    All flush bolts shall be interconnected with the main locking mechanism so that both flush bolts and the primary locking mechanism can be operated by operation of the primary mechanism.

D.    Cylinders shall be so designed or protected that they cannot be gripped by pliers or other wrenching devices.

E.     Exterior sliding commercial entrances shall be secured as in subsections A, B and D of this section with special attention given to safety regulations.

F.     Rolling overhead doors, solid overhead swinging, sliding, or accordion garage-type doors shall be secured with a cylinder lock or padlock on the inside, when not otherwise controlled or locked by electric power operation. If a padlock is used, it shall be of hardened steel five-eighths inch shackle locking at heel and toe, with a minimum five-pin tumbler operation with a non-removable key when in an unlocked position.

G.    Metal accordion grate or grill-type doors shall be equipped with a metal guide track, at the top and bottom, and a cylinder lock and/or padlock with a five-eighths inch hardened steel shackle and a minimum five-pin tumbler operation which locks heel and toe and has a non-removable key when in an unlocked position. The bottom track shall be so designed that the door cannot be lifted from the track when the door is in a locked position.

H.    Exterior doors swinging out shall have non-removable hinge pins if pin-type hinges are used.

I.      Exterior doors that swing in shall have rabbeted jambs.

J.     Jambs for all doors shall be so constructed or protected so as to prevent violation of the function of the strike from the outside.

K.     All exterior doors, excluding front doors, shall have a minimum of a sixty-watt bulb illumination capability located over the outside of the door, or equivalent lighting. If a bulb is used, it shall be protected with a vapor cover or cover of equal breaking-resistant material. (79-10)

 

15.06.064 Glass windows.
Louvered windows shall not be used. (79-10)

 

15.06.068 Accessible transoms.
A.     Exterior transoms exceeding eight inches by twelve inches located on the side and/or rear of any building used for business purposes shall be protected by one of the following:

1.     Laminated security glass which is a minimum of five-sixteenths inch in thickness with a 0.060 inch vinyl interlayer on one-quarter inch polycarbonate security sheets or their equivalent;

2.     Iron bars of at least one-half inch round or one inch by one quarter inch flat steel material under the skylight and securely fastened; or

3.     A steel grid of at least one-eighth inch material or two-inch mesh under the skylight and securely fastened.

B.     All hatchway openings on the roof of any building or premises used for business purposes shall be secured as follows:

1.     If the hatchway is of wooden material, it shall be covered on the inside with at least sixteen gauge sheet steel or its equivalent attached with screws.

2.     The hatchway shall be secured from the inside with a slide bar or slide bolts.

3.     Outside hinges on all hatchway openings shall be provided with non-removable pins when using pin-type hinges.

C.    All air duct and air vent openings exceeding eight inches by twelve inches located on the roof or exterior walls of any building used for business purposes shall be secured by covering the same with either of the following:

1.     Iron bars of at least one-half inch round or one inch by one quarter inch flat steel material, spaced no more than five inches apart and securely fastened; or

2.     A steel grill of at least one-eighth inch material of two-inch mesh and securely fastened;

3.     If the barrier is on the outside, it shall be secured with round head flush bolts on the outside. (79-10)

 

15.06.070 Special security measures.
Offices Buildings (Multiple-Occupancy). All individual office suites shall have solid core doors which have a minimum thickness of at least one and three-eighths inch and shall have a deadbolt lock which has a cylinder guard, a hardened steel insert, and a minimum throw of one inch. (79-10)

 

15.06.080 Prohibited areas.
The following listed commercial facilities shall be prohibited from using these security regulations:

A.     Buildings or portions of buildings used or intended to be used for the gathering together of more persons for such purpose as amusement, entertainment, instruction, deliberation, worship, drinking or dining, awaiting transportation, or education;

B.     Buildings or portions of buildings used or intended to be used for showing of motion pictures when an admission fee is charged, and when such building or structure is open to the public and has a capacity of ten or more persons;

C.    Educational facilities, day-care facilities for more than six persons, nurseries for full-time care of children, hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes, and homes or facilities for the housing of any person of the ages of eighteen years through sixty-four years, when such person is referred to or placed within such home or facility for protective social care and supervisory services by any governmental agency, and shall include but not be limited to those commonly referred to as “certified family care homes,” “out-of-home placement facilities,” and “half-way houses”;

D.    Occupancies used for storage and handling of hazardous and highly flammable or explosive materials;

E.     Occupancies used for storage and handling of Class I, Class II and Class III flammable liquids, dry-cleaning plants using liquids, paint stores with bulk handling, paint shops and spray-painting rooms and shops;

F.     Woodworking establishments, planing mills, box factories, buffing rooms for tire-rebuilding plants and picking rooms; shops, factories, or warehouses where loose combustible fibers or dust are manufactured, processed, generated, or stored, and pin refinishing rooms;

G.    Automotive repair garages;

H.    Aircraft repair hangars;

I.      Gasoline and service stations, storage garages, aircraft hangars, and open parking garages. (79-10)

 

15.06.090 Application and interpretation of security regulations.
A.     Pursuant to Section 15.06.030, exterior doors one and three-quarter inches in thickness containing solid raised wood panels not less than nine-sixteenths inch in thickness are a satisfactory alternate to solid core doors specified.

B.     French doors containing light panels glazed with safety glazing as per Uniform Building Code Section 5401(b) may be allowed pursuant to Section 15.06.030 as a satisfactory alternate, provided the following conditions are satisfied:

1.     The door is located in patio areas and is not a required exit door;

2.     The door is equipped with a double-keyed lock;

3.     When used in bedrooms, with an emergency window exit shall be provided as required in Uniform Building Code Sections 1304 and 1404.

C.    For the purpose of applying Sections 15.06.040 and 15.06.068, accessible (openings) shall mean sliding glass doors, French doors, and openable windows located within eight feet of the ground, porch, or patio. Such openings located on or adjacent to balconies shall be considered accessible from a balcony when the balcony is less than eight feet to the ground or less than eight feet from any other balcony or opening on the same floor level.

D.    Pursuant to Section 15.06.055: Internally illuminated address numbers four inches high are not available. When address numbers are internally illuminated fixtures with three-inch high block numbers on white background, such fixtures are acceptable as a satisfactory alternate. (79-10)

Chapter 15.08 ELECTRICAL CODE
15.08.010 Adoption.
A.     The California Electrical Code, 2019 Edition, which incorporates and amends the National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, published by the National Fire Protection Association, including Article 89, with changes, additions, and deletions set forth in this chapter, are adopted by reference as the electrical code of the City.

B.     At least one (1) copy of said electrical code has been deposited in the office of the Building Official and shall at all times be maintained by the Building Official for use and examination by the public. (19-08; 16-13, 13-10)

 

15.08.020 Fees.
Article 89 of the California Electric Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

A.     Section 89.108.4.2 is hereby amended to read as follows:

89.108.4.2 Permit Fees. The fee for each electrical permit shall be as established by resolution of the City Council, and at the time of issuance shall be paid to the Building Official.

B.     Section 89.108.4.2.1 is hereby added to read as follows:

89.108.4.2.1 Plan Review Fees. When submittal documents are required by the Building Official, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submitting submittal documents for plan review. The plan review fees for electrical work shall be equal to eighty percent (80%) of the total electrical permit fee as established by resolution of the City Council, and shall be paid to the Building Official. When submittal documents are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan review, an additional plan review fee shall be charged as established by resolution of the City Council.

(19-08; 16-13, 13-10)

 

15.08.040 Violations.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, equip, use or maintain any electrical system or equipment or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this chapter.

No person, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, shall violate, cause the violation of, or otherwise fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Unless a different penalty is prescribed for violating a specific provision of this chapter, every act prohibited or declared unlawful, and every failure to perform an act made mandatory, shall be a misdemeanor or an infraction, at the discretion of the City Attorney or the District Attorney. In addition to the penalties provided in this chapter, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared a public nuisance, and may be abated by any procedures authorized by law. The expense of such abatement proceedings may, by resolution of the City Council, be declared to be a lien against the property on which such nuisance is maintained, and such lien shall be made the personal obligation of the property owner, unless the City chooses another design method of recovering abatement cost permitted by law. (19-08; 16-13, 13-10)

 

15.08.050 Penalties.
A.     Misdemeanor Penalty. Every violation of this chapter which is prosecuted as a misdemeanor shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one-thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

B.     Infraction Penalty. Every violation of this chapter which is prosecuted as an infraction shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense, a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second offense of the same provision within one (1) year, and a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional offense of the same provision within one (1) year.

As used in this section, the term “year” means any consecutive twelve (12) month period.

As used in this section, the term “offense” includes any violation of the chapter which is cited or charged and which does not result in:

1.     Acquittal;

2.     A finding of “not guilty”;

3.     A dismissal of charges by the City or the court. (19-08; 16-13, 13-10)

 

15.08.060 Continuing violations.
Each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate crime for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted by such person, firm, or corporation and shall be punishable accordingly. (19-08; 16-13, 13-10)

Chapter 15.12 MECHANICAL CODE
15.12.010 Adoption.
A.     The California Mechanical Code, 2019 Edition and Appendices, which incorporates and amends the Uniform Mechanical Code, 2018 Edition, published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, including Chapter 1, with changes, additions, and deletions set forth in this chapter, are adopted by reference as the mechanical code of the City.

B      At least one (1) copy of said mechanical code has been deposited in the office of the Building Official and shall at all times be maintained by the Building Official for use and examination by the public. (19-08; 16-13, 13-10)

 

15.12.030 Violations.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or demolish, equip, use, or maintain any mechanical system or equipment or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this chapter. No person, whether as principal, agent, employee, or otherwise, shall violate, cause the violation of, or otherwise fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Unless a different penalty is prescribed for violating a specific provision of this chapter, every act prohibited or declared unlawful, and every failure to perform an act made mandatory, shall be a misdemeanor or an infraction, at the discretion of the City Attorney or the District Attorney. In addition to the penalties provided in this chapter, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared a public nuisance, and may be abated by any procedures authorized by law. The expenses of such abatement proceedings may, by resolution of the City Council, be declared to be a lien against the property on which such nuisance is maintained, and such lien shall be made the personal obligation of the property owner, unless the City chooses another design method of recovering abatement cost permitted by law. (19-08; 16-13, 13-10)

 

15.12.040 Penalties.
A.     Misdemeanor Penalty. Every violation of this chapter which is prosecuted as a misdemeanor shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

B.     Infraction Penalty. Every violation of this chapter which is prosecuted as an infraction shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense, a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second offense of the same provisions within one (1) year, and a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional offense of the same provision within one (1) year.

As used in this section, the term “year” means any consecutive twelve (12) month period.

As used in this section, the term “offense” includes any violation of the chapter which is cited or charged and which does not result in:

1.     Acquittal;

2.     A finding of “not guilty”;

3.     A dismissal of charges by the City or the court. (19-08; 16-13, 13-10)

 

15.12.050 Continuing violations.
Each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate crime for each and every day during any portion of which any violations of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm, or corporation and shall be punishable accordingly. (19-08; 16-13, 13-10)

Chapter 15.16 PLUMBING CODE
15.16.010 Adoption.
A.     The California Plumbing Code, 2019 Edition and Appendices, which incorporates and amends the Uniform Plumbing Code, 2018 Edition, published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, including Chapter 1, with changes, additions, and deletions set forth in this chapter, are adopted by reference as the plumbing code of the City.

B.     At least one (1) copy of said plumbing code has been deposited in the office of the Building Official and shall at all times be maintained by the Building Official for use and examination by the public. (19-08; 16-13, 13-10)

 

15.16.030 Violations.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, convert, demolish, equip, use, or maintain any mechanical system or equipment or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this chapter. No person, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, shall violate, cause the violation of, or otherwise fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Unless a different penalty is prescribed for violating a specific provision of this chapter, every act prohibited or declared unlawful, and every failure to perform an act made mandatory, shall be a misdemeanor or an infraction, at the discretion of the City Attorney or the District Attorney. In addition to the penalties provided in this chapter, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared a public nuisance, and may be abated by any procedures authorized by law. The expense of such abatement proceedings may, by resolution of the City Council, be declared to be a lien against the property on which such nuisance is maintained, and such lien shall be made the personal obligation of the property owner, unless the City chooses another design method of recovering abatement cost permitted by law. (19-08; 16-13, 13-10)

 

15.16.040 Penalties.
A.     Misdemeanor Penalty. Every violation of this chapter which is prosecuted as a misdemeanor shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

B.     Infraction Penalty. Every violation of this chapter which is prosecuted as an infraction shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense, a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second offense of the same provision within one (1) year, and a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional offense of the same provision within one (1) year.

As used in this section, the term “year” means any consecutive twelve (12) month period.

As used in this section, the term “offense” includes any violation of the chapter which is cited or charged and which does not result in:

1.     Acquittal;

2.     A finding of “not guilty”;

3.     A dismissal of charges by the City or the court. (19-08; 16-13, 13-10)

 

15.16.050 Continuing violations.
Each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate crime for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm or corporation and shall be punishable accordingly. (19-08; 16-13, 13-10)

Chapter 15.18 ENERGY CODE
15.18.010 Adoption.
A.     The California Energy Code, 2019 Edition and Appendices, with changes, additions, and deletions set forth in this chapter, are adopted by reference as the energy code of the City.

B.     At least one (1) copy of said energy code has been deposited in the office of the Building Official and shall at all times be maintained by the Building Official for use and examination by the public. (19-08; 16-13, 13-10)

 

15.18.030 Violations.
No person, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, shall violate, cause the violation of, or otherwise fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Unless a different penalty is prescribed for violating a specific provision of this chapter, every act prohibited or declared unlawful, and every failure to perform an act made mandatory, shall be a misdemeanor or an infraction, at the discretion of the City Attorney or the District Attorney. In addition to the penalties provided in this chapter, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared a public nuisance, and may be abated by any procedures authorized by law. The expense of such abatement proceedings may, by resolution of the City Council, be declared to be a lien against the property on which such nuisance is maintained, and such lien shall be made the personal obligation of the property owner, unless the City chooses another design method of recovering abatement. (19-08; 16-13, 13-10)

 

15.18.040 Penalties.
A.     Misdemeanor Penalty. Every violation of this chapter which is prosecuted as a misdemeanor shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

B.     Infraction Penalty. Every violation of this chapter which is prosecuted as an infraction shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense, a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second offense of the same provision within one (1) year, and a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional offense of the same provision within one (1) year.

As used in this section, the term “year” means any consecutive twelve (12) month period.

As used in this section, the term “offense” includes any violation of the chapter which is cited or charged and which does not result in:

1.     Acquittal;

2.     A finding of “not guilty”;

3.     A dismissal of charges by the City or the court. (19-08; 16-13, 13-10)

 

15.18.050 Continuing violations.
Each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate crime for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm or corporation and shall be punishable accordingly. (19-08; 16-13, 13-10)

Chapter 15.20 FIRE PREVENTION
15.20.010 Adoption of Fire Code for the Consolidated Fire Protection District of Los Angeles County.
A.     The 2020 Fire Code for the Consolidated Fire Protection District of Los Angeles County (Title 32, Los Angeles County Code) adopted by the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors, amending the 2019 California Fire Code, incorporating the 2018 International Fire Code published by the International Code Council, with the changes, additions and deletions set forth in this chapter and amendments set forth are adopted by reference as the fire code of the City.

B.     At least one (1) copy of said fire code will be deposited in the office of the Building Official and shall at all times be maintained by the Building Official for use and examination by the public. (19-08; 16-13, 13-10)

 

15.20.020 Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone.
The Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone is defined in Appendix M of the Los Angeles County Fire Code Title 32. (19-08; 16-13, 13-10)

 

15.20.030 New materials, processes or occupancies which may require permits.
The Building Official, the Fire Chief and a Fire Inspector shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies, which require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the Fire Code. (19-08; 16-13, 13-10)

 

15.20.040 Permit refusal—Appeal procedure.
Whenever the Fire Chief disapproves an application or refuses to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the Fire Code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the Fire Code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal the decision of the Chief to the City Council within thirty (30) days of the date of the decision. (19-08; 16-13, 13-10)

 

15.20.050 Violations.
No person, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, shall violate, cause the violation of, or otherwise fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Unless a different penalty is prescribed for violating a specific provision of this chapter, every act prohibited or declared unlawful, and every failure to perform an act made mandatory, shall be a misdemeanor or an infraction, at the discretion of the City Attorney or the District Attorney. In addition to the penalties provided in this chapter, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared a public nuisance, and may be abated by any procedures authorized by law. The expense of such abatement proceedings may, by resolution of the City Council, be declared to be a lien against the property on which such nuisance is maintained, and such lien shall be made the personal obligation of the property owner, unless the City chooses another design method of recovering abatement. (19-08; 16-13, 13-10)

 

15.20.060 Penalties.
A.     Misdemeanor Penalty. Every violation of this chapter which is prosecuted as a misdemeanor shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

B.     Infraction Penalty. Every violation of this chapter which is prosecuted as an infraction shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense, a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second offense of the same provision within one (1) year, and a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional offense of the same provision within one (1) year.

As used in this section, the term “year” means any consecutive twelve (12) month period.

As used in this section, the term “offense” includes any violation of the chapter which is cited or charged and which does not result in:

1.     Acquittal;

2.     A finding of “not guilty”;

3.     A dismissal of charges by the City or the court. (19-08; 16-13, 13-10)

 

15.20.070 Continuing violations.
Each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate crime for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm or corporation and shall be punishable accordingly. (19-08; 16-13, 13-10)

Chapter 15.22 GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
15.22.010 Adoption.
A.     The California Green Building Standards Code, 2019 Edition and Appendices, with changes, additions, and deletions set forth in this chapter, are adopted by reference as the green building standards code of the City.

B.     At least one (1) copy of said green building standards code has been deposited in the office of the Building Official and shall at all times be maintained by the Building Official for use and examination by the public. (19-08; 16-13, 13-10)

 

15.22.030 Violations.
No person, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, shall violate, cause the violation of, or otherwise fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Unless a different penalty is prescribed for violating a specific provision of this chapter, every act prohibited or declared unlawful, and every failure to perform an act made mandatory, shall be a misdemeanor or an infraction, at the discretion of the City Attorney or the District Attorney. In addition to the penalties provided in this chapter, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared a public nuisance, and may be abated by any procedures authorized by law. The expense of such abatement proceedings may, by resolution of the City Council, be declared to be a lien against the property on which such nuisance is maintained, and such lien shall be made the personal obligation of the property owner, unless the City chooses another design method of recovering abatement. (19-08; 16-13, 13-10)

 

15.22.040 Penalties.
A.     Misdemeanor Penalty. Every violation of this chapter which is prosecuted as a misdemeanor shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

B.     Infraction Penalty. Every violation of this chapter which is prosecuted as an infraction shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense, a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second offense of the same provision within one (1) year, and a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional offense of the same provision within one (1) year.

As used in this section, the term “year” means any consecutive twelve (12) month period.

As used in this section, the term “offense” includes any violation of the chapter which is cited or charged and which does not result in:

1.     Acquittal;

2.     A finding of “not guilty”;

3.     A dismissal of charges by the City or the court. (19-08; 16-13, 13-10)

 

15.22.050 Continuing violations.
Each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate crime for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm or corporation and shall be punishable accordingly. (19-08; 16-13, 13-10)

Chapter 15.24 PUBLIC WORKS CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS
15.24.010 Adoption of Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction.
Except as hereafter provided, that certain public works construction specification known and designated as the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, 1967 Edition as amended by the 1968 supplement to the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, is designated as the public works construction specifications of the City, regulating materials of construction and their use in the erection, installation, alteration, repair, removal, conversion, demolition and construction of public works improvements in the City, providing for the administration of contracts as well as permits issued in connection with such improvements, and repealing all ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict therewith. (Prior code § 17A.1)

 

15.24.020 Definitions.
Whenever any of the following names or terms are used in the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction or in this chapter, each such name or term shall be deemed and construed to have the meaning ascribed to it in this section as follows:

A.     “Agency” means the City of Claremont.

B.     “Board” means the City Council of the City of Claremont.

C.    “City” means the City of Claremont.

D.    “Engineer” means the City Engineer of the City of Claremont or his or her authorized representative. (Prior code § 17A.2)

 

15.24.030 Violations and penalties.
No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, convert, or demolish, equip, use or maintain any public works construction in violation of this chapter or the public works construction specifications adopted herein, or permit the same to be done in violation of this Code. (89-16; prior code § 17A.3)

Chapter 15.28 MOVING BUILDINGS
15.28.010 Permit—Required—Fee—Oversized object defined.
A.     Any person who moves any building or other oversized object over, along or across any street or other public place in the City shall first obtain a permit therefor from the City. The fee shall be ten dollars per unit, plus all costs to the City related to the permit, including but not limited to:

1.     Costs of engineering services, including design, inspection, survey and tests;

2.     Costs of any other inspection, transportation or tests made;

3.     Costs of repairing or restoring the highways and altering, removal, replacement and repair of all appurtenant facilities, including utilities, to the same or equal condition that they were in before being cut or damaged as a result of the permittee’s activities;

4.     Costs of furnishing or maintaining any lights, barricades or warning devices;

5.     Costs of alteration, removal, replacement or repair to traffic signals and devices, the removal of temporary or permanent traffic stripes and any other expense for traffic control;

6.     Cost for removing or remedying any hazardous condition;

7.     Costs of tree trimming;

8.     Costs of special police escort if determined necessary;

9.     Any other costs to the City caused pursuant to this permit.

B.     The permit shall specify the building or other object to be moved, the route to be taken in the moving thereof and the time in which the building or other oversized object will be moved. The Public Works Department and Police Department shall approve of the route and the time within which the building or other object shall be moved.

C.    As used in this chapter, the term “oversized object” means any object or thing which, when transported by a vehicle or combination of vehicles over, upon, along or across any highway, would be required to have a special permit in accordance with provisions of the Vehicle Code of the state and includes, but is not limited to, any house, vessel, machine, equipment, transformer, girder, boat or airplane. (Prior code § 20.62)

 

15.28.020 Permit—Bond or insurance required.
In addition to the fee specified in Section 15.28.010, any person who seeks a permit to move a building or other oversized object within the City shall first furnish the City with a certificate of insurance in the amount of $100,000/$300,000 for public liability, automobile bodily injury liability, property damage liability, non-automobile and automobile property damage liability. A cash bond or other surety, in the amount of at least one thousand dollars, may be submitted instead of a certificate of insurance if the Director of Public Works approves. After the completion of the movement of the building or other oversized object, the City shall inspect the route taken in the moving of the building or object and shall ascertain the damage, if any, to all streets, trees, buildings, overhanging wires and any and all property of any nature whatsoever with the City and shall present to the permittee a claim in the amount necessary to repair such damage, if any. Thereupon, the permittee shall cause such claim to be paid. (Prior code § 20.63)

 

15.28.030 Permit—Certificate of sound construction required.
Before the City Manager issues any permit for the moving of any building over, along or across any street or other public place in the City, he or she shall first require the owner of the building to furnish him or her with a certificate from the City Engineer certifying that the building is of sufficiently sound construction and condition that the same may be moved without endangering persons or property. Before issuing such a certificate, the City Engineer may make such physical and mechanical inspection of the building as he or she deems necessary to ascertain the physical condition thereof. (Prior code § 20.64)

 

15.28.040 Moving buildings into residential districts.
No building shall be moved into a residential district as the same is defined by the zoning ordinance of the City, unless the same complies with all requirements of the building, plumbing and electrical codes for new construction in such district. (Prior code § 20.65)

 

15.28.050 Procedure for moving buildings not conforming with technical codes.
If the building to be moved does not comply with the requirements of the building, plumbing and electrical codes for new construction, it may nevertheless be moved; provided, that the owner thereof shall file with the building inspector plans and specifications and a detailed breakdown of costs for remodeling the building to conform to the requirements of such codes and at the same time files with the City Clerk a good and sufficient surety bond conditioned upon the completion of the remodeling in accordance with such plans and specifications, which bond shall be not less than one hundred twenty percent of the cost of such remodeling as shown by the detailed cost breakdown. (Prior code § 20.66)

Chapter 15.30 WORK/LIVE REQUIREMENTS
15.30.010 Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this section is to provide for and make feasible the reuse of commercial and industrial buildings on the Register of Structures of Historic or Architectural Merit in Claremont by adopting building code standards for work/live units as contemplated by Section 17958.11 of the California Health and Safety Code. (05-03)

 

15.30.020 Definition.
A work/live unit is an area comprised of one or more rooms that contains adequate working space in, adjacent to, or near the unit regularly used by persons residing therein, and that meets basic habitability requirements including the provision of (1) kitchen facilities; (2) bathroom facilities, including a shower or tub; and (3) an approved heater. (05-03)

 

15.30.030 Administration.
A.     Planning Approval Required. Work/live units shall be permitted, subject to the provisions of this ordinance, in zoning districts which allow work/live as a permitted or conditionally permitted use.

B.     Building Permit Required. No building or unit shall be occupied as work/live unless a building permit permitting work/live occupancy has first been obtained from the Building Department.

C.    Business License Requirement. No work/live unit shall be occupied without obtaining an appropriate business license in accordance with the City Code.

D.    Occupancy Violation. Whenever any portion of a building designated as work/live is being used contrary to the provisions of this Code, the Building Official may order such use discontinued within the unit or specified portion of the building. Provided the violation is not life threatening to the occupants within the building, the occupants shall discontinue the use within seven (7) days after the receipt of such notice, as prescribed by the City Building Official, to make the structure, or portion thereof, comply with the requirements of this Code. (05-03)

 

15.30.040 General criteria.
A.     Work/live units may be located in upper stories, in below grade basements, or within the first floor of eligible commercial and industrial buildings.

B.     The minimum area of a work/live unit shall be 750 square feet. An individual work/live unit shall contain adequate working space.

C.    The residential occupancy in any work/live unit shall not exceed two persons.

D.    Any building converted or partially converted to work/live units shall retain its commercial or industrial occupancy classification for purposes of calculating impact fees.

E.     The life-safety requirements for dwelling units contained in the Uniform Building Code appendix entitled “Life-Safety Requirements for Existing Buildings Other Than High-Rise Buildings” shall apply to all work/live units.

F.     Modifications which create a life-safety hazardous condition shall not be authorized by the City of Claremont Building Official.

G.    The Building Official shall have the power to render interpretations of and enforce rules and supplemental regulations in order to clarify the application of work/live provisions. Such interpretations, rules and regulations shall be in conformance with the intent and purpose of this chapter.

H.    Storage of flammable or combustible liquids or materials shall be subject to the following limitations and requirements:

1.     The allowable quantities of flammable or combustible liquids, as defined in the California Fire Code, in a work/live unit shall have the following limitations:

a.

Class I-A

None

b.

Class I-B and I-C

1 gallon

c.

Class II

5 gallons

d.

Class III

5 gallons

e.

Combined Total

11 gallons

 

2.     A permit must be obtained by the Fire Department for quantities in excess of the above allowable amounts.

3.     All flammable and combustible liquids shall be stored in approved safety containers.

4.     Smoking, open flames or other sources of ignition shall not be located with 25 feet of any flammable or combustible liquids.

5.     The use of any welding equipment, open flame work or similar hazardous operations shall require approval by the Fire Department. (05-03)

 

15.30.050 Building standards.
All work/live units, including any alteration to a work/live unit, shall be required to meet the minimum life-safety standards as set forth below. Unless otherwise referenced in this chapter, prevailing code requirements for commercial buildings shall apply to work/live units.

A.     Each work/live unit shall be provided a primary entry from common areas such as hallways, corridors, and/or exterior portions of the building, such as courtyards, breezeways, parking areas and public spaces. Each work/live unit above the first floor shall be provided with access to two stairway exits.

B.     Where any unit containing a work/live occupancy is adjacent to any other unit containing a separate work/live occupancy, such units shall be separated by one-hour fire-resistive floors and walls, except as may be otherwise required by prevailing code for area separation walls. Exception: If two or more work/live units are combined into a single suite, then the partition walls and floors do not need to be fire rated.

C.    Each work/live unit shall have one open-able window accessible for exiting with not less than a 20-inch by 30-inch opening and not more than 44 inches from finished door, or a second exit door.

D.    All work/live units shall be provided with single-station smoke detectors. Smoke detectors shall receive their primary power from the building’s wiring system, and be provided with battery back-up. Detectors shall be installed in accordance with approved manufacturer’s instructions. Smoke detectors shall be mounted on the ceiling at a point centrally located in the residential portion of the unit and in each sleeping room separated by floor to ceiling walls. In the working area of the work/live unit, one hardwired smoke detector shall be centrally located on the ceiling. Where the working area is subdivided into separate rooms by floor to ceiling walls, one smoke detector shall be installed on the ceiling of each workroom.

E.     Fire sprinklers and fire alarm systems shall be installed. Design and installation shall comply with prevailing code for commercial occupancy.

F.     Any building containing work/live units shall have an approved sign posted in a conspicuous location at each entrance to the building indicated such to Fire Department personnel. The sign shall be constructed of durable, weatherproof material with a red “A” on a white background shall be placed in the lower quadrant. The height of the sign shall be a minimum of 10 inches. The “A” shall be a minimum of four inches.

G.    Each work/live unit shall meet residential standards per the prevailing electric code for electrical and for load calculations. A minimum of one receptacle outlet for every 12 feet of linear wall measured horizontally of each work/live unit shall be provided.

H.    Walls separating work/live units shall have a minimum Sound Transmission Class of 50.

I.      Work/live units shall provide minimum natural light requirements of six square feet of window area for every 600 square feet of floor space. Otherwise, work/live units shall comply with commercial light and ventilations standards, provided that no life-safety hazard is created.

J.     For the purposes of determining the minimum number of persons for which the building exiting system must be designed, an occupancy load factor of one person per 300 square feet shall be used for areas used for residential purposes and one person per 100 square feet for areas used for business purposes.

K.     Stairways serving a mezzanine or second level of a work/live unit shall comply with prevailing code; stairs are to have an eight-inch maximum rise, a nine-inch minimum run, and a 36-inch minimum width. Exception: for private stairways, mezzanines of less than 400 square feet may be accessed by spiral stairways as permitted by prevailing code or by other stairways with a minimum rise and run as required for spiral stairs: a nine-and-one-half-inch maximum rise and a seven-inch minimum run. Private stairways and mezzanines shall have a guardrail of 36 inches minimum height.

L.     Each work/live unit shall have a kitchen area consisting of a sink, cooking facilities, and garbage disposal.

M.    Each work/live unit shall have sanitation facilities consisting of a toilet, lavatory, shower and/or bathtub.

N.    Each work/live unit shall have an approved UL listed heating system capable of maintaining a room temperature of 70 degrees Fahrenheit at a point of three feet above the floor in the residential portion of the unit.

O.    Habitable space shall have a dimension of not less than seven feet, except as otherwise permitted under residential requirements for sloped ceiling heights.

P.     All work/live units shall have access to an ADA accessible restroom, either public or common on an accessible path of travel from the unit, or located within each work/live unit.

Q.    The following percentage of all work/live units within the building must have ADA-adaptable restrooms:

Number of Work/Live Units

ADA-adaptable Restrooms

5—12

1

13—20

2

21 or more

2, plus 1 for each additional 7 work/live units

 

R.    Adaptable restrooms shall be designed and equipped to be ADA compliant as follows:

1.     36-inch door;

2.     60-inch diameter clear wheelchair-turning radius;

3.     Water closet meeting ADA fixture specifications and clearances;

4.     Walls reinforced for ADA grab bars;

5.     Sinks meeting ADA height and clearance specifications;

6.     All switches meeting ADA specifications;

Chapter 15.32 TRAILERS AND TRAILER COACHES
15.32.010 Use for living purposes—Prohibited without conditional use permit.
It is unlawful for any person to use or occupy any trailer or trailer coach for residence or living purposes within the City except with a conditional use permit granted by the Planning Commission. (Prior code § 14.19)

 

15.32.020 Use for living purposes—Prohibited on real property when.
It is unlawful for any person owning or having the possession or control of any real property within the City to permit or allow any person to use or occupy any trailer or trailer coach upon such property for residence or living purposes except with a conditional use permit granted by the Planning Commission. (Prior code § 14.20)

 

15.32.030 Removal of wheels, effect.
A trailer or trailer coach shall not lose its identity as such by reason of the fact that its tires or wheels have been removed or that it has been permanently attached to the ground by means of underpinning or foundation. (Prior code § 14.21)

Chapter 15.36 SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND RESERVOIRS
15.36.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings:

“ABOVEGROUND/ON-GROUND POOL” means swimming pool.

“APPROVED SAFETY POOL COVER” means a manually or power operated safety pool cover that meets all of the performance standards of the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM), in compliance with Standard F 1346-91.

“BARRIER” means enclosure.

“ENCLOSURE” means a fence, wall or other barrier that isolates a swimming pool from access to the home. When approved by the building official, barriers may also incorporate natural or manmade features, such as topography, waterways, restricted areas and similar features including, but not limited to, geographically isolated areas and guarded-gated communities which provide an effective access barrier to the pool area.

“EXIT ALARMS” means devices that make audible, continuous alarm sounds when any door or window that permits access from the residence to the pool area, that is without any intervening enclosure, is opened or is left ajar. Exit alarms may be battery operated or may be connected to the electrical wiring of the building.

“GRADE” means the underlying surface, such as earth or a walking surface.

“HOT TUB” means spa, nonself-contained or spa, self-contained.

“IN-GROUND POOL” means swimming pool.

“PORTABLE SWIMMING POOL” means a non-permanent above-ground and on-ground structure intended for swimming or for recreational bathing, in which water-circulating equipment is non-permanent and an electrical cord plugs into an approved exterior electrical receptacle. A portable swimming pool is designed to be disassembled and easily removed without need of demolition.

“PUBLIC SWIMMING POOL” means a swimming pool operated for the use of the general public with or without charge, or for the use of the members and guests of a private club. Public swimming pool does not include a swimming pool located on the grounds of a private single-family home.

“SEPARATION FENCE” means a barrier that separates all doors of a dwelling unit with direct access to a swimming pool from the swimming pool.

“SPA, NONSELF-CONTAINED” means a hydro massage pool or tub for recreational or therapeutic use, not located in health-care facilities, designed for immersion of users and usually having a filter, heater and motor-driven blower. It may be installed indoors or outdoors, on the ground or on a supporting structure, or in the ground or in a supporting structure. A nonself-contained spa is intended for recreational bathing and contains water over 18 inches (457 mm) deep.

“SPA, SELF-CONTAINED” means a continuous-duty appliance in which all control, water-heating and water-circulating equipment is an integral part of the product, located entirely under the spa skirt and which electric equipment is cord connected (not permanently electrically wired) to an approved exterior electrical receptacle. A self-contained spa is intended for recreational bathing and contains water over 18 inches (457 mm) deep.

“SWIMMING POOL” means any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing that contains water over 18 inches (457 mm) deep. This includes in-ground, aboveground and on-ground swimming pools, and fixed-in-place wading pools.

“SWIMMING POOL, INDOOR” means a swimming pool that is totally contained within a residential structure and surrounded on all four sides by walls of said structure.

“SWIMMING POOL, OUTDOOR” means any swimming pool that is not an indoor pool. (02-05; 79-19)

 

15.36.015 Permit required for swimming pool, spa or hot tub.
A.     No person, firm or corporation shall erect, construct or enlarge any pool, spa, or hot tub in the City, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a swimming pool, spa or hot tub permit from the building official; provided, however, that no such permits are required for the installation of a portable pool which is entirely above ground, and which involves neither plumbing nor electrical wiring or self-contained spa or hut tub.

B.     The City Council shall, by resolution, determine, fix and establish fees to be paid prior to the issuance of such permits, and for any grading inspection and re-inspection required in connection with construction with the construction or alteration of a pool or spa. Any fences, walls or wooden decks built in connection with a swimming pool may require separate building permits. Concrete decks surrounding a pool or spa may be authorized in the pool or spa permit itself. (02-05; 79-19)

 

15.36.020 Application for permit.
A.     Application for a swimming pool or spa permit shall be made on the forms provided by the City, and shall include two copies of the engineer’s pool plans, prepared by a licensed structural engineer and containing a “wet signature” with his or her state approved stamp. A plot plan showing lot lines, adjoining structures, existing overhead electrical wires or such other information as is necessary to determine compliance with this Code and other applicable law shall also be provided.

B.     The City Engineer may require a special inspection before and after construction of grading on the parcel on which the pool is to be located if the City Engineer determines that the construction may affect approved cross-lot drainage or that other special circumstances affecting grading and drainage exist. Detailed grading plans may be required in such cases. In addition, a grading permit and bond may be required. (02-05; 79-19)

 

15.36.025 Pool—Safety features required.
Whenever a swimming pool or spa permit is issued for private single-family residence or Group R, Division 3 Occupancy where a wall of the residence serves as part of the enclosure and contains door openings between the residence and the pool that provide direct access to the pool, it shall be equipped with at least one of the following safety features:

A.     The residence shall be isolated from access to the pool by an enclosure that meets the requirements of Section 15.36.030.

B.     The residence shall be equipped with exit alarms on those doors providing direct access to the pool. The alarm shall sound continuously for a minimum of 30 seconds within seven seconds after the door and its screen, if present, are opened, and be capable of providing a sound pressure level of not less than 85 dBA when measured indoors at 10 feet (3048 mm). The alarm shall automatically reset under all conditions. The alarm system shall be equipped with a manual means, such as a touch pad or switch, to temporarily deactivate the alarm for a single opening. Such deactivation switch shall last no longer than 15 seconds. The deactivation switch shall be located at least 54 inches (1372 mm) above the threshold of the door.

C.    All doors providing direct access from the residence to the swimming pool shall be equipped with self-closing, self-latching device with a release mechanism no lower than 54 inches (1372 mm) above the floor.

D.    Other means of protection may be acceptable so long as the degree of protection afforded is not less than that afforded by any devices described above. (02-05)

 

15.36.030 Pool—Enclosure requirements.
Whenever a swimming pool or spa permit is issued for private single-family residence or Group R, Division 3 Occupancy, an enclosure shall meet the following requirements:

A.     A fence or wall surrounding property at pool area, which is at least 60 inches (1524 mm) above grade, measured on the side of the enclosure that faces away from the swimming pool. Where there are two or more adjacent properties that all have a pool, then the enclosure height may be reduced to 48 inches (1219 mm).

B.     A maximum vertical clearance between the grade and the bottom of the enclosure of two inches (51 mm). A maximum vertical clearance at the bottom of the enclosure may be increased to four inches (102 mm) when grade is a solid surface such as concrete deck or when the enclosure is mounted on the top of the aboveground pool structure.

C.    Openings in the enclosure shall not allow the passage of a 1¾-inch diameter (44.5 mm) sphere.

Exceptions:

1.     When vertical spacing between such openings is 45 inches (1143 mm) or more, the opening size may be increased such that passage of a four-inch-diameter (102 mm) sphere is not allowed.

2.     For fencing composed of vertical and horizontal members, the spacing between vertical members may be increased up to four inches (102 mm) when the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is 45 inches (1143 mm) or more.

D.    Chain link fences used as the enclosure shall not be less than 11 gauge.

E.     Access gates shall comply with the requirements of sections A through D. Pedestrian access gates shall be self-closing and have a self-latching device. Where the release mechanism of the self-latching device is located less than 54 inches (1372 mm) from the bottom of the gate, (1) the release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the enclosure at least three inches (76 mm) below the top of the gate; and (2) the gate and enclosure shall not have no opening greater than one-half inch (12.7 mm) within 18 inches (457 mm) of the release mechanism. Pedestrian gates shall swing away from the pool. Any gates other than pedestrian access gates shall be equipped with lockable hardware or padlocks and shall remain locked at all times not in use.

F.     Any decorative design work on the side away from the swimming pool, such as protrusions, indentations or cutouts, which render the enclosure easily climbable, is prohibited. All gates or doors opening through an enclosure shall be kept securely closed at all times when not in actual use.

G.    Doors within garages and carports opening through an enclosure shall be equipped with a self-closing, self-latching device with a release mechanism placed no lower than 54 inches (1372 mm) above the floor and open away from the swimming pool.

H.    Driveway gates are prohibited through an enclosure except for driveway gates that are equipped with an approved automatic opening and closing device that is approved by the Building Official. The property owner shall submit a written request for an exception to the Building Official and also provide the City with a hold-harmless agreement to be filed with the City Clerk.

I.      Where an aboveground pool structure is used as a barrier or where the barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure, and the means of access is a ladder or steps, then (1) the ladder or steps shall be capable of being secured, locked or removed to prevent access; or (2) the ladder or steps shall be surrounded by a barrier that meets the requirements of Sections 15.36.025 through 15.36.030. When the ladder or steps are secured, locked or removed, any opening created shall be protected by a barrier complying with Sections 15.36.025 through 15.36.030.

J.     For indoor swimming pool, protection shall comply with the requirements of Sections 15.36.025 through 15.36.030.

K.     A self-contained spa or hot tub equipped with a listed safety cover shall be exempt from the requirements of Sections 15.36.025 and 15.36.030. (02-05)

 

15.36.035 Pool—Draft hydrant required.
In the Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone as designated in Section 15.04.040 when deemed necessary by the chief of the fire department all new swimming pools constructed or installed having a capacity of 5,000 gallons or more shall have a minimum four-inch diameter drain and discharge line connected to a draft hydrant, the type, location and installation of which shall be approved by the chief of the fire department. Materials used for the discharge line shall be as approved in the City Plumbing Code, for potable water systems, except copper shall not be used.

Exception:

Swimming pools constructed or installed with the bottom of the pool more than 15 feet below the proposed draft hydrant connection elevation, measured vertically, need not be provided with a draft hydrant system.

To identify the pool draft system, a street marker shall be installed on the roadway or an appropriate sign (as designed by the fire department) indicating the location of the swimming pool shall be posted on the pool safety fence and/or at the draft hydrant location. (02-05)

 

15.36.040 Pool—Location.
A.     The minimum distance between any property line and a pool water line shall be five feet. In addition, pools shall be at least five feet from any structure. Pools shall not be located within twelve feet of overhead electrical wires, and diving boards shall not be located within 16 feet of electrical wires, unless these wires are safety cable. Pool equipment shall be at least three feet from the interior and rear property lines when equipment is closer than 20 feet to adjoining dwelling unit, or when yard fence is of combustible material.

B.     Plot plans filed as required by Section 15.36.020 of this Code shall show any portions of the parcel, which have been filled, and any slopes within 25 feet of the proposed pool and/or deck. Where fill or slopes are present in the vicinity of the pool, a soils report by a qualified professional shall be provided unless the City Engineer waives the requirement. The report shall include the geologist or engineer’s certification that the proposed construction will not jeopardize the integrity of the existing topography or adjoining structures under the circumstances to be anticipated in the area. (02-05; 79-19)

 

15.36.045 Construction standards and inspection.
The building official or his or her agent, upon notification from the permit holder or his or her agent, shall make the following inspections to ascertain that the following requirements have been met, and that other applicable laws have been obeyed:

A.     Excavation Inspection. The site shall be inspected to determine that the excavation and grading is as set forth in the plan on file with the City, and in the case of pools that are to be gunited, that reinforcing steel and circulation water lines are in place and bonded with at minimum number 8 AWG copper wire. All circulation water lines must be in place and similarly bonded. Copper piping must be provided with ten feet downstream of heaters. Any PVC (schedule 40 only) must be at least 18 inches below grade on a bed of select material. DWV copper is not permitted for pressure piping. Any pool light must use conduit to a junction box.

B.     Pre-Back Filling Inspection. After gunite has cured for at least seven days, or a pool of fiber glass or other material has been installed, plumbing and wiring shall be inspected for compliance with this Code, including the following plumbing standards:

1.     When permitted by the Los Angles County Sanitation District and the City of Claremont Engineering Division each pool shall have a drain line connected to a three-inch minimum P-trap to a sewer or separation tank.

2.     Gas lines shall be in place and subjected to a pressure test of 15 pounds per square inch for metal pipes and 60 pounds per square inch for Polyethylene (PE) pipe.

3.     Any PE gas lines shall be buried at least 18 inches or more below grade, and shall use transition steel (plastic coating) piping to grade.

4.     All PE gas pipe shall have a number 18 AWG copper tracer wire installed with the pipe and terminate above grade at each end. Ferrous gas piping protected from corrosion by approved coating shall be acceptable if at least 12 inches below grade, and if all joints and damaged coating are primed and wrapped with approved materials.

C.    Electrical Inspection. Electrical wiring shall be inspected for compliance with the code in the following special requirements:

1.     A ground-fault circuit interrupter shall be required for all pool lights, and there shall be an unbroken ground conductor not smaller than number 12 AWG copper wire from the main service panel to any pool light junction box.

2.     Pools and spas other than gunite pools, which are properly grounded through their reinforcing steel, shall be grounded with an eight-foot copper-weld ground rod or 10 feet of buried copper water pipe.

3.     Number 8 AWG copper bonding conductor shall be required for all pool equipment other than a pool light.

4.     Rigid conduit is acceptable at least twelve inches below grade.

5.     A 30-inch clear space shall be provided in front of all time clocks and sub panels.

D.    Concrete Deck Inspection. If the permit includes authorization to install a concrete deck, the project will be inspected before the concrete deck is poured to confirm compliance with the following special standards:

1.     Forms in place must be eight inches wide with 12-inch-deep footing into natural or compacted grade.

2.     Concrete decking, if any, adjacent to a pool must be at least four feet wide around the entire circumference of a pool.

3.     A spa adjacent to any concrete deck shall have a deck at least three feet wide around its entire circumference, but footings may be omitted.

4.     Concrete shall be at least four inches thick, and metal clamps approved for direct burial shall be installed for all slides, diving supports, grab rails and other metal surfaces within five feet of the pool’s water edge.

E.     Pre-plaster (Gunite) Inspection. Before a gunited pool is plastered or any other type of pool is filled, the property shall be inspected to determine that fencing as required by code has been installed, that the yard area is properly graded with drainage established to the street or an approved drainage course, and that all the debris has been disposed of. Electrical equipment shall be inspected for proper connection and drainage, and all metal surfaces within five feet of pool’s water edge shall be checked for proper bonding with a two-cell flashlight continuity tester. Before authorization of utility connections, the City shall determine that any damage to public property in connection with the construction has been repaired or compensated.

F.     Final Inspection. A final inspection shall be made to review all requirements, and where a concrete deck has been installed, to determine that the joint between deck and pool has been caulked with an approved sealer. (02-05; 79-19)

 

15.36.050 Reservoir and pits—Fence required.
Every person in possession of land within the City, either as owner, purchaser under contract, lessee, tenant or licensee, upon which is a situated reservoir, pit, excavation or similar open area (except a temporary excavation during the process of a construction) shall at all times maintain on the lot or premises, an enclosure of such open area. The enclosure shall have a minimum height of no less than six feet. The material and design of the enclosure shall be subject to the approval of the Director of Community Development. The enclosure shall have no openings (other than doors or gates) larger than six inches square. All gates or doors opening through such enclosure shall be kept securely closed at all times when not in actual use, and shall be equipped with either a self-closing and self-latching device designed to keep and capable of keeping such door or gate securely closed at all times when not in actual use. (12-01)

 

15.36.055 Violations.
No person, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, shall violate, cause the violation of, or otherwise fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Unless a different penalty is prescribed for violating a specific provision of this chapter, every act prohibited or declared unlawful, and every failure to perform an act made mandatory, shall be a misdemeanor or an infraction, at the discretion of the City Attorney or the district attorney. In addition to the penalties provided in this chapter, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared a public nuisance, and may be abated by any procedures authorized by law. The expense of such abatement proceedings may, by resolution of the City Council, be declared to be a lien against the property on which such nuisance is maintained, and such lien shall be made the personal obligation of the property owner, unless the City chooses another design method of recovering abatement. (02-05)

 

15.36.060 Penalties.
A.     Misdemeanor Penalty. Every violation of this chapter which is prosecuted as a misdemeanor shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000), or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

B.     Infraction Penalty. Every violation of this chapter which is prosecuted as an infraction shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense, a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second offense of the same provision within one (1) year, and a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional offense of the same provision within one (1) year.

As used in this section, the term “year” means any consecutive twelve-month period.

As used in this section, the term “offense” includes any violation of the chapter which is cited or charged and which does not result in:

1.     Acquittal;

2.     A finding of “not guilty”;

3.     A dismissal of charges by the City or the court. (02-05)

 

15.36.065 Continuing violations.
Each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate crime for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm or corporation and shall be punishable accordingly. (02-05)

Chapter 15.40 WATER WELL STANDARDS
15.40.010 Department of Water Resources Bulletin No. 74 adopted.
Except as provided in this chapter, that certain document known and designated as the Water Well Standards: State of California, Chapter II and Appendices E, F and G, from the Department of Water Resources Bulletin No. 74, as published in February, 1968, by the State of California Department of Water Resources, is designated as the water well standards of the City, regulating water well construction and the destruction of abandoned wells in the City.

A copy of such water well standards has been deposited in the office of the City Clerk and shall be at all times maintained by such clerk for use and examination by the public. (Prior code § 7.32)

 

15.40.020 Definitions.
Whenever any of the following names or terms are used in the water well standards or in this chapter, each such name or term shall be deemed and construed to have the meaning ascribed to it in this section as follows:

“City” means the City of Claremont.

“Enforcing agency” means the City Engineering and building departments. (Prior code § 7.33)

 

15.40.030 Section 21 amended—Definition of abandoned well.
Section 21 of the water well standards adopted by this chapter is amended to read as follows:

Section 21. Definition of abandoned well.

A well is considered abandoned when it has not been used for a period of one year, unless the owner declares his or her intention to use the well again for supplying water or other associated purpose (such as an observation well or injection well). As evidence of his or her intentions for continued use, the owner shall properly maintain the well in such a way that:

1.     The well has no defects which will facilitate the impairment of quality of water in the well or in the water-bearing formations penetrated.

2.     The well is covered with an appropriate locked cap.

3.     The well is marked so that it can be clearly seen.

4.     The area surrounding the well is kept clear of brush or debris.

If the pump has been removed for repair or replacement, the well shall not be considered abandoned, provided that evidence of repair can be shown. During the repair period, the well shall be adequately covered to prevent injury to people and to prevent the entrance of undesirable water or foreign matter.

Observation wells used in the investigation or management of ground water basins by governmental agencies or other appropriate engineering or research organizations are not considered abandoned so long as they are maintained for this purpose. However, such wells shall be covered with an appropriate cap, bearing the label observation well, and the name of the agency or organization and preferably shall be locked when measurements are not being made. When these wells are no longer used for this purpose or for supplying water, they shall be considered abandoned.

A well shall not be considered abandoned when the engineering and building departments determine that such well is necessary to relieve present or prospective artesian pressure.

(Prior code § 7.34)

 

15.40.040 Section 21.1 added—Declaration of abandoned well.
Section 21.1 is added to the water well standards adopted in this chapter to read as follows:

Section 21.1. Declaration of abandoned well.

In the event the enforcing agency desires to have a well declared abandoned, it shall file a written request for such determination with the City. The City Clerk shall set the matter for public hearing by the City Council and fix the date, time and place for such hearing. The City Clerk shall give mailed notice of such hearing to the owner of the property upon which the well sought to be declared abandoned is situated. Such notice shall be mailed at least fifteen days prior to the date specified therein for the hearing.

(Prior code § 7.34)

 

15.40.050 Section 23.1 added—Notice of destruction of well.
Section 23.1 is added to the water well standards adopted in this chapter to read as follows:

Section 23.1. Notice of destruction of well.

Notice must be given to the Director of Public Works five working days prior to the intended destruction of a well. The Director of Public Works is authorized to grant a permit for such destruction if he or she is satisfied that the proposed work meets the Water Well Standards Code. The permit will allow the Director of Public Works to inspect, regulate and make a record of the well destruction. The fee for such a permit will be as set by the City Council from time to time.

(Prior code § 7.34)

Chapter 15.42 CROSS-LOT DRAINAGE
15.42.010 Cross-lot drainage defined.
“Cross-lot drainage” means a system of drainage, approved by the City as part of the plan for a subdivision or parcel map, in which water from one parcel drains across one or more other parcels prior to reaching a public street, storm drain or alley. (79-6)

 

15.42.020 Interference with cross-lot drainage prohibited.
No person in possession of land within the City, whether as owner, purchaser under contract, lessee, tenant or licensee shall build, create, install or maintain any structure, landscaping or grade changes which will interfere with cross-lot drainage. For the purposes of this chapter, “structure” shall have the meaning set forth in Chapter 16.415 of this Code, except that it shall include improvements to outdoor areas such as patios, paved areas, walks, swimming pools, tennis courts, walls, fences and similar improvements. (79-6)

Chapter 15.46 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
15.46.010 Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of California has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560, and 65800, conferred upon local government units the authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City Council of the City of Claremont does hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations. (06-04)

 

15.46.020 Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:

A.     Protect human life and health;

B.     Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;

C.    Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

D.    Minimize prolonged business interruptions;

E.     Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

F.     Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage;

G.    Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and

H.    Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. (06-04)

 

15.46.030 Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application.

“Area of special flood hazard” means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.

“Base flood” means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the “100 year flood”). Base flood is the term used throughout this ordinance.

“Building” see “Structure.”

“Development” means any man made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.

“Flood or flooding” means:

1.     A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; or mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding as defined herein and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current.

2.     The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in this definition.

“Floodplain or flood prone area” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source – see “Flooding.”

“Floodplain Administrator” is the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.

“Floodplain management” means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.

“Floodplain management regulations” means this ordinance and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of police power which control development in flood prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.

“Governing body” is the City Council of the City of Claremont empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.

“Historic structure” means any structure that is:

1.     Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

2.     Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;

3.     Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or

4.     Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states with approved programs.

“Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”

“Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

“New construction,” for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

“One hundred year flood” or “100 year flood”—See “Base flood.”

“Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:

1.     Built on a single chassis;

2.     400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

3.     Designed to be self propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and

4.     Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

“Start of construction” includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

“Structure” means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home.

“Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

“Substantial improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:

1.     Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or

2.     Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure.” (06-04)

 

Article I. General Provisions
15.46.051 Lands to which this chapter applies.
This chapter shall apply to all areas identified as flood-prone within the jurisdiction of the City of Claremont. (06-04)

 

15.46.052 Basis for establishing flood-prone areas.
The Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood data available from other federal or state agencies or other source to identify flood-prone areas within the jurisdiction of the City of Claremont. This data will be on file at City Hall, Engineering Division, 207 Harvard Avenue, Claremont, CA 91711. (06-04)

 

15.46.053 Compliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the term of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the City of Claremont from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (06-04)

 

15.46.054 Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (06-04)

 

15.46.055 Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:

A.     Considered as minimum requirements;

B.     Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

C.    Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. (06-04)

 

15.46.056 Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man made or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of City of Claremont any officer or employee thereof, the State of California, or the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (06-04)

 

15.46.057 Severability.
This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. (06-04)

 

Article II. Administration
15.46.061 Establishment of development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained for all proposed construction or other development in the community, including the placement of manufactured homes, so that it may be determined whether such construction or other development is within flood-prone areas. (06-04)

 

15.46.062 Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
The City Engineer is hereby appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions. (06-04)

 

15.46.063 Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

A.     Permit Review. Review all development permit applications to determine that:

1.     Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;

2.     All other required state and federal permits have been obtained; and

3.     The site is reasonably safe from flooding.

B.     Review and Use of Any Other Base Flood Data. The Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood data available from other federal or state agency or other source. (06-04)

 

Article III. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
15.46.071 Standards of construction.
If a proposed building site is in a flood-prone area, all new construction and substantial improvements, including manufactured homes, shall:

A.     Be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.

B.     Be constructed:

1.     With materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;

2.     Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;

3.     With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. (06-04)

 

15.46.072 Standards for subdivisions or other proposed new development.
If a subdivision proposal or other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, is in a flood-prone area, any such proposals shall be reviewed to assure that:

A.     All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the flood prone area;

B.     All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and

C.    Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. (06-04)

 

15.46.073 Standards for utilities.
A.     All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate:

1.     Infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and

2.     Discharge from the systems into floodwaters.

B.     On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding. (06-04)

Chapter 15.50 SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM EXPEDITED REVIEW PROCESS
15.50.010 Definitions.
A.     “Solar energy system” means either of the following:

1.     Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating.

2.     Any structural design feature of a building, whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electrical generation, space heating or cooling, or for water heating.

B.     “Small residential rooftop solar energy system” means all of the following:

1.     A solar energy system that is no larger than ten (10) kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or thirty (30) kilowatts thermal.

2.     A solar energy system that conforms to State fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the City of Claremont.

3.     A solar energy system that is installed on the roof of a single- or duplex-family dwelling.

4.     A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the Claremont Municipal Code. (15-07)

 

15.50.020 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to adopt an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process that complies with the Solar Rights Act and AB 2188 (Chapter 521, Statutes 2014) to achieve timely and cost effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. This chapter encourages the use of solar systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the City of Claremont, and expanding the ability of property owners to install solar energy systems. This chapter allows the City of Claremont to achieve these goals while protecting the public health and safety. (15-07)

 

15.50.030 Applicability.
This chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the City of Claremont. Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type or components of a small rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit. (15-07)

 

15.50.040 Solar energy system requirements.
A.     All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards, and requirements imposed by the State of California, the City of Claremont and Los Angeles County Fire Department.

B.     Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical Codes.

C.    Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electrical Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. (15-07)

 

15.50.050 Duties of the Building Division and the Building Official.
A.     All documents required for submission of an expedited solar energy system application shall be made available on the publicly accessible City of Claremont website.

B.     Electronic plan check submittal (email, the Internet, facsimile) will be made available for all small residential rooftop solar energy systems.

C.    Electronic signatures will be accepted on forms and documents.

D.    The City of Claremont shall adopt a standard plan and checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review.

E.     The small residential rooftop solar system permit process, standard plan(s), and checklist shall substantially conform to recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklist and standard plans contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research.

F.     All fees prescribed for the permitting of small residential rooftop solar energy systems must comply with Government Code Sections 65850.555, 66015, 66016, and State Health and Safety Code Section 17951. (15-07)

 

15.50.060 Permit review and inspection requirements.
A.     The City of Claremont Building Division shall issue a permit for a small residential rooftop solar system within three days of receipt of a complete application that meets all the requirements of the expedited approved checklist and standard plan and does not have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety.

B.     Review of the permit application shall be limited to the Building Official’s review of whether the application meets local, State and Federal health and safety requirements.

C.    The City shall not condition approval of an application on the approval of an association, as defined in Section 4080 of the Civil Code.

D.    If an application is deemed incomplete, a written plan check correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be given to the applicant for resubmission.

E.     Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the Building Division for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review.

F.     The inspection shall be done in a timely manner and should include consolidated inspections. An inspection will be scheduled within two business days of a request and provide a two-hour inspection window.

G.    If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized but need not conform to the requirements of this chapter. (15-07)

 

15.50.070 Severability.
If any section, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining portions of this chapter shall nonetheless remain in full force and effect. (15-07)

Chapter 15.54 ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING SYSTEMS EXPEDITED, STREAMLINED PERMITTING PROCESS
15.54.010 Definitions.
A.     “Electric vehicle charging station” or “charging station” means any level of electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in compliance with Article 625 of the California Electrical Code, as it reads on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and delivers electricity from a source outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in vehicle.

B.     “Specific adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete.

C.    “Electronic submittal” means the utilization of one or more of the following:

1.     Electronic mail.

2.     The Internet.

3.     Facsimile. (17-06)

 

15.54.020 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote and encourage the use of electric vehicles by creating an expedited, streamlined permitting process for electric vehicle charging stations while promoting public health and safety and preventing specific adverse impacts in the installation and use of such charging stations. (17-06)

 

15.54.030 Applicability.
This chapter applies to the permitting of all electric vehicle charging systems in the City of Claremont. Electric vehicle charging systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type or components of an electric vehicle charging system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit. (17-06)

 

15.54.040 Electric vehicle charging system requirements.
A.     All electric vehicle charging systems shall meet the requirements of the California Electrical Code, the Society of Automotive Engineers, the National Electrical Manufacturers Association, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories, and rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability.

B.     Installation of electric vehicle charging stations shall be incorporated into the load calculations of all new or existing electrical services and shall meet the requirements of the California Electrical Code. Electric vehicle charging equipment shall be considered a continuous load.

C.    Anchorage of either floor-mounted or wall-mounted electric vehicle charging stations shall meet the requirements of the California Building or Residential Code as applicable per occupancy, and the provisions of the manufacturer’s installation instructions. Mounting of charging stations shall not adversely affect building elements. (17-06)

 

15.54.050 Duties of the Building Division and the Building Official.
A.     All documents required for submission of an electric vehicle charging system application shall be made available on the publicly accessible City of Claremont website.

B.     The City of Claremont shall adopt a checklist of all requirements with which electric vehicle charging systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review.

C.    The electric vehicle charging system permit process and checklist shall substantially conform to recommendations contained in the most current version of the Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting Checklist contained in the Zero-Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness Guidebook adopted by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research.

D.    The Building Official shall allow the electronic submittal of the electric vehicle charging station application. (17-06)

 

15.54.060 Permit review requirements.
A.     Review of the permit application shall be limited to the Building Official’s review of whether the application meets local, state, and federal health and safety requirements. The application shall be administratively reviewed by the Building Official as a nondiscretionary permit.

B.     The City shall not condition approval of an application on the approval of an association, as that term is defined by Civil Code Section 4080.

C.    An application for an electric vehicle charging station shall be deemed complete and the permit available for issuance, when the Building Official determines that the application satisfies all the requirements found in the checklist.

D.    If an application is deemed incomplete, a written plan check correction notice will be available to the applicant within ten (10) working days, detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be given to the applicant for resubmission.

E.     The Building Official, in consultation with the Community Development Director, may require an applicant to apply for a use permit if the Building Official finds, based on substantial evidence, that the electric vehicle charging station could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. The Building Official’s decision to require a use permit may be appealed by the applicant to the Planning Commission pursuant to Chapter 16.321 of this Code.

F.     If a use permit is required, the application for the use permit may be denied if the Planning Commission makes written findings based upon substantial evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of potential feasible alternatives for preventing the specific, adverse impact. Such decisions may be appealed to the City Council pursuant to Chapter 16.321 of this Code. (17-06)

TITLE 16 ZONING
Note
Chapter 16.000 TITLE, INTENT AND ZONING DISTRICTS CREATED
Chapter 16.001 RS SINGLE-FAMILY DISTRICTS
Chapter 16.004 HC HISTORICAL CLAREMONT DISTRICT
Chapter 16.007 RR RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Chapter 16.010 H HILLSIDE DISTRICT
Chapter 16.013 RM MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Chapter 16.014 HDR HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL OVERLAY DISTRICT
Chapter 16.016 EQ EQUESTRIAN OVERLAY DISTRICT
Chapter 16.019 AV ARBOL VERDE SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Chapter 16.033 RESIDENTIAL DENSITY BONUS
Chapter 16.036 INCLUSIONARY HOUSING REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 16.040 MU MIXED USE DISTRICTS
Chapter 16.051 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Chapter 16.054 B/IP BUSINESS/INDUSTRIAL PARK DISTRICT
Chapter 16.060 CV CLAREMONT VILLAGE DISTRICT
Chapter 16.063 CVO CLAREMONT VILLAGE OVERLAY DISTRICT
Chapter 16.066 CR COMMERCIAL RECREATION DISTRICT
Chapter 16.069 I INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICTS
Chapter 16.072 P/RC PARK/RESOURCE CONSERVATION DISTRICT
Chapter 16.075 WP WILDERNESS PARK DISTRICT
Chapter 16.078 P PUBLIC DISTRICT
Chapter 16.081 SP SPECIFIC PLAN DISTRICT
Chapter 16.087 AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS
Chapter 16.090 INCIDENTAL OUTDOOR USES
Chapter 16.093 DRIVE-THROUGH RESTAURANT FACILITIES
Chapter 16.094 DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES FOR BANKS AND PHARMACIES
Chapter 16.096 MINI-STORAGE/WAREHOUSE FACILITIES
Chapter 16.097 ADULT BUSINESSES
Chapter 16.098 BODY ART
Chapter 16.099 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
Chapter 16.100 ANTENNAS AND WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
Chapter 16.103 COMMERCIAL USE OF RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES
Chapter 16.130 SETBACKS, YARD LANDSCAPING STANDARDS, HEIGHTS OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
Chapter 16.131 WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 16.133 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES, FENCES, AND RECREATION COURTS
Chapter 16.136 PARKING, LOADING, AND TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MEASURES
Chapter 16.139 DEDICATION AND OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS
Chapter 16.142 VISUAL SCREENING
Chapter 16.145 SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
Chapter 16.148 PUBLIC ART PROGRAM
Chapter 16.151 UNDERGROUNDING UTILITIES
Chapter 16.154 ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTIVE STANDARDS
Chapter 16.157 GARAGE SALES OR OCCASIONAL SALES
Chapter 16.200 TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEES
Chapter 16.203 FIRE PROTECTION FACILITIES AND SERVICES
Chapter 16.206 OTHER PUBLIC FACILITY IMPACT FEES
Chapter 16.209 FEE ADJUSTMENTS AND APPEALS
Chapter 16.300 ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW
Chapter 16.301 BUILDING CONSERVATION/DEMOLITION
Chapter 16.303 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
Chapter 16.306 SPECIAL USE AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITS
Chapter 16.309 VARIANCES
Chapter 16.312 MINOR EXCEPTION PERMITS
Chapter 16.315 ZONE CHANGES AND CODE AMENDMENTS
Chapter 16.318 GENERAL PLAN AMENDMENTS
Chapter 16.321 APPEALS AND COUNCIL REVIEW
Chapter 16.324 COMMUNITY HOUSING CONVERSIONS
Chapter 16.327 HOME OCCUPATION PERMITS
Chapter 16.330 SPECIAL OUTDOOR USE PERMITS
Chapter 16.333 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS
Chapter 16.336 SURFACE MINING AND RECLAMATION
Chapter 16.339 FINDING OF SIMILAR USE
Chapter 16.400 NONCONFORMITIES
Chapter 16.403 CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY
Chapter 16.406 VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT
Chapter 16.409 ZONING MAP ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 16.412 ANNEXED AREAS
Chapter 16.415 SEVERABILITY
Chapter 16.900 GLOSSARY OF DEFINITIONS

Note
*      Prior history: Included in the Claremont Land and Use Development Code, Ordinance No. 599, adopted April 1958, and amended through January 9, 2007, and codified as part of the Claremont Municipal Code, Ordinance No. 2008-05, April 8, 2008.

Chapter 16.000 TITLE, INTENT AND ZONING DISTRICTS CREATED
16.000.000 TITLE
Title 16 of the Municipal Code shall be known as the “Zoning Ordinance of the City of Claremont.”

 

16.000.010 INTENT
It is the intent of Title 16 to promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare by encouraging the most appropriate and desirable use and development of land, in accordance with the General Plan of the City of Claremont.

 

16.000.020 ZONING DISTRICTS CREATED
For the intent and purpose of this title, the following Zoning Districts are established and are delineated as shown on City of Claremont’s “Official Zoning Map.”

Symbol

District Name

RS

Single-Family Residential Districts

HC

Historical Claremont District

RR

Rural Residential Districts

H

Hillside District

RM

Medium Density Residential Districts

EQ

Equestrian Overlay District

AV

Arbol Verde Single-Family Residential Districts

MU

Mixed Use Districts

CP

Commercial Professional District

CN

Commercial Neighborhood District

CL

Commercial Limited District

CH

Commercial Highway District

CF

Commercial Freeway District

B/IP

Business/Industrial Park District

CV

Claremont Village District

CVO

Claremont Village Overlay District

CR

Commercial Recreation District

IE

Institutional Educational District

IR

Institutional Residential District

P/RC

Park/Resource Conservation District

WP

Wilderness Park District

P

Public District

SP

Specific Plan Districts

Chapter 16.001 RS SINGLE-FAMILY DISTRICTS
16.001.000 INTENT
The RS Single-Family Residential Districts are intended to provide for individual homes on separate lots, each for the occupancy of one family, at various minimum lot sizes (indicated in parentheses after the “RS” designation) to provide for a range of yard and lot sizes which are based on the location, density and topographical considerations of the General Plan of the City of Claremont, and to provide for other uses that are associated and compatible with the residential uses.

No building, structure or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be erected or altered in the RS Districts except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (08-05)

 

16.001.010 USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED
Only the following uses and development shall be conducted or constructed as a matter of right in the RS Districts:

A.     One single-family dwelling unit per lot for occupancy by no more than one family.

B.     Accessory buildings and structures, including fences and recreation courts, and accessory uses, located on the same lot as a single-family dwelling unit subject to the development standards and requirements of this chapter and Chapter 16.133.

Accessory buildings shall have a maximum floor area of 300 square feet plus an additional 400 square feet may be permitted for required parking.

C.    The renting of no more than one sleeping room per dwelling unit for occupancy by no more than two persons. Meals may be provided in connection with such renting, or the dwelling’s kitchen facilities may be shared with tenants.

1.     Rental Rooms

Rental rooms shall not contain kitchens. Rental rooms shall not be rented for a period of less than 30 days.

2.     Rental Permit

Prior to the renting of any room in a Single-Family Residential District, a rental permit shall be obtained from the Department of Community Development. A permit shall be issued by the Department of Community Development only after the Director of Community Development has determined that the following criteria are satisfied:

a.     The proposed room rental meets all building and health requirements.

b.     There is sufficient parking.

c.     The proposed rental will not result in an adverse impact on the single-family character of the neighborhood. The number of such rentals in the neighborhood shall be a factor in determining adverse impact.

The fee for this permit shall be determined by resolution of the City Council. The permit shall be valid for a period of three years, provided the permit may be revoked if the Director of Community Development determines that the above criteria are no longer satisfied.

D.    Home occupations, subject to approval pursuant to Chapter 16.327.

E.     The keeping of animals as pets (not for commercial purposes), subject to Title 6 of the Claremont Municipal Code.

F.     The growing of crops and fruits.

G.    Parks.

H.    Accessory second units subject to the development standards of this chapter and requirements of Chapter 16.333, Accessory Second Units. (08-05)

 

16.001.020 SPECIAL USES AND DEVELOPMENTS
Uses and developments listed in Chapter 16.306 as permitted subject to the issuance of a special use and development permit are allowed in the RS Districts if not contrary to the intent of this chapter. (08-05)

 

16.001.030 CONDITIONAL USES
The following uses and developments are permitted in RS Districts subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 16.303:

A.     Wholesale plant nurseries, and similar commercial/agricultural uses.

B.     Other uses listed in Chapter 16.303, as permitted in RS Districts or any district subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit if not contrary to the intent of this chapter. (14-04; 08-05)

 

16.001.040 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and structures in the RS Districts. For exceptions to and explanatory description of these standards and for standards for accessory structures, fences, recreation courts, signs, parking, off-site improvements and dedication requirements, visual screening, solar energy systems, community art, and undergrounding utilities, see Chapters 16.130 through 16.151.

A.     Minimum Lot Area and Dimensions

1.     RS (20,000) District

a.     Size – 20,000 sq. ft.

b.     Width – 90 ft.

c.     Depth – 120 ft.

In the RS (20,000) District, all new development and grading shall be subject to the new development and grading standards of Chapter 16.010.

2.     RS (13,000) District

a.     Size – 13,000 sq ft.

b.     Width – 90 ft.

c.     Depth – 120 ft.

3.     RS (10,000) District

a.     Size – 10,000 sq. ft.

b.     Width – 75 ft.

c.     Depth – 100 ft.

4.     RS (8,000) District

a.     Size – 8,000 sq ft.

b.     Width – 65 ft.

c.     Depth – 100 ft.

For existing lots not meeting these standards, see Chapter 16.400.

B.     Maximum Lot Size

1.     Lots in the RS Districts shall not exceed the maximums listed below except as otherwise permitted by this subsection.

a.     RS (20,000) District – 30,000 square feet

b.     RS (13,000) District – 19,500 square feet

c.     RS (10,000) District – 15,000 square feet

d.     RS (8,000) District – 12,000 square feet

2.     Two or more contiguous parcels that have been held by the same owner and developed, and continually used from the time of their development, as one residential property may be merged to create a single lot exceeding the above maximum lot sizes if one of the following requirements is met:

a.     No more than one of the affected parcels has ever been developed with a structure other than accessory structures, or a structure other than an accessory structure, for which a building permit was issued or for which a building permit was not required at time of construction, that is also partially sited on a contiguous parcel.

b.     No more than one parcel has legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety equipment access and maneuverability.

3.     All existing lots that exceed the above maximums and which were created pursuant to the ordinances and regulations in effect at the time of their creation shall be considered conforming lots not subject to the provisions of Chapter 16.400.

(Note: Existing subsections 16.001.040.B and 16.001.040.C are renumbered as 16.001.040.C and 16.001.040.D to accommodate the above addition.)

C.    Minimum Setbacks

1.     RS (20,000) District

a.     Front – 15 ft. Except that a vehicle entrance of a garage or carport that directly faces onto the street shall be set back 18.5 ft.

b.     Interior Side if not adjacent to slope – 8 ft.

c.     Interior Side if adjacent to slope – 5 ft. from property line or 8 ft. from mid-point of slope, which ever is greater

d.     Street Side if reversed corner lot – 15 ft.

e.     Street Side if standard corner lot – 10 ft.

f.      Rear – 8 ft.

2.     RS (13,000) District

a.     Front – 30 ft.

b.     Interior Side – 8 ft.

c.     Street Side if reversed corner lot – 15 ft.

d.     Street Side if standard corner lot – 10 ft.

e.     Rear – 8 ft.

3.     RS (10,000) District

a.     Front – 25 ft.

b.     Interior Side – 8 ft.

c.     Street Side if reversed corner lot – 15 ft.

d.     Street Side if standard corner lot – 10 ft.

e.     Rear – 8 ft.

4.     RS (8,000) District

a.     Front – 25 ft.

b.     Interior Side – 8 ft.

c.     Street Side if reversed corner lot – 15 ft.

d.     Street Side if standard corner lot – 10 ft.

e.     Rear – 8 ft.

For description, clarification and exceptions to minimum setbacks, see Chapter 16.130.

For additional garage or carport setback requirements and standards for driveways and parking spaces, see Chapter 16.136, Parking, Loading, and Transportation Demand Management Measures.

D.    Maximum Lot Coverage

1.     RS (20,000) District – 30%

2.     RS (13,000) District – 35%

3.     RS (10,000) District – 35%

4.     RS (8,000) District – 40%

Calculation shall include all areas of the lot covered by any buildings including carports, and covered patios and decks, and balconies and decks more than three feet above grade. Lot coverage shall not include uncovered outdoor recreation courts and equipment, uncovered patios, walkways and driveways, pools, and uncovered decks and balconies no more than three feet above grade.

E.     Maximum Floor Area of Main Residential Structure (All RS Districts)

The total floor area of the main residential structure shall not exceed a maximum of 2000 square feet plus 15 percent of the square footage of the net lot area, or the maximum floor area as set forth in the following table for each RS District, whichever is less:

RS District

Maximum floor area of main residential

structure regardless of lot size

RS (8000)

Maximum 4,800 square feet

RS (10,000)

Maximum 5,250 square feet

RS (13,000)

Maximum 5,925 square feet

RS (20,000)

Maximum 7,500 square feet

 

For purposes of this section, the calculation of the floor area shall include the floor areas of all floors of the main residential structure including the area of an upper level not separated from a lower level by a floor/ceiling assembly including the upper and lower areas of any stairwell, floor areas of attached garages, carports, covered patios, and any open inner courtyard/patio area that is bounded on more than 80 percent of its perimeter by exterior walls of the main residential structure. Floor area calculation shall not include the floor area of detached accessory structures, except as noted below, uncovered patios, decks or balconies, basements where the finished floor level directly above is less than six feet above grade at any point, or uncovered courtyard area that is not bounded on more than 80 percent of its perimeter by exterior walls of the main residential structure.

When any accessory building is located less than six feet from a main residential building, the floor area of such accessory building shall be included in the floor area calculation of the main residential building. The accessory building shall still be subject to all accessory building standards.

All existing structures that exceed the above maximums and which were constructed pursuant to the ordinances and regulations in effect at the time of their construction shall be considered conforming buildings not subject to the provisions of Chapter 16.400.

F.     Maximum Floor Area of Second Story of Main Residential Structure

The total floor area of a second story of the main residential structure shall not exceed 40 percent of the maximum permitted floor area of the main residential structure.

G.    Minimum Floor Area Per Main Dwelling Unit

1.     RS (20,000) District – 1200 sq. ft.

2.     RS (13,000) District – 1200 sq. ft.

3.     RS (10,000) District – 1200 sq. ft.

4.     RS (8,000) District – 1000 sq. ft.

H.    Maximum Number of Stories (All RS Districts)

1.     Main Building – 2 stories

Two-story buildings, buildings with a height of more than 18 feet, and second-story additions are permitted only if the architectural criteria in Chapter 16.300 are met.

2.     Accessory Buildings – 1 story

I.      Maximum Height (All RS Districts)

1.     Main Building – 25 feet

2.     Accessory Buildings and Structures – 15 feet

3.     Athletic Apparatus and Children’s Play Equipment – 13 feet

For measurement of height and exceptions to height limits, see Chapter 16.130. All accessory buildings and structures are subject to requirements of Chapter 16.133.

J.     Minimum Number of Covered Parking Spaces – 2 spaces

Required spaces shall be covered and in a garage or carport. For design standards of parking spaces, see Chapter 16.136. (09-11; 08-05)

Chapter 16.004 HC HISTORICAL CLAREMONT DISTRICT
16.004.000 INTENT
The regulations and standards of this chapter are intended to preserve and protect the single-family residential character and the historic and architectural integrity of the HC Historical Claremont District while allowing for sensitive and compatible alterations, additions, and in-fill development. The character-defining features of the area, including scale, density, setbacks, development patterns, architecture, workmanship, materials, and landscape, must be maintained. Existing architectural elements and materials should be preserved in alterations and repairs. The restoration of deteriorated materials is encouraged. New additions and new development shall be sensitive to existing design patterns and scale. New materials shall be compatible with existing materials.

The HC Historical Claremont District is the oldest residential area in the City. The history of the neighborhood is evident in the large number of historically significant structures still maintained as single-family residences. The homes exhibit a variety of building styles from the turn of the century to the 1940’s, and they show a quality of workmanship and character not often found in current times. An interesting and livable pattern of urban design has resulted from the area’s earliest stages of development. The homes vary in size, but are usually set back amidst tall trees on streets laid in a grid pattern featuring parkways planted with street trees. One development pattern evident is that large homes are mixed with small homes, and the corner house tends to be larger and more predominant, serving as anchors for the rest of the block. Another pattern is that garages are frequently accessed from or located to the rear of properties, making for an attractive streetscape.

The HC District enriches the entire community. The scale and density of the buildings, architectural styles, relationship of buildings with open areas, mature landscaping, and residential continuity of the area contribute considerably to the City’s unique small town character, and help to mark Claremont as a distinctive place. The district provides a sense of history by evoking early stages of the City’s history.

No building, structure, or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be erected or altered in the HC District, except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Non-residential uses, housing facilities of a commercial nature, educational and non-profit institutional uses, and parking lots are incompatible with the HC District, and shall be prohibited uses as specified in this chapter. In addition, all new construction, exterior modifications, and site changes shall be subject to architectural review pursuant to Chapter 16.300. (08-05)

 

16.004.010 APPLICABILITY
The standards and regulations of this chapter shall apply to all new uses, new development, or redevelopment within the HC District. All uses and development which were initiated and developed pursuant to the ordinances and regulations in effect at the time of their development shall be considered legal, conforming uses not subject to the provisions in Chapter 16.400. Such uses or development may be continued, rehabilitated and reconstructed subject only to architectural review pursuant to Chapter 16.300, provided there is no intensification of use and any reconstruction of structures duplicates the size, location and footprint of the destroyed structures. Any residential development destroyed by fire or earthquake, or other natural catastrophe, may be rebuilt at the previous residential density. (08-05)

 

16.004.020 PERMITTED USES
Only the following uses and development shall be conducted or constructed as a matter of right in the HC District:

A.     One single-family dwelling per lot for occupancy by not more than one family.

B.     Accessory buildings and structures, including fences and recreation courts, located on the same lot as a single-family dwelling unit subject to the development standards and requirements of this chapter, Chapter 16.400, and the following additional standard:

Accessory buildings shall have a maximum floor area of 300 square feet plus an additional 400 square feet may be permitted for required parking.

C.    The renting of rooms to no more than three persons aggregate per lot or parcel. Meals may be provided in connection with such renting or the dwelling’s kitchen facilities may be shared with tenants. This subsection shall not apply to the rental of entire dwelling units.

1.     Rental Rooms

Rental rooms shall not contain kitchens. Rental rooms shall not be rented for less than 30 days. No more than two persons shall occupy one rental room. Rental rooms shall be located within a dwelling unit.

2.     Rental Permit

Prior to the renting of any room in the HC District, a rental permit shall be obtained from the Department of Community Development. A permit shall be issued by the Department only after the Director of Community Development has determined that the following criteria are satisfied:

a.     The proposed room rental meets all building and health requirements.

b.     There is sufficient parking.

c.     The proposed rental will not result in an adverse impact on the single-family character of the neighborhood. The number of such rentals in the neighborhood shall be a factor in determining adverse impact.

The fee for this permit shall be determined by resolution of the City Council. The permit shall be valid for a period of three years, provided that the permit may be revoked if the Director of Community Development determines that the above criteria are no longer satisfied.

D.    Home occupations pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 16.327 of this title.

E.     The keeping of animals as pets (not for commercial purposes), subject to Title 6 of the Claremont Municipal Code.

F.     The growing of crops and fruits.

G.    Parks.

H.    Accessory second units subject to approval of an accessory second unit permit pursuant to Chapter 16.333, Accessory Second Units. (08-05)

 

16.004.030 SPECIAL USES AND DEVELOPMENTS
The uses and developments listed in Chapter 16.306 as permitted subject to issuance of a special use and development permit are allowed in the HC District if not contrary to the intent of this chapter. (08-05)

 

16.004.040 CONDITIONAL USES
A.     The following uses and developments are not permitted as a right; however, they may be permitted in the HC District subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 16.303:

The uses identified in Chapter 16.303 as permitted in the HC District or in any district subject to a conditional use permit if not contrary to the intent of this chapter.

B.     Architectural Commission Review

The Architectural Commission shall, upon approval of a conditional use permit by the Planning Commission, have the responsibility of reviewing and approving any new architectural feature including, but not limited to, site plan, elevations, building materials, colors, textures, and landscaping, to determine if such is consistent with the intent of this chapter.

In reviewing development and uses requiring conditional use permits, the Architectural Commission may modify or add requirements to the conditional use permits during the architectural review process in order to meet the intent of this chapter. (08-05)

 

16.004.050 USES PROHIBITED
The following uses have been identified as not meeting the spirit or intent of this chapter and are, therefore, expressly prohibited:

A.     Any nonresidential use not expressly permitted.

B.     Housing facilities of a commercial character such as hotels, motels, motor hotels, mobile home courts, bed and breakfast establishments, and uses of a similar nature.

C.    Nonresidential educational uses, private non-profit or profit institutions at collegiate and higher level.

D.    Parking lots. (08-05)

 

16.004.060 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and structures in the Historical Claremont District. For exceptions to and explanatory descriptions of these standards, and for standards for accessory structures, fences, recreation courts, signs, parking, off-site improvements and dedication requirements, visual screening, solar energy systems, community art, and undergrounding utilities, see Chapters 16.130 through 16.151.

A.     Minimum Lot Area and Dimensions

1.     Minimum lot size – 7500 sq. ft.

2.     Minimum lot width – 50 feet

3.     Minimum lot depth – 150 feet

For existing lots not meeting these standards, see Chapter 16.400.

B.     Maximum Lot Size

1.     Lots in the HC District shall not exceed 11,250 square feet excepting two or more contiguous parcels that have been held by the same owner and developed, and continually used from the time of their development, as one residential property may be merged to create a single lot exceeding 11,250 square feet if one of the following requirements is met:

a.     No more than one of the affected parcels has ever been developed with structures other than accessory structures, or a structure other than an accessory structure, for which a permit was issued or for which a building permit was not required at time of construction, that is also partially sited on a contiguous parcel.

b.     No more than one parcel has legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety equipment access and maneuverability.

2.     All existing lots greater than 11,250 square feet were created pursuant to the ordinances and regulations in effect at the time of their creation shall be considered conforming lots not subject to the provisions of Chapter 16.400.

C.    Minimum Setbacks

1.     Front yard setback – 20 feet

2.     Interior side setback – 5 feet

3.     Street side setback – 15 feet

4.     Rear yard setback – 5 feet

For description, clarification and exceptions to minimum setbacks, see Chapter 16.130.

When a garage or carport has straight vehicular access from a public street, said garage or carport shall be set back at least 20 feet from the street side property line.

D.    Maximum Number of Stories

1.     Main Building – 2 stories

Two-story buildings, buildings with a height of more than 18 feet and second-story additions are permitted only when the architectural criteria in Chapter 16.300 are met.

2.     Accessory Buildings – 1 story

E.     Maximum Height

1.     Main Building – 25 feet

2.     Accessory Building and Structure – 15 feet

3.     Athletic Apparatus and Children’s Play Equipment – 13 feet

For measurement of height and exceptions to height limits, see Chapter 16.130. All accessory buildings and structures are subject to requirements of Chapter 16.133.

F.     Maximum Lot Coverage – 35%

Calculation shall include all areas of the lot covered by any buildings including carports, covered patios, and covered decks, and balconies and decks more than three feet above ground. Lot coverage shall not include uncovered outdoor recreation courts and equipment, uncovered patios, walkways and driveways, pools, and uncovered decks and balconies no more than three feet above grade.

G.    Maximum Floor Area of Main Residential Building

The maximum floor area of the main residential structure shall not exceed a maximum of 2,000 square feet plus 15 percent of the square footage of the net lot area, or 4,688 square feet, whichever is less.

For purposes of this section, the calculation of floor area shall include the floor areas of all floors of the main residential structure including the area of an upper level not separated from a lower level by a floor/ceiling assembly including the upper and lower areas of any stairwell, floor areas of attached garages, carports, covered patios, and any open inner courtyard/patio area that is bounded on more than 80 percent of its perimeter by exterior walls of the main residential structure. Floor area calculation shall not include the floor area of detached accessory structures, except as noted below, uncovered patios, decks or balconies, basements where the finished floor level directly above is less than six feet above grade at any point, or uncovered courtyard area that is not bounded on more than 80 percent of its perimeter by exterior walls of the main residential structure.

All existing structures that exceed the above maximum and which were constructed pursuant to the ordinances and regulations in effect at the time of their construction shall be considered conforming buildings not subject to the provisions of Chapter 16.400.

H.    Maximum Floor Area of Second Story of Main Residential Structure

The total floor area of a second story of the main residential structure shall not exceed 40 percent of the maximum permitted floor area of the main residential structure.

I.      Minimum Number of Covered Parking Spaces – 2 spaces

Required spaces shall be covered and in a garage or carport. For design standards of parking spaces, see Chapter 16.136. (09-11)

 

16.004.070 ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW
All new construction of buildings and structures, or exterior alterations, shall be subject to architectural review pursuant to Chapter 16.300 of this title. Architectural review may include staff, Architectural Commission or Council review. (12-01)

Chapter 16.007 RR RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
16.007.000 INTENT
The RR Rural Residential Districts are intended to provide for single-family homes and agricultural uses with a density of one dwelling unit per one gross acre in the RR (35,000) District and one dwelling unit per 1.25 gross acre in the RR (1 acre) District to promote variety in the rural zone, as well as to provide for a range of lot sizes based on location, density, and topographical considerations consistent with the General Plan. Other uses which are associated and compatible with residential uses and the rural character of the area are also allowed. The calculation of gross lot area shall include the area of the property plus one-half of the area of any portion of a street abutting the property.

All new development must be in harmony with the rural character of this area. The area’s rural character is depicted by the presence of agricultural features such as citrus groves, barns, rock walls, pump houses built of rock, and other characteristics such as mountain vistas, minimal outdoor artificial lighting, narrow streets accompanied by equestrian, pedestrian, and bike trails, and native landscaping. The lack of such urban features as curb and gutters, streetlights, and sidewalks also contribute greatly to the rural character of this area. In addition to the above attributes, this area is identified by the General Plan as a significant aquifer recharge area which should be maintained.

No building, structure, or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be erected or altered in the RR Districts except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (08-05)

 

16.007.010 USES AND DEVELOPMENTS PERMITTED
Only the following uses and developments shall be permitted as a matter of right in the RR districts:

A.     One single-family dwelling unit per lot for occupancy by no more than one family.

B.     Accessory buildings and structures, including fences and recreation courts, and accessory uses located on the same lot as a single-family dwelling unit subject to the development standards and requirements of this chapter and Chapters 16.130 through 16.151. Specific size, height, and placement standards for accessory structures in the RR Rural Residential Districts are set forth below in Section 16.007.040.H of this chapter. General standards for accessory structures are set forth in Chapters 16.130 and 16.133.

The floor area of all accessory buildings shall be included in the calculation of lot coverage, which shall not exceed 20 percent.

C.    Tree farms and growing of citrus trees, crops, and fruit, provided no retail sales occur at the site.

D.    The renting of no more than one sleeping room per dwelling unit for occupancy by no more than two persons. Meals may be provided in connection with such renting, or the dwelling’s kitchen facilities may be shared with tenants.

1.     Rental Rooms

Rental rooms shall not contain kitchens. Rental rooms shall not be rented for periods of less than 30 days.

2.     Rental Permit

Prior to the renting of any room in the Rural Residential District, a rental permit shall be obtained from the Department of Community Development. A permit shall be issued by the Department of Community Development only after the Director of Community Development has determined that the following criteria are satisfied:

a.     The proposed room rental meets all building and health requirements.

b.     There is sufficient parking.

c.     The proposed rental will not result in an adverse impact on the single-family character of the neighborhood. The number of such rentals in the neighborhood shall be a factor in determining adverse impact.

The fee for this permit shall be determined by resolution of the City Council. The permit shall be valid for a period of three years, provided the permit may be revoked if the Director of Community Development determines that the above criteria are no longer satisfied.

E.     Home occupations, subject to approval pursuant to Chapter 16.327.

F.     The keeping of animals as pets (not for commercial purposes), subject to Title 6 of the Claremont Municipal Code.

G.    The raising of livestock and large animals including horses, as accessory uses for hobby, 4H, educational, or other similar projects are permitted subject to review by staff for conformance with requirements of Title 6 of the Claremont Municipal Code.

H.    Parks.

I.      Accessory second units subject to approval of an accessory second permit pursuant to Chapter 16.333, Accessory Second Units. (08-05)

 

16.007.020 SPECIAL USES AND DEVELOPMENTS
The following uses and developments are permitted in the RR Districts subject to the issuance of a special use and development permit pursuant to Chapter 16.306:

A.     The retail sale of fruit, trees, and crops grown as an accessory use on the premises of a single-family dwelling.

B.     Other uses and developments listed in Chapter 16.306, as permitted subject to issuance of a special use and development permit if not contrary to the intent of this chapter. (08-05)

 

16.007.030 CONDITIONAL USES
The following uses and developments are permitted in the RR Districts subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 16.303.

A.     The keeping of more than four large animals on a lot for non-commercial purposes subject to Title 6 of the Claremont Municipal Code.

B.     Wholesale plant nurseries, and similar uses that the Planning Commission finds are appropriate and compatible with the intent of this chapter.

C.    Equestrian riding, training, or boarding facilities.

D.    Kennels.

E.     Other uses listed in Chapter 16.303, as permitted in RR Districts or district subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit if not contrary to the intent of this chapter. (14-04; 08-05)

 

16.007.040 STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and structures in the RR Districts. For exceptions to and explanatory descriptions of these standards, and for standards for accessory structures, fences, recreation courts, signs, parking, off-site improvements and dedication requirements, visual screening, solar energy systems, community art, and undergrounding utilities, see Chapters 16.130 through 16.151 and Chapters 16.200 through 16.209 for applicable development impact fee requirements.

Blaisdell Ranch (TM 34477) and any other Residential Unit Development (RUD) shall comply with the lot size, lot width and depth, setbacks, and perimeter fencing and planting plan requirements of its general development plan. In cases not addressed in a general development plan, the provisions of this chapter shall apply.

A.     Minimum Lot Area and Dimensions

1.     RR (35,000)

a.     Minimum Lot Area – 35,000 sq. ft.

b.     Minimum Lot Width – 130 ft.

c.     Minimum Lot Depth – 150 ft.

2.     RR (1 acre)

a.     Minimum Lot Area – 1 acre

b.     Minimum Lot Width – 150 ft.

c.     Minimum Lot Depth – 200 ft.

B.     Minimum Front Setbacks

1.     Forty (40) feet for structures or portions of structures which do not exceed a height of 12 feet, or an overall height of 16 feet as measured to the highest portion of a roof having a minimum pitch of 2.5:12.

2.     Sixty (60) feet for all other structures or portions or portions thereof that exceed the height limitations set forth in subsection 1 above.

C.    Minimum Rear Setback

1.     RR (35,000) – 20 feet.

2.     RR (1 acre) – 25 feet.

For properties with a rear yard adjacent to Mills and Padua Avenues and Mt. Baldy Road, an additional ten-foot rear setback is required for structures other than a fence or wall. A fence shall be required to be set back 25 feet from a rear property line adjacent to Mills and Padua Avenues and Mt. Baldy Road. For other properties, fences and walls not exceeding six (6) feet in height are allowed on the rear property line adjacent to a street.

D.    Minimum Side Setback

1.     RR (35,000) – The total of both side yards shall equal 30 percent of the lot width, with not less than 15 feet for an interior side yard and not less than 25 feet for a street side yard.

2.     RR (1 acre) – The total of both side yards shall equal 50 feet, with not less than 20 feet on one side yard and not less than 25 feet for a street side yard.

For properties with a side yard adjacent to Mills and Padua Avenues and Mt. Baldy Road, an additional ten-foot street side setback is required for structures other than a fence or wall. A fence or wall shall be required to be set back 25 feet from a side property line adjacent to Mills and Padua Avenues and Mt. Baldy Road. For other properties, fences and walls not exceeding six (6) feet in height are allowed behind the first 20 feet of the required side yard setback adjacent to a street.

E.     Maximum Lot Coverage – 20%

Calculation shall include all areas of the lot covered by any buildings including carports, covered patios, and covered decks, and balconies and decks more than three feet above grade. Lot coverage shall not include uncovered outdoor recreation courts and equipment, uncovered patios, walkways and driveways, pools, uncovered decks no more than three feet above grade, and uncovered patios and balconies no more than three feet above grade.

F.     Maximum Floor Area of Main Residential Structure

The maximum floor area of the main residential structure shall not exceed a maximum of 2,000 square feet plus 15 percent of the square footage of the net lot area, or 9,750 square feet, whichever is less.

For purposes of this section, the calculation of floor area shall include the floor areas of all floors of the main residential structure including the area of an upper level not separated from a lower level by a floor/ceiling assembly including the upper and lower areas of any stairwell, floor areas of attached garages, carports, covered patios, and any open inner courtyard/patio area that is bounded on more than 80 percent of its perimeter by exterior walls of the main residential structure. Floor area calculation shall not include the floor area of detached accessory structures, except as noted below, uncovered patios, decks or balconies, basements where the finished floor level directly above is less than six feet above grade at any point, or uncovered courtyard area that is not bounded on more than 80 percent of its perimeter by exterior walls of the main residential structure.

When any accessory building is located less than six feet from a main residential building, the floor area of such accessory building shall be included in the floor area calculation of the main residential building. The accessory building shall still be subject to all accessory building standards.

All existing structures that exceed the above maximum and which were constructed pursuant to the ordinances and regulations in effect at the time of their construction shall be considered conforming buildings and not subject to the provisions of Chapter 16.400.

G.    Maximum Floor Area of Second Story of Main Residential Structure

The total floor area of a second story of the main residential structure shall not exceed 40 percent of the maximum permitted floor area of the main residential structure.

H.    Maximum Height and Stories of Main Residential Structure

A main residential structure shall have a height of no more than 25 feet and be no more than two stories. For measurement of height and exceptions to height limits, see Chapter 16.130.

I.      Size, Height and Location Standards for Accessory Buildings and Structures

1.     Maximum Floor Area

The floor area of an accessory building shall not exceed 700 square feet, or 40 percent of the first floor area of the main residential structure on the lot, whichever is greater.

2.     Maximum Height

a.     An accessory building shall not exceed one story or 15 feet in height except with a special use and development permit granted pursuant to Chapter 16.303. With a special use and development permit, an accessory structure that does not exceed 18 feet in height may be permitted.

b.     Athletic and children’s play equipment shall not exceed 13 feet in height, except with a special use and development permit granted pursuant to Chapter 16.303. With a special use and development permit, athletic and children’s play equipment that does not exceed 15 feet in height may be permitted.

For measurement of height and exceptions to height limit, see Chapter 16.130.

3.     Location Requirements

a.     All accessory structures and buildings shall be located such that they are substantially obstructed from street visibility and will not impinge on the privacy of adjacent properties.

b.     No accessory structure or building shall be located within required setbacks except as otherwise permitted in Chapter 16.130.

J.     Minimum Number of Covered Parking Spaces – 2 spaces

Required spaces shall be covered and in a garage or carport. For design standards of parking spaces, see Chapter 16.136.

K.     Lighting Standards

All exterior lighting shall conform to the outdoor lighting and glare standards set forth in the Rural Claremont Architectural and Landscape Standards and in Chapter 16.154 of this title. In addition to those standards, the following standards shall apply. In case of conflict, the provisions of this chapter shall take precedence.

1.     All exterior light fixtures over 60 watts shall be designed, constructed, mounted, and maintained so that the direct rays of the light(s) are directed downward into the interior of the lot.

2.     All outdoor lighting fixtures shall be incandescent or fluorescent lighting fixtures.

3.     No outdoor lighting shall be permitted where the light source or fixture is greater than 14 feet above grade level, except that when a lighting fixture is used to illuminate a second-story outside stairway, entry way, or a balcony, the fixture shall not be higher than eight (8) feet above the floor of the second story.

L.     Fencing Requirements

All fencing shall comply with the development standards of Chapter 16.133. Metal fences shall be a dark matte color.

M.    Residential Driveways

Driveways shall comply with the development standards of Chapter 16.136.

N.    Trail Dedication

Dedication for trails may be required by the Planning Commission when the Commission determines that the trails are necessary for implementing the circulation policies of the General Plan. (09-11; 08-05)

 

16.007.050 ARCHITECTURAL AND LANDSCAPE STANDARDS
Development regulated in this chapter shall comply with the Rural Claremont Architectural and Landscaped Standards. The intent of the standards is to ensure that development will be in harmony with the rural character of the area. Development means all new buildings, structures, and landscaping proposed by a developer or property owner of record. All development proposals shall be reviewed and approved by the Director of Community Development or his/her designee for conformance to the Rural Claremont Architectural and Landscape Standards prior to the developer and/or property owner of record securing permits and commencing work. The decision of the Director may be appealed to the Architectural Commission. (08-05)

 

16.007.060 ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTIVE STANDARDS
The environmental protective standards of Chapter 16.154 shall apply in the RR Districts with the following exceptions:

A.     All farm machinery and vehicles used in the production of crops and fruit raised within the district are permitted as a matter of right. The machines and vehicles need not be screened.

B.     Any building materials or equipment stored on any lot shall be screened from public view; said materials are not permitted in the street side setback area or in the front setback area. (08-05)

 

16.007.070 NONCONFORMITIES
Those lots, uses, and structures that were legal at the time of their creation, initiation or construction, but which become nonconforming as described in Chapter 16.400 shall be governed by the provisions of that chapter, subject to the following modifications:

A.     Legal nonconforming, single-family residences and accessory structures which are damaged or destroyed may be reconstructed even if the cost of restoration exceeds 50 percent of the replacement cost of the structure, provided reconstruction commences within one year from the date when the damage occurred. The Director of Community Development may grant an extension for good cause when the applicant presents proof of a hardship not of his or her own making.

B.     Legal nonconforming, single-family residences may be expanded, provided all new construction complies with the development standards of this chapter. No portion of the existing structure shall be required to be brought into compliance with the development standards of this chapter.

C.    All nonconforming lighting shall be brought into compliance with this chapter by January 1, 1988. (08-05)

Chapter 16.010 H HILLSIDE DISTRICT
16.010.000 INTENT
The Hillside District is intended to provide for limited uses of hillside areas which are consistent with the City’s General Plan. The mix of permitted uses, the intensity of uses, and the distribution of uses are to be based largely on natural environmental factors and accessibility to necessary facilities and services. The hillside areas must be kept in a natural state to the greatest extent feasible in order to protect the public health, safety and general welfare, and minimize the hazards identified in the Public Safety and Noise Element of the General Plan and to advance the goals and policies of the Open Space, Parkland and Conservation Element of the General Plan. Slope density regulations which correlate intensity of development to the steepness of terrain will be used to minimize grading, removal of vegetation, land instability, and fire hazards. Clustering of residential units will be encouraged. Transfer of development credits will also be used as a means of limiting residential development to areas designated on the General Plan. (08-05)

 

16.010.010 PERMITTED USES
A.     The following uses and development shall be permitted in the H District:

1.     In areas shown as Hillside Residential Overlay on the General Plan Land Use Plan, in areas within 500 feet of Webb Canyon Road or 300 feet of Base Line Road, the following uses and development are permitted provided proposed building sites and project accessibility meet the requirements of this chapter:

a.     One single-family dwelling unit per lot for occupancy by no more than one household.

b.     Accessory buildings and structures located on the same lot as a single-family dwelling unit subject to the development standards of this chapter and all other applicable provisions of this title.

c.     One accessory dwelling unit per lot subject to the development standards of this chapter and requirements of Chapter 16.333 entitled Accessory Second Units.

d.     Home occupations, subject to approval pursuant to Chapter 16.327.

e.     The growing of crops and fruits when accessory to and subordinate to a residential use.

f.      The keeping of animals as pets and not for commercial purposes, subject to Title 6 of this Code.

2.     Low intensity uses such as watershed, pasture, trails, and scientific study requiring no more than minor structures or minor terrain modification.

3.     Public parks and open spaces.

B.     The following uses and developments may be permitted in the H District with a conditional use permit:

1.     The keeping of large animals for commercial purposes and the keeping of large animals for non-commercial purposes in excess of that number permitted by Title 6 of the Claremont Municipal Code.

2.     The growing of crops and fruits.

3.     Organized equestrian riding, training and boarding.

4.     Limited commercial recreation uses suitable to open space areas.

5.     Other uses listed in Chapter 16.303, as permitted in any district with a conditional use permit subject to these uses being consistent with the intent of the Hillside District and the City’s General Plan.

C.    No building, structure or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be erected, altered or enlarged except in accordance with the provisions of this section. (14-04; 08-05)

 

16.010.020 REQUIREMENTS
The following requirements shall apply to all land and structures in the Hillside District:

A.     Residential Density

1.     Maximum residential density for a specific parcel shall not exceed the density limits set out in paragraph 2 of this subsection. The Planning Commission may, for reasons related only to the applicant’s parcel, require a density less than the maximum otherwise permitted upon a finding that the reduced maximum is necessary to implement specific policies in the General Plan.

In the case of Residential Unit Developments or residential developments utilizing transfer of development credits, the overall maximum density in a cluster area shall be 0.5 acres per dwelling unit.

2.     All Hillside District classifications are combined with a Slope-Density standard denoted as SD-l, SD-2, or SD-3. These Slope-Density standards establish different densities based on accessibility and location within the City. The Slope-Density standards are set forth on Tables 1, 2 and 3 of this section.

Column One, Gross Area per Dwelling Unit, shall be used for Residential Unit Developments, and Column Two, Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit, shall be used in all other cases. Gross Residential Area is the total area devoted exclusively to the use of the residents plus all trail easements, road rights-of-way and any open spaces meeting the requirements of Section 16.010.030, Transfer of Development Credits. Net residential area is the total area devoted exclusively to the use of the residents. Where lands are in excess of 50% slope, such lands shall be assigned a slope of 50% for purposes of determining the average slope of the parcel.

3.     Average slope shall be calculated by the following formula:

S

=

IL (0.00229)

 

 

A

where

S = Average natural ground slope of the total project area in percent

I = The contour interval in feet. (For parcels 20 acres or larger, the maximum contour interval shall be 40 feet. For parcels of less than 20 acres, contours shall meet the standards of Title 17 of this Code, unless the Director of Community Development finds a larger contour interval will provide reasonable accuracy for purposes of determining the average slope of the parcel under consideration.)

L = the total length of all contour lines within the total project, in feet.

A = the gross area of the project, in acres.

0.00229 = a constant used to convert square feet into acres x 100%

or

1 acre

x 100%

43,560 sq. ft.

 

The calculated average natural slope shall be rounded to the nearest whole number.

B.     Property Development Standards

1.     The following standards govern unless modified as part of a Residential Unit Development, Specific Plan, or Architectural Commission review:

 

SD-1

SD-2

SD-3

Minimum lot size

See Tables 1, 2, 3 – Slope Density Standards

Minimum lot width

150 ft.

200 ft.

250 ft.

Minimum lot depth

150 ft.

200 ft.

250 ft.

Minimum front yard setback

20 ft.

20 ft.

20 ft.

Minimum rear yard setback

10 ft.

10 ft.

10 ft.

Minimum street side yard setback

20 ft.

20 ft.

20 ft.

Minimum interior side yard setback

10 ft.

10 ft.

10 ft.

Maximum height

25 ft.

25 ft.

25 ft.

Required parking

2 spaces per dwelling unit*

          *  When any accessory building is located less than six feet from a main residential building, the floor area of such accessory building shall be included in the floor area calculation of the main residential building. The accessory building shall still be subject to all accessory building standards.

 

2.     Required parking need not be covered but must be screen from any public right-of-way.

3.     For exceptions and explanatory descriptions, for standards of accessory structures, fences, walls, and signs, and for off-site improvements and dedication requirements, see Chapters 16.133 through 16.139. All standards applicable to single-family residential districts apply to the property in the H (Hillside) District, excepting if modified as part of a specific plan or planned unit development.

TABLE 1

SLOPE DENSITY STANDARDS SD-1*

(Density Range of 1 acre per dwelling unit to 20 acres per dwelling unit)

 

Slope Category in Percent

Gross Area Per Dwelling Unit in Acres

Min. Lot Area per Dwelling Unit in Acres

Slope Category in Percent

Gross Area per Dwelling Unit in Acres

Min. Lot Area per Dwelling Unit in Acres

 

(1)

(2)

 

(1)

(2)

0

1.00

.92

25

1.90

1.75

1

1.02

.94

26

1.98

1.82

2

1.04

.95

27

2.05

1.89

3

1.06

.97

28

2.14

1.97

4

1.08

.99

29

2.23

2.05

5

1.10

1.02

30

2.33

2.15

6

1.13

1.04

31

2.43

2.24

7

1.15

1.06

32

2.55

2.35

8

1.18

1.08

33

2.68

2.48

9

1.21

1.11

34

2.82

2.61

10

1.23

1.13

35

2.99

2.75

11

1.26

1.16

36

3.16

2.93

12

1.30

1.19

37

3.37

3.12

13

1.33

1.22

38

3.60

3.33

14

1.36

1.25

39

3.86

3.58

15

1.40

1.29

40

4.17

3.87

16

1.44

1.32

41

4.52

4.20

17

1.48

1.36

42

4.95

4.61

18

1.52

1.40

43

5.46

5.09

19

1.56

1.44

44

6.10

5.70

20

1.61

1.48

45

6.90

6.46

21

1.67

1.53

46

7.94

7.46

22

1.72

1.58

47

9.35

8.83

23

1.78

1.64

48

11.36

10.81

24

1.84

1.69

49

14.49

13.94

 

 

 

50 & Over

20.00

19.61

 

* The values in this table are derived from the equations:

(1) Gross Area Per Dwelling Unit in Acres

1

 

1.0 – 0.019S

(2) Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit in Acres

1

 

1.089 – 0.02076S

Where S is the average natural ground slope in percent.

 

TABLE 2

SLOPE DENSITY STANDARDS SD-2*

(Density Range of 2 acres per dwelling unit to 20 acres per dwelling unit)

 

Slope Category in Percent

Gross Area Per Dwelling Unit in Acres

Min. Lot Area per Dwelling Unit in Acres

Slope Category in Percent

Gross Area per Dwelling Unit in Acres

Min. Lot Area per Dwelling Unit in Acres

 

(1)

(2)

 

(1)

(2)

0

2.00

1.85

25

3.64

3.38

1

2.04

1.89

26

3.76

3.50

2

2.07

1.92

27

3.89

3.62

3

2.11

1.96

28

4.03

3.76

4

2.16

2.00

29

4.18

3.90

5

2.20

2.04

30

4.35

4.06

6

2.24

2.08

31

4.52

4.22

7

2.29

2.12

32

4.72

4.40

8

2.34

2.17

33

4.92

4.60

9

2.39

2.21

34

5.15

4.82

10

2.44

2.26

35

5.41

5.06

11

2.49

2.31

36

5.68

5.32

12

2.55

2.37

37

5.99

5.61

13

2.61

2.42

38

6.33

5.94

14

2.67

2.48

39

6.71

6.31

15

2.74

2.54

40

7.14

6.72

16

2.81

2.61

41

7.63

7.19

17

2.88

2.68

42

8.20

7.74

18

2.96

2.75

43

8.85

8.37

19

3.04

2.82

44

9.62

9.12

20

3.13

2.90

45

10.53

10.01

21

3.22

2.99

46

11.63

11.10

22

3.31

3.08

47

12.99

12.45

23

3.41

3.17

48

14.71

14.17

24

3.52

3.28

49

16.95

16.45

 

 

 

50 & Over

20.00

19.61

 

* The values in this table are derived from the equations:

(1) Gross Area Per Dwelling Unit in Acres

1

 

0.5 – 0.009S

(2) Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit in Acres

1

 

0.54 – 0.00978S

Where S is the average natural ground slope in percent.

 

TABLE 3

SLOPE DENSITY STANDARDS SD-3*

(Density Range of 5 acres per dwelling unit to 20 acres per dwelling unit)

 

Slope Category in Percent

Gross Area Per Dwelling Unit in Acres

Min. Lot Area per Dwelling Unit in Acres

Slope Category in Percent

Gross Area per Dwelling Unit in Acres

Min. Lot Area per Dwelling Unit in Acres

 

(1)

(2)

 

(1)

(2)

0

5.00

4.59

25

8.00

7.43

1

5.08

4.66

26

8.20

7.62

2

5.15

4.73

27

8.40

7.82

3

5.24

4.81

28

8.62

8.03

4

5.32

4.89

29

8.85

8.25

5

5.41

4.97

30

9.09

8.49

6

5.49

5.05

31

9.35

8.74

7

5.59

5.14

32

9.62

9.00

8

5.68

5.23

33

9.90

9.28

9

5.78

5.32

34

10.20

9.57

10

5.88

5.42

35

10.53

9.89

11

5.99

5.52

36

10.87

10.23

12

6.10

5.62

37

11.23

10.59

13

6.21

5.73

38

11.63

10.98

14

6.33

5.84

39

12.05

11.40

15

6.45

5.96

40

12.50

11.84

16

6.58

6.08

41

12.99

12.33

17

6.71

6.20

42

13.51

12.87

18

6.85

6.33

43

14.08

13.44

19

6.99

6.47

44

14.71

14.08

20

7.14

6.61

45

15.34

14.77

21

7.30

6.76

46

16.13

15.54

22

7.46

6.92

47

16.95

16.39

23

7.63

7.08

48

17.46

17.34

24

7.81

7.25

49

18.87

18.40

 

 

 

50 & Over

20.00

19.61

 

* The values in this table are derived from the equations:

(1) Gross Area Per Dwelling Unit in Acres

1

 

0.2 – 0.003S

(2) Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit in Acres

1

 

0.218 – 0.00334S

Where S is the average natural ground slope in percent.

 

C.    New Developments

Any division of land into five (5) or more lots, or any proposal which would allow the construction of five (5) or more dwelling units, shall be permitted only in conjunction with this title.

D.    General Design Criteria

All new development shall be subject to architectural review pursuant to Chapter 16.300 of this title. In addition to the review criteria denoted in Chapter 16.300, the following criteria apply to new development:

1.     Plans for hillside developments shall conform to the provisions of the General Plan and any specific plans adopted for the hillside area.

2.     There shall be flexibility in the siting of dwelling units so as to best fit the natural terrain, minimize spoilage of the land and maintain the level of quality of the surrounding area.

3.     Outstanding natural features, such as the highest crest of the hill range, canyons, natural rock outcroppings, particularly desirable vegetation, and natural water courses, and areas particularly abundant in wildlife, shall be preserved.

4.     The introduction and conservation of plant material shall be required to protect slopes from slippage or soil erosion and to minimize the visual effects of any grading or construction on hillside areas, including the preservation of prominent trees.

5.     Buildings shall be designed to accommodate sloping sites and minimize the amount of grading required. The use of innovative building techniques to best blend buildings into the terrain is encouraged.

6.     Streets shall follow the natural contour lines wherever possible to minimize the amount of grading required, and street improvements and lighting shall harmonize with the natural character of the hillsides.

7.     Any view corridors or scenic vistas from adjacent development shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.

8.     The proposed development shall not be in conflict with the goals and policies of the Los Angeles County Fire Department or the Los Angeles County Flood Control District unless there is a finding by the Planning Commission that said goals and policies are not consistent with other adopted goals and policies of the City of Claremont.

E.     Fire Protection Standards

For fire protection standards, see the Fire Code and Building Code of the City of Claremont. Placement of buildings shall be such that required brush clearance may be performed within the limits of the development of which such buildings are a part. The entire foothills area shall be considered to be Fire Zone Four (4).

F.     Grading

The following standards shall apply to the grading of land and shall be in addition to the Grading Standards contained in the Building Code.

1.     No excavation or fill exceeding three (3) feet vertical height and no cut or fill slopes in excess of three (3) feet vertical height shall be created without the prior approval of the Director of Community Development, or the Planning Commission when such grading is in conjunction with a residential unit development. The Director’s decision may be appealed to the Planning Commission. The Director, and the Planning Commission on appeal or in reviewing grading plans for residential unit developments, shall find the following criteria are met by the grading plans:

a.     The extent of grading indicated is necessary for the use of property to the extent of the uses permitted by the Zoning Ordinance.

b.     The proposed grading will have no adverse environmental effect on surrounding property or the permitted use thereof.

c.     The proposed grading plan, when compared to possible alternative plans which would serve the same function, will result in the most natural appearance and greatest preservation of natural terrain and water courses possible.

d.     The landscape plans indicate sufficient permanent, fire-resistant plantings, preferably native, with adequate root systems to protect slopes from erosion and slippage, and to minimize the visual effects of grading and construction.

e.     The irrigation plans indicate a full-coverage system, adequate to permanently sustain the slope plantings.

2.     No cut or fill slopes shall be created which exceed 30 feet vertical height, or 400 feet in horizontal length (except that slopes required for public streets may exceed 400 feet in length); except that the Planning Commission may permit slopes exceeding these dimensions where the slopes will be the result of earth contouring which the Commission finds will result in a natural appearance and will not create geological or erosion hazards.

3.     All cut and fill slopes shall be contoured to present a natural appearance and shall be blended in with the natural grade, per a plan approved by the Director of Community Development or the Planning Commission when such grading is in conjunction with a residential unit development.

G.    Other Requirements

1.     All applications for subdivisions of land or proposed residential developments shall be accompanied by sufficient information as determined appropriate by the City to demonstrate compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the General Plan. The General Plan describes goals and policies to preserve natural open space, protect limited natural habitats and watershed areas, minimize natural hazards including fire and earthquake induced landslides, and promote fiscal stability of the City; and it shall be incumbent on applicants to perform those studies as deemed necessary by the City to address all potential environmental, safety, and economic issues related to the development of the applicant’s property.

2.     Open space easements shall be dedicated to the City covering such lands shown as Hillside (non-Hillside Residential Overlay) space as the City may require to implement the General Plan, said easements to be dedicated during final map recordation or during Architectural Commission review. (14-04; 12-01; 08-05)

 

16.010.030 TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT CREDITS
A.     Purpose

To provide a procedure whereby development credits may be transferred from parcels in the Hillside District to other parcels in the Hillside District with areas shown for housing clusters on the General Plan, and, furthermore, to stipulate conditions for ownership and use of non-Hillside Residential Overlay space.

B.     Definitions

1.     Donor Parcel – Parcel from which development credits are transferred.

2.     Receiver Parcel – Parcel to which development credits are transferred.

3.     Development Credit – A development credit is a potential entitlement to construct one dwelling on land within the area designated Hillside Residential Overlay in the General Plan, which may only be exercised when the development credit has been transferred pursuant to the provisions of this chapter from a donor to a receiver parcel and other applicable requirements are fulfilled.

C.    Applicability

The transfer of development credits may be authorized when the following conditions are met:

1.     Both the donor and receiver parcels are in the Hillside District; and

2.     The Planning Commission finds that the receiver parcel has sufficient area with the General Plan designation of Hillside Residential Overlay to accommodate the development credits determined for the receiver through slope-density standards plus the development credits to be transferred, and the entire development meets all applicable codes and General Plan policies.

D.    Procedure

The transfer of development credits shall be authorized as part of a Residential Unit Development pursuant to a conditional use permit. A conditional use permit application shall contain as the subject property both the donor and receiver parcels.

E.     Provisions Governing Donor Parcel

1.     When development credits are transferred, all such credits are thereafter extinguished with regard to the donor parcel. Excess development credits of that donor parcel which are not initially transferred to a receiver parcel may be subsequently transferred to another receiver parcel in accordance with the provisions of this section.

2.     The number of development credits which may be transferred shall not exceed the number of dwelling units determined for the donor parcel through applying established slope-density standards.

3.     The fee title to the donor parcel may, upon approval of the City, be retained by the owner of the donor parcel, be transferred to the receiver parcel, be transferred to a quasi-public agency or private institution or body, or be transferred to a public body. Approval by the City must be based on findings that the option is consistent with the General Plan and provides for the long-term maintenance of the property as open space.

4.     The donor parcel, after development credits have been extinguished, shall be kept essentially in a natural condition. However, the City may, pursuant to a conditional use permit, authorize the following uses if it deems they are compatible with maintaining the natural condition of the property and are consistent with the General Plan:

a.     Watershed, pasture, trails, scientific study.

b.     The growing of crops and fruits.

c.     Low intensity recreation.

d.     Other uses of similar nature.

e.     Such accessory uses as are necessary to support uses (a) through (d) above.

5.     Lands from which development credits have been transferred shall have such easements dedicated to the City or other agreements entered into running with the land which will ensure that such lands remain as open space in perpetuity.

6.     A parcel from which development credits have been transferred shall not be considered as “common open space” pursuant to this title, unless such parcel is transferred in fee to the receiver parcel.

F.     Provisions Governing Receiver Parcel

The maximum number of dwelling units permitted on a parcel receiving development credits shall not exceed the sum total determined by applying the established slope-density standard to the receiving parcel and adding the number of development credits transferred. (14-04; 08-05)

Chapter 16.013 RM MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
16.013.000 INTENT
The RM Medium Density Residential Districts are intended to provide for residential structures or lots containing one or more dwelling units at various densities (indicated by the lot area in square feet required for each dwelling unit, in parentheses after the “RM” designation) which are based on location and density considerations of the General Plan of the City of Claremont, and to provide for other uses that are associated and compatible with the residential uses.

No building, structure or land shall be used, and no building or structures shall be erected, altered or enlarged in the RM Districts except in compliance with this chapter. (08-05)

 

16.013.010 USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED
A.     Only the following uses and developments shall be permitted as a matter of right in the RM Districts:

1.     Single- and multiple-family residential structures, and associated accessory buildings for the residential use and occupancy of not more than one (1) family per dwelling unit, and related recreational and community facilities for the use of the residents of the development.

2.     Limited business and home occupations subject to Chapter 16.327, Home Occupations.

3.     The keeping of animals as pets (not for commercial purposes), subject to Title 6 of this Code.

4.     New community housing projects as defined in Chapter 16.900, including condominiums and row house development. Community housing projects shall be in compliance with the development standards of this chapter. Minimum lot size, dimensions and setbacks of the district shall apply only to the overall site and shall be measured from the original property lines only.

5.     Accessory second units subject to approval of an accessory second unit permit pursuant to Chapter 16.333, Accessory Second Units.

6.     Public park.

B.     The following uses and developments may be permitted in RM Districts only with a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 16.303:

1.     Minor commercial uses, provided that such commercial uses are clearly incidental and auxiliary to the development and are designed for the sole use of the residents of the development.

2.     Mobile home parks, provided that a minimum site size of ten (10) acres is required and the density shall not exceed 4,000 square feet of lot area per mobile home or mobile home space.

3.     Boarding houses and rooming house containing no more than four (4) sleeping rooms for rent to no more than five (5) persons. Meals may be provided to boarders in connection with the renting of rooms or common kitchen facilities may be provided.

Rental rooms shall not contain kitchens. Rental rooms shall not be rented for periods of less than 30 days. No more than two (2) persons shall occupy one rental room. One parking space shall be provided for each rental room.

4.     Parking lots where adjacent to a commercial district.

5.     Other uses listed in Chapter 16.303 as permitted in any district with a conditional use permit.

6.     Conversions of existing apartment projects to community housing projects subject to conversion requirements in Chapter 16.324. Minimum lot size, dimensions and setbacks of the district shall apply only to the overall site and shall be measured from the original property lines only. (14-04; 08-05)

 

16.013.020 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and structures in the RM Districts. For exceptions to and explanatory description of these standards and for standards for accessory structures, fences, recreation courts, signs, parking, off-site improvements and dedication requirements, visual screening, solar energy systems, community art, and undergrounding utilities, see Chapters 16.130 through 16.151.

A.     Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit

1.     RM (4000) District – 4000 sq. ft.

2.     RM (3000) District – 3000 sq. ft.

3.     RM (2000) District – 2000 sq. ft.

B.     Minimum Lot Dimensions

1.     RM (4000) District

a.     Size – 8000 sq. ft.

b.     Width – 63 ft.

c.     Depth – 110 ft.

2.     RM (3000) District

a.     Size – 12,000 sq. ft.

b.     Width – 75 ft.

c.     Depth – 110 ft.

3.     RM (2000) District

a.     Size – 12,000 sq. ft.

b.     Width – 75 ft.

c.     Depth – 110 ft.

For existing lots not meeting these standards, see Chapter 16.400. In the RM (2000) and RM (3000) Districts, any lot with an area less than the minimum required for the District may only be developed to the RM (4000) District density, provided that any lot in any RM District that has an area of less than 8,000 square feet may only be developed pursuant to the RS (8000) standards. Lot dimensions shall be measured pursuant to Chapter 16.130.

C.    Minimum Setbacks

1.     RM (4000) District

a.     Front – 25 ft.

b.     Interior Side or Rear – 8 ft.

c.     Street Side or Rear – 15 ft.

2.     RM (3000) District

a.     Front – 25 ft.

b.     Interior Side or Rear – 8 ft.

c.     Street Side or Rear – 15 ft.

3.     RM (2000) District

a.     Front – 20 ft.

b.     Interior Side or Rear – 5 ft.

c.     Street Side or Rear – 15 ft.

For description, clarification, and exceptions to minimum setbacks, see Chapter 16.130.

D.    Outdoor Living Area

1.     Minimum Outdoor Living Area

a.     Units with one or no bedrooms – 400 sq. ft. per unit

b.     Units with two or more bedrooms – 400 sq. ft. per bedroom

Outdoor living area may be within required rear and interior side setback areas. No portion of any required front or street-side setback area shall count as the required outdoor living area.

Outdoor living area may include swimming pools, recreation courts, patios and landscaped open areas, but it shall not include driveways, parking areas or accessory buildings.

2.     Private Outdoor Living Area

a.     A minimum of 25 percent of the required outdoor living area shall be provided in private outdoor living space contiguous to a dwelling unit. It may include balconies, decks or patios with at least one side open, if designed and maintained for the exclusive use of the occupants of an individual unit.

This required area shall have minimum dimensions of eight feet at any point and be reasonably accessible from the dwelling units. In most cases, this area shall be adjacent to, and provide a private usable area for, each dwelling unit.

b.     For multiple-story apartments or condominiums where units have no ground floor access, and in other cases where the Architectural Commission finds that provision of the required private outdoor living area is impractical or undesirable, private outdoor living area may be reduced to less than 25 percent of the required outdoor living area.

3.     Common Open Space Area

a.     A minimum of 50 percent of the required outdoor living area shall be provided in a common open space area, or areas, with minimum dimensions of 20 feet. This common open space shall be a well designed, coherent area that is an essential component of the project’s design, not merely space left over after the building mass is placed.

b.     Areas having minimum dimensions of less than 20 feet but at least eight feet at any point which are contiguous with and an integral part of the common open space, may be included in calculating the area of such space.

c.     Up to 1/2 of covered patio areas designed to be commonly used by residents of a development may be included in calculation of common open space provided such area does not comprise more than 25 percent of the total common open space.

d.     For developments where units are detached single-family dwellings, and in other cases where the Architectural Commission finds that provision of the required common open space is impractical or undesirable, required common open space may be reduced to less than 25 percent of the required outdoor living area, and part or all of the required outdoor living area may be provided in private outdoor living area.

E.     Housing for Large Households in Developments of Six or More Housing Units

In every new project with six or more housing units developed under the RM Medium Density Residential Districts, at least 10 percent of the units, or a minimum of one unit, shall have three or more bedrooms, except in developments specifically designed for seniors or disabled persons.

F.     Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit

1.     No bedrooms – 450 sq. ft.

2.     One or more bedrooms – 600 sq. ft.

G.    Maximum Number of Stories

1.     RM (4000) District – 2 stories

2.     RM (3000) District – 2 stories

3.     RM (2000) District – 3 stories

No portion of any building within 75 feet of a parcel in a single-family district shall exceed two stories.

H.    Maximum Height

1.     RM (4000) District – 25 ft.

2.     RM (3000) District – 25 ft.

3.     RM (2000) District – 35 ft.

No portion of any building within 75 feet of a parcel in a single-family district shall exceed 25 feet in height.

For measurement of height and exceptions to height limits, see Chapter 16.130.

I.      Parking Spaces Required per Dwelling Unit

1.     RM (4000) District

a.     Units with less than 720 sq. ft. – 1.5 spaces (including 1 space in garage)

b.     Units with 720 sq. ft. or more – 2.5 spaces (including 2 spaces in garage)

c.     Visitor parking per unit - 0.5 spaces

2.     RM (3000) District

a.     Units with less than 720 sq. ft. – 1.5 spaces (including 1 space in garage)

b.     Units with 720 sq. ft. or more – 2.25 spaces (including 1.5 spaces/unit in garage)

c.     Visitor parking per unit - 0.5 spaces

3.     RM (2000) District

a.     Units with less than 720 sq. ft. – 1.5 spaces (including 1 space in garage or carport)

b.     Units with 720 sq. ft. or more – 2.25 spaces (including 1 space in garage or carport)

c.     Visitor parking per unit - 0.5 spaces

If no enclosed parking is provided, lockable storage spaces shall be required. The size of such storage spaces shall not be less than 100 cubic feet per unit, and no dimension for the measurement of the storage space shall be less than three feet.

Calculation of floor area when determining the required number of parking spaces shall exclude stairwells up to a maximum of 80 square feet, and balconies and patios which are enclosed on no more than three sides.

For parking area development standards, see Chapter 16.136. Credit may be allowed for uncovered spaces located in front of garage spaces if restricted for the exclusive use of the occupants of the unit served; however, such credit may not be allowed toward visitor parking. Visitor parking shall be individually accessible and evenly distributed throughout the development. The Architectural Commission may allow credit toward visitor spaces for adequate on-street parking. (08-05; 12-01)

 

16.013.030 VILLAGE DESIGN PLAN
Development of property that is located within the Claremont Village Design Plan’s boundaries shall conform to the Claremont Village Design Plan. The intent of the plan is to ensure that development will enrich and preserve the character of the Village. Development proposals shall be reviewed by the Architectural Commission for conformance to the Claremont Village Design Plan. (08-05)

Chapter 16.014 HDR HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL OVERLAY DISTRICT
16.014.000 INTENT
The purpose of the HDR (High Density Residential) Overlay District is to encourage the development of new housing affordable to low-, very low-, and extremely low-income households by allowing a greater building height and density than what is otherwise allowed in an underlying land use district, when 50 percent of the units in such developments are affordable for low-, very low-, and extremely low-income households. (09-16)

 

16.014.010 APPLICABILITY
This chapter shall apply to all land in the HDR Overlay District. Any and every building, premises, and land in the HDR Overlay District shall be used and occupied, and every building shall be erected, constructed, established, altered, enlarged, maintained, moved into or within the HDR Overlay District only in accordance with all applicable sections of this chapter and regulations of this title. (09-16)

 

16.014.020 DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED
The only uses and development permitted in the HDR Overlay District are those uses and developments permitted in the underlying land use district, except developers of housing developments in which at least 50 percent of the units will be reserved for low-, very low-, and extremely low-income households, are entitled to modified density and height restrictions and other development standards pursuant to this chapter. (09-16)

 

16.014.030 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
The following property development standards apply to an affordable housing development when 50 percent of the units in such developments are affordable for low-, very low-, and extremely low-income households:

A.     Lot Area

Minimum lot area per unit is 1,351 square feet.

B.     Building Height

A mix of three and four stories is permitted. The maximum height is 35 feet for a three-story building and 45 feet for a four-story building. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no portion of a building within 75 feet of a single-family dwelling shall be more than two stories and 25 feet in height.

C.    Setbacks, Lot Coverage, Floor Area, Open Space, Landscaping and Parking

The development standards for setbacks, lot coverage, floor area, open space, landscaping, and parking standards of the underlying land use district shall apply to projects, provided, however, if a project applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Director of Community Development that a proposed housing development cannot be built or is not financially feasible to be built by complying with these development standards of the underlying land use district, then modifications to the development standard are permitted. Applicants are required to work with City staff to determine the modifications necessary for the project to be built and to achieve a quality project design that is compatible with surrounding land uses. (09-16)

 

16.014.040 RESTRICTION ON UNITS
Applicants of projects for which the density, height, or other development standards are modified from the underlying land use district pursuant to this chapter, shall enter into an agreement with the City to restrict at least 50 percent of the units in the project to low-, very low-, and extremely low-income households. The agreement shall be recorded as a restriction on the subject parcel or parcels on which the low-, very low-, and extremely low-income units are to be built, and shall be binding to all future owners and successors in interest. The agreement shall include the location of units, tenure of restrictions, and provisions to ensure implementation and continued compliance. (09-16)

Chapter 16.016 EQ EQUESTRIAN OVERLAY DISTRICT
16.016.000 INTENT
The EQ Equestrian Overlay District is intended to permit the keeping of horses in certain residential neighborhoods north of Base Line Road. The provisions of this chapter shall be in addition to those of the underlying RS Single-Family Residential District.

In the Equestrian Overlay District, no horses shall be kept and no structures for the purposes of keeping horses shall be erected or altered except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (08-05)

 

16.016.010 USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED
Only the following uses shall be conducted or constructed as a matter of right in the Equestrian Overlay District.

A.     The uses and developments permitted in the underlying district.

B.     The keeping of horses subject to the provisions of this chapter. (08-05)

 

16.016.020 DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS
A.     Minimum Area

The minimum area of an Equestrian Overlay District shall be five acres.

B.     New Designations

1.     Any new designation of property to be included in the Equestrian Overlay District shall require a zone change pursuant to Chapter 16.315 of this title.

2.     The Planning Commission shall require the installation of bridle trails and/or easements except in unusual circumstances or in those cases where there is a better alternative. The Planning Commission may require that the trail and/or easement be fenced, and may specify the type of material to be used.

3.     In circumstances where buffering is necessary to protect property outside of the EQ District, the Planning Commission may specify the type and amount of buffering that is required. (08-05)

 

16.016.030 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
In addition to the development standards of the underlying district, the following standards shall apply to the keeping of horses in the EQ District:

A.     Lot Size—Number of Horses Permitted

1.     For existing lots included within the Equestrian Overlay District prior to January 9, 1992, the keeping of horses shall be permitted. The maximum number of horses on any one lot shall be no more than one for the first 10,000 square feet of lot area and one for each additional 5,000 square feet of lot area, up to a maximum of four horses per lot.

2.     The minimum size for lots created or included in the Equestrian Overlay District after January 9, 1992, is 20,000 square feet. The number of horses that may be kept on any one lot is one for the first 20,000 square feet and one for each additional 5,000 square feet, up to a maximum of four horses per lot.

3.     For existing lots located outside the City which are annexed to the City and are designated as being in an Equestrian Overlay District, the following standards shall apply:

a.     If horses have been maintained on the premises prior to the date the request for initiating annexation proceedings is made to the City, the minimum size for lots shall be 10,000 square feet. The maximum number of horses that may be kept on any one lot is one for the first 10,000 square feet and one for each additional 5,000 square feet, up to a maximum of four horses per lot.

b.     If maintenance of the horses on the property is discontinued for a period of one year, the maximum number of horses permitted to be maintained on a lot shall be one for the first 13,000 square feet of area and one for each additional 5,000 square feet, up to a maximum of four horses per lot.

4.     Any foal less than one year of age may be kept in addition to the maximum number of horses permitted to be maintained on a lot as specified in this chapter.

5.     The Planning Commission may grant a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 16.303 for keeping more than four (4) horses in circumstances where the property is in excess of one acre in size and keeping additional horses is compatible with the surrounding property.

B.     Corral-Stable

1.     All horses shall be confined within a corral or stable which has a minimum of 625 square feet of surface for each animal. Such enclosure shall exceed a minimum of more than five feet high and shall be constructed of metal pipe or other material which is approved by the Director of Community Development.

2.     An overhead covering to screen direct sunlight, wind, and rain shall be provided to serve all of the horses which are maintained on the property, and it shall be of such construction that it is waterproof and will not be damaged by wind or rain. Prior to the installation of the covering, or any other small structure, such as a tack room, a building permit shall be obtained from the Department of Community Development.

3.     No part of any stable shall be used for human habitation.

4.     No storage of machinery or equipment shall be permitted except incidental supplies and tools utilized for the care and handling of horses which are kept on the lot, provided that the environmental protective standards of Chapter 16.154 are satisfied.

5.     No part of any new corral or stable shall be located within 50 feet of an existing habitable dwelling on the adjacent property, 35 feet of an existing habitable dwelling on the same lot, or 30 feet of an existing patio, pool, or similar structure on adjacent property.

6.     A corral or stable must be located a minimum of six feet from an interior or rear property line and 25 feet from a public right-of-way line, unless a trail or easement is adjacent to the property line. Where the corral is adjacent to a trail or easement, the trail or easement fence may be used as part of the corral fence with the approval of the Director of Community Development.

C.    Access

1.     Access shall be provided to the rear yard for vehicles. Such access shall have a width of no less than ten feet.

2.     Direct access shall be provided for horses to reach the bridle trails or bridle easements. (08-05)

 

16.016.040 SANITATION-MAINTENANCE
A.     Each property owner is responsible for the continuous maintenance of sanitary conditions which includes, but is not limited to, the cleaning of corrals, stables and other areas to which horses have access, and the removal of manure, offal, soiled straw, or other refuse as required.

B.     Each lot shall be maintained so that there is no ponding of water within the corral area.

C.    All buildings used to stable horses and all corral fences shall be maintained in a neat and orderly condition with no chipped, peeling. or cracked paint, and no broken elements of a fence, gate, or structure. (08-05)

Chapter 16.019 AV ARBOL VERDE SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
16.019.000 INTENT
The Arbol Verde Single-Family Residential Districts are intended to recognize the unique history and character of the Arbol Verde neighborhood, and to preserve and stabilize this single-family residential neighborhood. These districts recognize the long-term interests of The Colleges, as the major landowners, and the individual residential landowners. In this context, the portion of the neighborhood immediately adjacent to The Colleges north of Harwood Place (the AV2 District) will be a transitional area that may have educational institution uses that are compatible with the adjoining single-family neighborhood south of Harwood Place (the AV1 District), which is to be strengthened and preserved.

Both maintaining the vitality of The Colleges and retaining affordable housing are goals of the General Plan. To the greatest extent feasible, the neighborhood’s existing housing stock shall be retained or relocated within the neighborhood, and new development must be in harmony with the design character of the neighborhood.

No building, structure, or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be erected or altered in the AV Districts except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (08-05)

 

16.019.010 PERMITTED USES
Only the following uses and developments shall be permitted as a matter of right in the AV Districts:

A.     One single-family dwelling unit per lot for occupancy by no more than one family.

B.     Accessory buildings and structures, including fences and recreation courts, and accessory uses, located on the same lot as a dwelling unit subject to the development standards and requirements of this chapter and Chapter 16.133.

Accessory buildings shall have a maximum floor area of 300 square feet plus an additional 400 square feet may be permitted for required parking, except as otherwise permitted by this chapter.

C.    The renting of no more than one sleeping room per dwelling unit for occupancy by no more than two persons. Meals may be provided in connection with such renting, or the dwelling’s kitchen facilities may be shared with tenants.

1.     Rental Rooms

Rental rooms shall not contain kitchens. Rental rooms shall not be rented for a period of less than 30 days.

2.     Rental Permit

Prior to the renting of any room in the Arbol Verde Single-Family Residential Districts, a rental permit shall be obtained from the Department of Community Development. A permit shall be issued by the Department of Community Development only after the Director of Community Development has determined that the following criteria are satisfied:

a.     The proposed room rental meets all building and health requirements.

b.     There is sufficient parking.

c.     The proposed rental will not result in an adverse impact on the single-family character of the neighborhood. The number of such rentals in the neighborhood shall be a factor in determining adverse impact.

The fee for this permit shall be determined by resolution of the City Council. The permit shall be valid for a period of three years, provided the permit may be revoked if the Director of Community Development determines that the above criteria are no longer satisfied.

D.    Home occupations, subject to approval pursuant to Chapter 16.327.

E.     The keeping of animals as pets (not for commercial purposes), subject to Title 6 of the Claremont Municipal Code.

F.     The growing of crops and fruits.

G.    Accessory second units subject to approval of an accessory second unit permit pursuant to Chapter 16.333, Accessory Second Units.

H.    Public park. (12-07; 08-05)

 

16.019.020 SPECIAL USES AND DEVELOPMENTS
Uses and developments listed in Chapter 16.306 as permitted subject to the issuance of a special use and development permit are allowed in the AV Districts if not contrary to the intent of this chapter. (08-05)

 

16.019.030 CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED IN AV1 AND AV2 DISTRICTS
The following uses and developments are permitted in the AV1 and AV2 Districts subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 16.303:

A.     Wholesale plant nurseries and similar commercial/agricultural uses.

B.     Public recreation facilities.

C.    Other uses listed in Chapter 16.303, as permitted in this district subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit. (14-04; 12-07; 08-05)

 

16.019.040 ADDITIONAL CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED IN AV1 DISTRICT
The following uses and developments are permitted in the AV1 District subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 16.303:

A.     Single-family residential lots with a minimum area of 6,000 square feet. In approving a lot with an area of less than 7,500 square feet, the Planning Commission, in addition to making the findings required in Chapter 16.303, shall find that:

1.     The proposed development retains or strengthens the existing architectural scale and character;

2.     The lot will be permanently restricted so that no variances from the development standards of this chapter shall be allowed; and

3.     The lot would not substantially change the historic lotting pattern of the neighborhood.

B.     Demolition of a dwelling unit subject to the demolition permit requirements of this chapter. (12-07; 08-05)

 

16.019.050 ADDITIONAL CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED IN AV2 DISTRICT
The following uses and developments are permitted in the AV2 District subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 16.303:

A.     Conversion of a single-family residence to an office or administrative use of an educational institution.

B.     New structures for office or administrative use of an educational institution. Such structures shall be designed to be compatible with the existing residential neighborhood. In approving such structures, the Planning Commission, in addition to making the required findings in Chapter 16.303, shall find the proposed development retains or strengthens the existing architectural scale and character of the AV1 neighborhood.

C.    Private educational recreation facilities subject to the following:

1.     Amplifying speakers for private educational recreation facilities may be used only in conjunction with athletic events. Such sound systems shall conform to the following criteria:

a.     Hours of operation shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.;

b.     The amplifying system shall be used only for inter-collegiate athletic events; and

c.     Outdoor speakers should be directed away from adjacent residential uses. Other conditions shall be applied when outdoor speakers must face residential structures.

2.     Sport field lighting for private educational recreational facilities may be used provided lighting is designed, installed, and maintained to minimize the illumination of neighboring residential uses. Sports field lighting shall meet the following requirements:

a.     Lighting shall utilize modern state-of-the-art light fixtures that provide minimal light beyond the field areas to be illuminated.

b.     Prior to issuance of a building permit for field lights, a lighting plan shall be prepared by a lighting consulting firm that demonstrates that the indirect illumination from the field lighting shall not exceed 0.5 foot-candles at the property line of any neighboring residential uses, as measured horizontally and vertically from the adjacent grade at the property line to a height of 14 feet. A post-construction light analysis shall be performed by a qualified professional confirming that lighting impacts have been minimized (e.g. through shielding or other methods) and light does not exceed 0.5 foot-candles at the property line of neighboring residential properties.

c.     Light standards shall not exceed 80 feet in height.

d.     Fields shall not be lit past 10:00 p.m. (12-07; 08-05)

 

16.019.060 PROHIBITED USES
The following uses have been identified as not meeting the spirit or intent of this chapter and are, therefore, expressly prohibited:

A.     Any nonresidential use not expressly permitted.

B.     Parking lots in the AV1 District. (12-07; 08-05)

 

16.019.070 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and structures in the Arbol Verde Districts. For exceptions to and explanatory description of these standards and for standards for accessory structures, fences, recreation courts, signs, parking, off-site improvements and dedication requirements, visual screening, solar energy systems, community art, and undergrounding utilities, see Chapters 16.130 through 16.151.

A.     General Standards for All Development in the AV Districts

1.     Minimum Lot Area and Dimensions

a.     Minimum lot size     7500 sq. ft.

In the AV1 District, single-family residential lots with a minimum area of 6,000 square feet may be permitted with a conditional use permit. (See Additional Conditional Uses Permitted in AV1 District above in Section 16.019.050.)

b.     Minimum lot width   50 feet

c.     Minimum lot depth   100 feet

For existing lots not meeting these standards, see Chapter 16.200.

2.     Minimum Setbacks

a.     Front yard setback  20 feet

b.     Interior side setback        5 feet

c.     Street side setback 15 feet

d.     Rear yard setback   5 feet

e.     Parking for institutional uses shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from street right-of-way and from properties developed with residential uses. Landscaping shall be provided to provide screening of parking facilities as seen from the street.

f.      When a garage or carport has straight vehicular access from a public street, said garage or carport shall be set back at least 20 feet from the street-side property line.

For description, clarification, and exceptions to minimum setbacks, see Chapter 16.130.

3.     Playing Fields

Playing field activity areas may be located within required setbacks subject to the following:

a.     Fencing, light standards and seating areas associated with the playing fields are set back a minimum of five feet from the street right-of-way and a minimum of 20 feet from properties developed with residential uses.

b.     At least 50 percent of the vertical surface of the fencing material is open to permit transmission of light, air and vision.

c.     No buildings shall be constructed within the setback areas.

d.     Landscaping shall be provided to screen parking facilities as seen from the street.

4.     Maximum Number of Stories – Two Stories

Two-story buildings, buildings with a height of more than 18 feet and second-story additions are permitted only when the architectural criteria in Chapter 16.300 are met.

Accessory structures on residential lots are permitted a maximum of one story.

5.     The maximum height for buildings and structures is 25 feet, except as follows:

a.     Light standards associated with playing fields may exceed the maximum height of 25 feet if approved as part of a conditional use permit and subject to the standards for playing field lighting in Section 16.019.050.C.2 of this chapter.

b.     On lots with residential uses, accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed a maximum height of 15 feet, and athletic apparatus and children’s play equipment shall not exceed a maximum height of 13 feet.

For measurement of height and exceptions to height limits, see Chapter 16.130. All accessory residential buildings and structures shall be subject to the requirements in Chapter 16.133.

6.     Maximum Lot Coverage – 35%

Calculation shall include all areas of the lot covered by any buildings including carports, covered patios and decks, and balconies and decks more than three feet above grade. Lot coverage shall not include uncovered outdoor recreation courts and equipment, uncovered patios, walkways and driveways, pools, and uncovered decks and balconies no more than three feet above grade.

7.     Maximum Floor Area of Main Residential Structure

The total floor area of the main residential structure shall not exceed a maximum of 1,500 square feet plus 25 percent of the lot area.

The calculation of total floor area shall include the floor areas of all floors of the main residential structure including the area of an upper level not separated from a lower level by a floor/ceiling assembly, floor areas of attached garages, carports and covered patios. Floor area shall not include the floor area of detached accessory structures, uncovered patios, decks, or balconies.

When any accessory building is located less than six feet from a main residential building, the floor area of such accessory building shall be included in the floor area calculation of the main residential building. The accessory building shall still be subject to all accessory building standards.

8.     Minimum Parking Requirements

a.     Single-family residences – Two covered (garage or carport) spaces.

b.     Institutional uses – the parking for institutional uses shall be as shown in Table 16.069.B in Chapter 16.069 entitled I Institutional Districts.

B.     Additional Development Standards For Educational Institutions

In addition to the development standards set forth above in this chapter, education institutional uses and developments permitted in the AV Districts shall conform to the following standards:

1.     All existing structures in the AV Districts proposed for relocation shall be relocated to the AV1 District to the extent feasible based on the condition of the structure and the availability of vacant property in the AV1 District. In the event a site for the structure is not available in the AV1 District, the structure may be relocated elsewhere in the City or other location.

2.     Any applicant proposing to demolish or relocate a residence shall provide 12 months notice, or interim housing, or relocation assistance to any lessees that may be affected.

3.     Exterior light fixtures for all institutional uses shall be constructed, mounted, and maintained so that the direct rays of the lights are directed downward into the interior of the lot. Security lighting for all pedestrian pathways shall be provided. Additional security lighting may be permitted as determined appropriate by the Director of Community Development.

4.     Vehicular access for playing field parking areas shall be only from Sixth Street or Claremont Boulevard.

5.     Only those surfaces that require pavement for playing fields, vehicular travel, parking, and pedestrian use shall be paved.

6.     Trees removed as part of a development proposal shall be replaced at a ratio of two to one; 20 percent of the replacement trees shall be at least 24 inch box size or greater. The balance of the replacement trees shall be 15 gallons or greater. Coast Live Oak trees shall be replaced with the same species. Other types of trees maybe replaced with another species subject to Architectural Commission approval.

7.     All existing trees that are to remain shall be protected during construction by a protective barrier. (12-07; 08-05)

 

16.019.080 ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW
Exterior alterations and site improvements for uses requiring a conditional use permit, and all new construction of buildings or structures, shall be subject to review and approval pursuant to Chapter 16.300 of this title, and if applicable, the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings for those structures on the Register of Sites of Historical or Architectural Merit in Claremont. (12-07; 08-05)

 

16.019.090 DEMOLITION PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
A.     Demolition of a residential structure in the AV1 District may be permitted only with issuance of a conditional use permit, pursuant to Chapter 16.303.

B.     When demolition of a residential structure is proposed as a part of a project the applicant shall submit a report by a structural engineer on the feasibility of relocating the structure and a cost analysis of remodeling the existing structures versus new construction costs.

C.    In approving a demolition of a residential structure, the Planning Commission, in addition to making the required findings in Chapter 16.303, shall find as follows:

1.     The action proposed is consistent with the intent of this ordinance and the goals and policies of the General Plan; and

2.     One of the following:

a.     The cost of refurbishing and/or moving the existing structure would substantially exceed the cost of new construction; or

b.     The proposed demolition is necessary to correct an unsafe or dangerous condition of the property; or

c.     The structure proposed for demolition is not compatible with the character of the Arbol Verde neighborhood in terms of scale, density and/or design, or otherwise has a detrimental visual impact on the character of the neighborhood.

D.    Demolition permits for residential dwellings shall not be issued by the Community Development Department until development plans for that site have plan check approval.

E.     None of the provisions of this title shall prevent any measures of construction, alteration, or demolition necessary to correct the unsafe or dangerous conditions of any structure, other feature, or part thereof, where such condition has been declared unsafe or dangerous by the Building Official or the Fire Chief. Where the proposed measures have been declared necessary, work that is absolutely necessary to correct the unsafe or dangerous condition may be done with due regard for preservation of the appearance of the structure involved pursuant to this section. In the event any structure or other feature shall be damaged by fire, or other calamity, or by act of God, to such an extent that in the opinion of the aforesaid officials it cannot be reasonably repaired and restored, it may be removed in conformity with normal permit procedures and applicable laws. (12-07; 08-05)

Chapter 16.033 RESIDENTIAL DENSITY BONUS
16.033.000 INTENT
A.     In enacting this chapter, it is the intent of the City of Claremont to encourage the development of affordable housing to meet a variety of economic needs within the City and to implement the goals, objectives, and policies of the City’s Housing Element of the General Plan. The provisions of Chapters 16.001 through 16.040 are intended to facilitate the construction of residential developments that will be long lasting, quality places to live, and compatible with surrounding land uses and residential neighborhoods. This chapter provides incentives for the production of housing for very low-, lower-, and moderate-income households and senior citizen housing in accordance with Sections 65915 through 65917 of the California Government Code.

B.     The regulations and procedures set forth in this chapter shall be publicized by the City and shall apply throughout the City. Sections of the California Government Code referenced in this chapter and application forms for complying with this chapter, shall be available to the public. (13-04; 08-05)

 

16.033.010 DEFINITIONS
Whenever the following terms are used in this chapter, they shall have the meaning established by this section.

“Additional incentives” means the regulatory concessions and incentives as specified in California Government Code subsections 65915 (k) to include, but not be limited to, the reduction of site development standards or zoning code requirements, direct financial assistance, approval of mixed-use zoning in conjunction with the housing development, and any other regulatory incentive which would result in identifiable cost avoidance or reductions that are offered in addition to a density bonus.

“Affordable” means housing units offered at an affordable rent or affordable sales price.

“Affordable rent” means monthly housing expenses, including a reasonable allowance for utilities, for rental target units reserved for very low- and lower-income households, not exceeding the following calculations:

1.     Very low-income: 50 percent of the area median income for Los Angeles County, adjusted for household size appropriate for the unit, multiplied by 30 percent and divided by 12.

2.     Lower-income: 60 percent of the area median income for Los Angeles County, adjusted for household size appropriate for the unit, multiplied by 30 percent and divided by 12.

“Affordable sales price” means a sales price at which very low- or lower-income households can qualify for the purchase of target units, calculated on the basis of underwriting standards of mortgage financing available for the development.

“Childcare facility” means a child daycare facility other than a family daycare home, including, but not limited to, infant centers, preschools, extended daycare facilities, and school age childcare centers.

“Density bonus” means a minimum density increase over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density.

“Density bonus housing agreement” means a legally binding agreement between a developer and the City to ensure that the requirements of this chapter are satisfied. The agreement, among other things, shall establish the number of target units, their size, location, terms and conditions of affordability, and production schedule. See Section 16.033.090 of this chapter.

“Density bonus units” means those residential units granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter which exceed the maximum allowable residential density for the development site.

“Equivalent financial incentive” means a monetary contribution, based upon a land cost per dwelling unit savings that would otherwise result from a density bonus or additional incentive(s).

“Household size” means the number of persons assumed, as detailed in the table below, in determining the affordable rent or affordable sales price of target units, unless the housing development is subject to different assumptions imposed by other government regulations.

 

Assumed Persons Per Housing Unit

Housing Unit Type

Non-Senior Units

Senior Units

SRO (residential hotel) unit

75% of 1 person

75% of 1 person

0 bedroom (studio)

1 person

1 person

1 bedroom

2 persons

1 person

2 bedrooms

3 persons

2 persons

 

“Housing cost” means the sum of actual or projected monthly payments for all of the following associated with for-sale target units, principal and interest on a mortgage loan, including any loan insurance fees, property taxes and assessments, fire and casualty insurance, property maintenance and repairs, homeowner association fees, and a reasonable allowance for utilities.

“Housing development” means construction projects consisting of five or more residential units, including single-family, multifamily, and mobile homes for sale or rent.

“Lower-income household” means a household whose income does not exceed the lower income limits applicable to Los Angeles County, as published and periodically updated by the State’s Department of Housing and Community Development pursuant to Section 50079.5 of the California Health and Safety Code.

“Maximum allowable residential density” means the maximum number of residential units permitted by the City’s General Plan and Zoning Ordinance on the project site at the time of application, excluding the provisions of this chapter. If the housing development is within a planned development overlay zone, the maximum residential density shall be determined on the basis of the General Plan and the maximum density of the underlying zoning district.

“Moderate-income household” means a household whose income does not exceed the moderate-income limits applicable to Los Angeles County, as published and periodically updated by the State’s Department of Housing and Community Development pursuant to Section 50093 of the California Health and Safety Code.

“Non-restricted units” mean all units within a housing development excluding the target units.

“Qualified housing development” means a housing development in which the applicant agrees to provide the following:

1.     At least five percent of the total units of the housing development as target units affordable to very low-Income households; or

2.     At least ten percent of the total units of the housing development as target units affordable to lower-income households; or

3.     At least ten percent of the total units in a common interest development, as defined in Section 1351 of the Civil Code, as target units affordable to moderate-income households, provided that all units in the development are offered to the public for sale subject to the equity sharing and restrictions specified in Government Code Section 65915(c)(2); or

4.     Senior citizen housing.

“Qualifying resident” means senior citizens or other persons eligible to reside in a senior citizen housing.

“Senior citizen housing” means a senior citizen housing development as defined in Sections 51.3 and 51.12 of the Civil Code, or mobilehome park that limits residency based on age requirements for housing for older persons pursuant to Section 798.76 or 799.5 of the Civil Code.

“Target unit” means a dwelling unit in a housing development which will be reserved for sale or rent to, and affordable to, very low-, lower-income or moderate-income households, and qualifying residents, so as to qualify for a density bonus and additional incentives pursuant to this chapter.

“Very low-income household” means a household whose income does not exceed the very low-income limits applicable to Los Angeles County, as published and periodically updated by the State’s Department of Housing and Community Development pursuant to Section 50105 of the California Health and Safety Code. (13-04; 08-05)

 

16.033.020 DENSITY BONUS
A.     This section describes the minimum density bonus, which shall be provided, at the request of an applicant of a qualified housing development when that applicant agrees to provide the following:

1.     At least five percent of the total units of the housing development as target units affordable to very low-income households; or

2.     At least ten percent of the total units of the housing development as target units affordable to lower-income households; or

3.     At least ten percent of the total units in a common interest development, as defined in Section 1351 of the Civil Code, as target units affordable to moderate-income households, provided that all units in the development are offered to the public for sale subject to the equity sharing and restrictions specified in Government Code Section 65915(c)(2); or

4.     Senior citizen housing.

B.     For purposes of calculating the amount of density bonus, the applicant who requests a density bonus pursuant to this chapter shall elect whether the bonus shall be awarded on the basis of paragraph 1, 2, 3, or 4 of subsection A of this section.

C.    In determining the minimum number of density bonus units to be granted to a housing development in a residential district pursuant to subsection A, the maximum allowable residential density for the site shall be multiplied by a density bonus percentage. The density bonus percentage is determined according to the percentage of units in the housing development provided as target units affordable to very low-income households, lower-income households, and moderate-income households if a common interest development, or the housing development’s status as senior citizen housing. The density bonus percentages for each category of housing are as shown in Tables 16.033.020.A through 16.033.020.D.

 

Table 16.033.020.A Very Low Income Units

Percentage of Very Low-Income Units

Density Bonus Percentage

5

20.0

6

22.5

7

25.0

8

27.5

9

30.0

10

32.5

11

35.0

 

Table 16.033.020.B Lower-Income Units

Percentage of Lower-Income Units

Density Bonus Percentage

10

20.0

11

21.5

12

23.0

13

24.5

14

26.0

15

27.5

16

29.0

17

30.5

18

32.0

19

33.5

20

35.0

 

Table 16.033.020.C Moderate-Income Common Interest Development

Common Interest Development Percentage of Moderate-Income Units

Density Bonus Percentage

10

5

11

6

12

7

13

8

14

9

15

10

16

11

17

12

18

13

19

14

20

15

21

16

22

17

23

18

24

19

25

20

26

21

27

22

28

23

29

24

30

25

31

26

32

27

33

28

34

29

35

30

36

31

37

32

38

33

39

34

40

35

 

Table 16.033.020.D Senior Citizen Housing

Percentage of Very Low-Income Units

Density Bonus Percentage

<20

20

20

60

30

100

40

150

 

D.    The density bonus units shall not be included when determining the total number of target units in the housing development. When calculating the number of permitted density bonus units, any fractions of units shall be rounded to the next larger integer.

E.     The granting of a density bonus shall not be interpreted, in or of itself, to require a General Plan amendment, change of zone, or other discretional approval.

F.     Each housing development meeting the criteria of subsection A is entitled to only one bonus density and may not combine density bonuses from more than one category listed above in subsection A.

G.    The applicant may elect to accept a lesser density bonus percentage than what is shown in the above tables. If the applicant elects to accept a lesser density bonus percentage, no reduction will be allowed in the number of target units required. (13-04; 08-05)

 

16.033.030 TARGET UNIT REQUIREMENTS
A.     Target units should be constructed concurrently with non-restricted units unless both the City and applicant agree within the density bonus housing agreement to an alternative schedule for development.

B.     Rental target units shall remain restricted and affordable to the designated group for a period of 30 years (or longer period of time if required by the construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy program).

C.    In determining the maximum affordable rent or affordable sales price of target units the following household and unit size assumptions shall be used, unless the housing development is subject to different assumptions imposed by other governmental regulations:

 

 

Assumed Persons Per Housing Unit

Housing Unit Type

Non-Senior Units

Senior Units

SRO (residential hotel) unit

75% of 1 person

75% of 1 person

0 bedroom (studio)

1 person

1 person

1 bedroom

2 persons

1 person

2 bedrooms

3 persons

2 persons

 

D.    Target units shall be built on-site and, when practical, be reasonably dispersed within the housing development. Where feasible, the number of bedrooms in the target units should be equivalent to the bedroom mix of the non-target units of the housing development; except that the applicant may include a higher proportion of target units with more bedrooms. The design and appearance of the target units shall be compatible with the design of the total housing development. Housing developments shall comply with all applicable development standards, except those which may be modified as provided by this chapter.

E.     Circumstances may arise in which the public interest would be served by allowing some or all of the target units associated with one housing development to be produced and operated at an alternative site. Where the applicant and the City form such an agreement, the resulting linked developments shall be considered a single housing development for purposes of this chapter. Under these circumstances, the applicant shall be subject to the same requirements of this chapter for the target units to be provided on the alternative site.

F.     A density bonus housing agreement shall be made a condition of the discretionary planning permits (e.g., tract maps, parcel maps, site plans, planned development or conditional use permits, etc.) for all housing developments provided a density bonus or a development incentive pursuant to this chapter. The agreement shall be recorded as a restriction on the parcel or parcels on which the target units will be constructed. The density bonus agreements shall be consistent with Section 16.033.090 of this chapter. In the event that the applicant enters into an inclusionary or other regulatory agreement with the City, then a separate density bonus housing agreement shall not be required. (13-04; 08-05)

 

16.033.040 SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSING DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
The following development standards apply to senior citizen housing that qualifies the applicant for a density bonus pursuant to this chapter, except if otherwise reduced/revised at the request of the applicant and approved by the City as an additional incentive(s) pursuant to this chapter. In the case that these standards conflict with other standards in Chapters 16.001 through 16.040, these standards shall take precedence.

 

A.

Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit

 

1.

0-bedroom:

400 sq. ft.

2.

1-bedroom:

450 sq. ft.

3.

2-bedroom:

600 sq. ft.

B.

Minimum Building Facilities and Features

 

1.

Laundry facilities – washers and dryers:

One per 10 dwelling units

2.

Elevator(s) – 2 & 3 story buildings, number dependent on design:

Required

3.

Lounge, lobby & group recreation facilities, including kitchen & bathrooms:

20 sq. ft. per dwelling unit

4.

Private storage space per dwelling unit in interior or exterior of units in addition to clothes closets:

150 cu. ft.

5.

24-hour medical, security, and smoke detector alarm system to central location:

Required in each unit

6.

Grab bars installed per standards of California Administrative Code Title 24:

Required in all bathrooms

7.

Handrails in all public hallways:

Required

C.

Minimum Open Space

 

1.

Private open space per unit, in a patio or balcony:

60 sq. ft.

2.

Common open space per unit with minimum 15′ dimension:

125 sq. ft.

(13-04; 08-05)

 

16.033.050 ADDITIONAL INCENTIVES
A.     This section includes the provision for providing additional incentives as specified in California Government Code Section 65915(d), (e) and (h) for qualified housing developments. An applicant may request specific incentives pursuant to this section only when the housing development is eligible for a density bonus pursuant to Section 16.033.020.

B.     By Right Parking Incentives

Qualified housing developments shall be granted the following maximum parking standards listed below, inclusive of handicapped and guest parking, which shall apply to the entire development, not just the restricted target units, when requested by the project applicant.

1.     Zero to one bedroom dwelling units: One on-site parking space

2.     Two to three bedroom dwelling units: Two on-site parking spaces

3.     Four or more bedroom dwelling units: Two and one-half on-site parking spaces

If the total number of spaced required results in a fractional number, it shall be rounded up to the next whole number. For purposes of the above subsection A, this parking may be provided through tandem parking or uncovered parking, but not through on-street parking.

C.    By Right Additional Incentives

In addition to by right parking incentives identified in the above subsection A, qualified housing developments shall be granted one, two or three additional incentives as follows:

1.     For qualified housing developments with target units affordable to very low-income households:

a.     One additional incentive if five percent of the units (not including the density bonus units) are target units affordable to very low-income households.

b.     Two additional incentives if ten percent of the units (not including the density bonus units) are target units affordable to very low-income households.

c.     Three additional incentives if 15 percent of the units (not including the density bonus units) are target units affordable to very low-income households.

2.     For qualified housing developments with target units affordable to lower-income households:

a.     One additional incentive if ten percent of the units (not including the density bonus units) are target units affordable to lower-income households.

b.     Two additional incentives if 20 percent of the units (not including the density bonus units) are target units affordable for lower-income households.

c.     Three additional incentives if 30 percent of the units (not including the density bonus units) are target units affordable to very low-income households.

3.     For qualified housing developments in a common interest development with target units affordable to moderate-income households:

a.     One incentive if ten percent of the units (not including the density bonus units) are target units affordable to moderate-income households.

b.     Two additional incentives if 20 percent of the units (not including the density bonus units) are target units affordable for moderate-income households.

c.     Three additional incentives if 30 percent of the units (not including the density bonus units) are target units affordable to moderate-income households.

D.    Other Concession or Incentives

An applicant of a qualified housing development may also submit a proposal for other concessions or incentives necessary to make the development economically feasible and to accommodate the density bonus and additional incentives otherwise permitted by this chapter. The need for other additional incentives will vary for different housing developments and shall be determined on a case-by-case basis. The applicant shall provide evidence that the proposed concessions and incentives result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reduction. A proposal for concessions or incentives pursuant to this subsection shall neither reduce nor increase the number of additional incentives the applicant is otherwise entitled to pursuant to the above subsections B and C. Concessions or incentives proposed pursuant to this subsection may include, but are not limited to, any of the following:

1.     A reduction of site development standards or a modification of zoning code or architectural design requirements which exceed the minimum building standards provided in Part 2.5 (commencing with Section 18901) of Division 13 of the California Health and Safety Code. These may include, but are not limited to, one or more of the following:

a.     Reduced minimum lot sizes and/or dimensions.

b.     Reduced minimum lot setbacks.

c.     Reduced minimum outdoor and/or private outdoor living area.

d.     Increased maximum lot coverage.

e.     Increased maximum building height and/or stories.

f.      Reduced on site-parking standards, including the number or size of spaces and covered parking requirements.

g.     Reduced minimum building separation requirements.

h.     Reduced street standards, e.g., reduced minimum street widths.

i.      Minimum floor areas requirements.

j.      Location of walls/fences in setbacks.

k.     Exterior noise standards for second and third story balconies.

2.     Approval of mixed-use zoning in conjunction with the qualified housing development if commercial, office, industrial, or other land uses will reduce the cost of the housing development and if the commercial, office, industrial, or other land uses are compatible with the housing project and the existing or planned development in the area where the qualified housing development will be located.

3.     Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the applicant or the City that result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions or avoidance.

E.     The City may approve or deny the additional incentive(s) requested by the applicant pursuant to subsection D in its sole and absolute discretion.

F.     The granting of an additional incentive(s) pursuant to this chapter shall not be interpreted to require a General Plan amendment, a change of zone, or other discretionary approval.

G.    Equivalent Financial Incentive

The City may offer an equivalent financial incentive in lieu of granting a density bonus and/or a development incentive(s). The value of the equivalent financial incentive shall be equal to at least the land cost per dwelling unit savings that would result from a density bonus and must contribute significantly to the economic feasibility of providing the target units pursuant to this chapter. (13-04; 08-05)

 

16.033.060 QUALIFIED HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS WITH CHILDCARE FACILITIES
A.     A qualified housing development that includes a childcare facility, which will be located on the premises of, as part of, or adjacent to, the housing development, is eligible for either of the following:

1.     An additional density bonus that is an amount of square feet of residential space that is equal to or greater than the amount of square feet in the childcare facility.

2.     One additional incentive to that otherwise allowed pursuant to Section 16.033.050 that contributes significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction of the childcare facility.

B.     If an additional density bonus or development incentive is granted pursuant to this section, the following conditions of approval are required of the development:

1.     The childcare facility shall remain in operation for a period of time that is as long as or longer than the period of time during which the target units are required to remain affordable pursuant to Section 16.033.030.

2.     Of the children who attend the childcare facility, the number children of the very low-, lower- and moderate-income households shall equal a percentage that is equal to or greater than the percentage of target units in the housing development for very low-, lower-, or moderate-income households.

C.    Not withstanding any provisions of this section, the City shall not be required to grant the additional density bonus or addition development incentive if it finds, based upon substantial evidence, that the City has adequate childcare facilities. (13-04)

 

16.033.070 DONATION OF LAND FOR VERY LOW-INCOME UNITS
A.     An applicant for a tentative parcel map, parcel map, or other residential development project, that donates land to the City is eligible for a density bonus above the otherwise maximum allowable residential density for the applicant’s development project, if all of the following conditions are met:

1.     The applicant donates and transfers the land to the City or a housing developer approved by the City no later than the date of approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or residential development application for the applicant’s project.

2.     The developable acreage and zoning classification of the land transferred are sufficient to permit construction of units affordable to very low-income households in an amount that is equal to ten percent or more of the number of residential units in the applicant’s project.

3.     The land transferred is at least one acre in size or is of sufficient size to permit development of at least 40 target units, has the appropriate General Plan designation, is appropriately zoned for residential development at the density of no less than 30 units per acre, and is or will be served by adequate public facilities and infrastructure.

4.     The land transferred shall have, no later than the date the land is transferred, all of the permits and approvals that are necessary for the development of the very low-income housing units on the transferred land, other than architectural review of the project required pursuant to Chapter 16.300 and building permits.

5.     The land transferred and the target units shall be subject to a deed restriction ensuring continued affordability and restricted use of the target units consistent with the requirements set forth in subsection C of Section 16.033.090.

6.     The land transferred is within the boundary of the residential development, or if the City agrees, within one-quarter mile of the boundary of the applicant’s project.

7.     The proposed source of funding for the very low-income residential units is identified before the land is transferred.

8.     The bonus density mandated by this section is in addition to a density bonus to which the applicant may otherwise be entitled for a qualified housing development pursuant to Section 16.033.020, up to a maximum combined density bonus of 35 percent if an applicant requests a bonus density pursuant to this section and Section 16.033.020. The density bonus provided by this section is determined by the number of units affordable to very low-income households on the transferred land that is equal to a percentage of the number of units in the applicant’s project. When the number of target units is equal to ten percent or more of units in the applicant’s project before the density bonus, the maximum allowable residential density of the applicant’s project is multiplied by the density bonus percentage shown below in Table 16.033.070.

Table 16.033.070 Density Bonus for Land Transferred for Very Low-Income Units

 

Percentage of Units in Applicant’s Project Equal to Number of Very Low-Income Units on Transferred Land

Density Bonus Percentage

10

15

11

16

12

17

13

18

14

19

15

20

16

21

17

22

18

23

19

24

20

25

21

26

22

27

23

28

24

29

25

30

26

31

27

32

28

33

29

34

30

35

(13-04)

 

16.033.080 APPLICATION PROCESS
A.     An application for a density bonus and additional incentives pursuant to this chapter shall be processed concurrently with any other application(s) required for the housing development.

B.     Preliminary Plan and Pre-application Meeting

An applicant proposing a housing development pursuant to this chapter may submit a preliminary plan prior to submittal of any formal request for approval of a qualified housing development. Applicants are encouraged to schedule a pre-application conference with the Director of Community Development, or designated staff, to discuss and identify potential application issues, and for early feedback and guidance on the means for complying with this chapter. No charge shall be required for the pre-application conference. The preliminary plan shall be made on forms provided by the Department of Community Development and shall include the following information:

1.     A brief description of the proposed housing development, including the number of units, target units, density bonus units proposed, and additional incentive(s) requested.

2.     The zoning and General Plan designations and assessors parcel number(s) of the project site.

3.     A vicinity map and preliminary site plan, drawn to scale, including building footprints, driveway and parking layout.

C.    Residential Density Bonus Application and Filing Fee

1.     Filing

Application for a density bonus and additional incentives for a qualified housing development shall be made on forms provided by the Department of Community Development. The application shall include such plans as may reasonably be required for a complete understanding of the proposal.

2.     Reapplication

A person may not file and the Department of Community Development shall not accept an application which is the same, or substantially the same, as an application on which final action has been taken by the City of Claremont within 12 months prior to the date of said application, unless accepted by a motion of the Planning Commission or City Council.

3.     Filing Fee

The filing fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council and paid at the time the application is submitted.

D.    Application Review

1.     Upon receipt of an application for a density bonus and additional incentives, City staff shall review the application and inform the applicant as to the completeness of the submittal, of additional materials required, if any, and project issues of concern. City staff shall also inform applicant of the procedures for compliance with this chapter.

2.     Public Hearings

When an application for a density bonus and additional incentives is deemed complete, the matter shall be set for public hearings to be held by the Planning Commission and City Council. Notices of the hearings shall be given pursuant to Government Code Section 65091. Notices shall include the dates, times, and places of the public hearings. Also included shall be a general explanation of the matter to be considered and a general description of the location of the subject property as specified in Government Code Section 65094. Notices shall be sent no less than ten days prior to any action taken on the application. Signs, at least eight inches by ten inches, shall be posted on the subject property setting forth substantially the same information included in the mailed notice. There shall be a minimum of two such signs on the subject property. Said signs shall be posted at least ten days prior to the public hearings.

3.     Prior to the public hearing by the Planning Commission, City staff shall inform the applicant that the requested development incentive(s) shall be recommended for approval with the proposed housing development or, if City staff believes that one of the findings for City Council denial of the request can be made pursuant to subsection F.2 below, that alternative or modified incentives pursuant to Section 16.033.050 shall be recommended in lieu for the requested incentives, or recommended for denial. If alternative or modified incentives are recommended, the recommendation shall establish how the alternative or modified incentives can be expected to have an equivalent affordability effect as the requested incentive(s).

E.     Planning Commission Review

1.     The Planning Commission shall investigate the facts bearing on each case to determine if the proposed housing development, density bonus, and additional incentives requested by the applicant are consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter, and shall accordingly recommend approval of the application with conditions, or recommend denial of the application if any one of the findings for City Council denial of the application can be made pursuant to subsection G below.

2.     The Planning Commission shall announce its findings by formal resolution. Said resolution shall recite the recommendation of the Commission and set forth the recommended conditions of approval. The Planning Commission’s recommendation shall be filed with the City Council, and a copy shall be mailed to the applicant.

F.     City Council Approval

1.     Final approval or disapproval of an application for a density bonus and additional incentive(s) requested by the applicant for a qualified housing development shall be made by the City Council. Before taking final action, the City Council shall consider the recommendation of the Planning Commission on the application.

2.     The City Council shall grant the density bonus and additional incentive(s) requested by the applicant unless the Council makes a written finding, based on substantial evidence, of any of the following:

a.     The additional incentive(s) is not required in order to provide affordable housing costs, as defined in Section 50052.5 of the Health and Safety Code, or affordable rents for the target units to be set as specified in Section 16.033.030.

b.     The additional incentive(s) would have a specific adverse impact upon the public health or safety, or the physical environment, or on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact with rendering the development unaffordable to low- and moderate-income households. For purposes of this subsection, a “specific adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions, as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. Inconsistency with the City’s Zoning Ordinance, or General Plan land use designation, shall not constitute a specific adverse impact upon the public health or safety or the physical environment or on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources.

c.     The incentive(s) would be contrary to state or federal law.

G.    Conditions of Approval

1.     In reviewing an application for a density bonus and additional incentive(s), the Planning Commission shall recommend, and the City Council shall impose in approving an application, such conditions deemed necessary to ensure implementation and compliance with this chapter.

2.     Approval of an application for a density bonus and additional incentive(s) shall require execution of a density bonus agreement pursuant to Section 16.033.090 to ensure the continued affordability and restricted use of target units during the restricted period. (14-04; 13-04)

 

16.033.090 DENSITY BONUS HOUSING AGREEMENT
A.     Applicants requesting a density bonus and additional incentive(s) pursuant to this chapter shall agree to enter into a density bonus housing agreement with the City. A density bonus housing agreement shall be made a condition of approval for all discretionary City approvals related to the housing development (i.e., tentative maps, parcel maps, planned unit developments, conditional use permits). The terms of the draft agreement shall be reviewed and revised as appropriate by the Director of Community Development, who shall formulate a recommendation to the City Council for final approval. Following execution of the agreement by all parties, the completed density bonus housing agreement, or memorandum thereof, the agreement shall be recorded and the conditions therefrom filed on the parcel or parcels designated for the construction of the target units. The approval and recordation shall take place prior to final map approval, or, where a map is not being processed, prior to issuance of building permits for such parcels or units. The density bonus housing agreement shall be binding to all future owners and successors in interest. Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, in the event that the applicant enters into an inclusionary housing agreement pursuant to Chapter 16.036, or other regulatory agreement with the City, setting forth the scope of development for a housing development that includes housing for very low-, lower-, or moderate- income, or for qualifying senior citizens, then a separate density bonus housing agreement shall not be required.

B.     The density bonus housing agreement shall include at least the following:

1.     The total number of units approved for the housing development, including the number of target units.

2.     A description of the household income group or qualifying residents to be accommodated by the target units as outlined in Section 16.033.020 of this chapter.

3.     The location, unit sizes (square feet), and number of bedrooms of the target units.

4.     Tenure of use restrictions for target units of at least 30 years.

5.     Schedule for completion and occupancy of target units.

6.     Description of the development incentive(s) or equivalent financial incentives being provided by the City.

7.     A description of remedies for breach of the agreement by either party (the City may identify tenants or qualified purchasers as third party beneficiaries under the agreement).

8.     Other provisions to ensure implementation and compliance with this chapter.

C.    The density bonus housing agreement shall also include provisions to ensure the continued affordability and restricted use of target units during the restricted period as follows:

1.     Rents for target units that qualified the housing development for a density bonus shall be set at an affordable rent as defined in Section 50053 of the Health and Safety Code.

2.     Owner-occupied target units shall be available at an affordable housing cost as defined in Section 50052.5 of the Health and Safety Code.

3.     The initial occupants of moderate-income target units in common interest development, which qualified the housing development for a bonus density, shall be persons and families of moderate-income, as defined in Section 50093 of the Health and Safety Code.

4.     Units in senior citizen housing that qualified for a density bonus shall be occupied by qualifying residents during the use restriction period.

5.     The initial owner/occupant of each owner-occupied target unit shall execute an instrument or agreement approved by the City restricting the sale of the target unit in during the applicable use restriction period in accordance with this chapter. Such instrument or agreement shall be recorded against the parcel containing the target unit, and shall contain such provisions as the City may require in order to ensure continued compliance with this chapter and the state’s density bonus law.

6.     The City shall enforce an equity sharing agreement, unless it is in conflict with the requirements of another public funding source or law. The following shall apply to the equity sharing agreement:

a.     Upon resale, the seller of unit shall retain the value of any improvements, the down payment, and the seller’s proportionate share of appreciation. The City shall recapture any initial subsidy, and its proportionate share of appreciation.

b.     For purposes of this subsection, the City’s initial subsidy shall be equal to the fair market value of the home at the time of initial sale minus the initial sale price to the moderate-income household, plus the amount of any down payment assistance or mortgage assistance.

c.     For purposes of this subsection, the City’s proportional share of appreciation shall be equal to the ratio of the City’s initial subsidy to the fair market value of the unit at the time of initial sale.

7.     In the case of rental target units, the density bonus housing agreement shall provide for the following provisions governing the use of target units during the use restriction period:

a.     The rules and procedures for qualifying tenants, establishing affordable rent, filling vacancies, and maintaining target units for qualified tenants.

b.     Provisions requiring owners to verify tenant incomes, when applicable, and maintain books and records to demonstrate compliance with this chapter.

c.     Provisions requiring owners to submit an annual report to the City, which includes the name, address, and income, when applicable, of each person occupying a target unit, and the bedroom size and monthly rent or cost of the target unit occupied by such person. (14-04; 13-04; 08-05)

Chapter 16.036 INCLUSIONARY HOUSING REQUIREMENTS
16.036.000 INTENT
It is the intent of this chapter to establish standards and procedures that facilitate the development and availability of housing affordable to a range of households with varying income. The purpose of this chapter is to encourage the development and availability of such housing by ensuring that the addition of affordable housing units to the City’s housing stock is in proportion with the overall increase in new jobs and housing units. (18-10; 13-03; 08-05)

 

16.036.010 DEFINITIONS
Whenever the following terms are used in this chapter, they shall have the meaning established by this section:

“Adjusted for household size appropriate for the unit” means for a household of one person in the case of a studio unit, two (2) persons in the case of a one-bedroom unit, three (3) persons in the case of a two-bedroom unit, four (4) persons in the case of a three-bedroom unit, five (5) persons in the case of a four-bedroom unit and six (6) persons in a six-bedroom unit.

“Administrative Manual” means the Administrative Manual adopted pursuant to Section 16.036.050.E for the implementation and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.

“Affordable housing costs” means the total housing costs paid by a qualifying household, which shall not exceed a specified fraction of their gross income, adjusted for household size appropriate for the unit, as follows:

1.     Low income households, rental or for sale units: thirty percent (30%) of seventy percent (70%) of the Los Angeles County median income.

2.     Moderate income households, rental or for sale units: thirty-five percent (35%) of one hundred ten percent (110%) of the Los Angeles County median income.

“Appreciation” means the difference in dollar amount between the resale price of an inclusionary unit at the time it is sold by the initial purchaser, less the sum of the fair market value of an inclusionary unit at the time of the original sale and the value of any capital improvements made to the inclusionary unit as approved by the City in accordance with the terms of this chapter and the regulations implementing this chapter.

“City Council” means the City Council of the City of Claremont.

“City principal” means the difference between the fair market value of the inclusionary unit at the time of initial sale of the unit and the affordable purchase price actually paid by the initial purchaser for that unit as a consequence of the requirements set forth in this chapter.

“City share of appreciation” means a proportionate share of the appreciation of each inclusionary unit based on the City principal to be paid to the City at the time of resale of an inclusionary unit by the initial purchaser in accordance with the equity share agreement. The City share of appreciation is calculated as a percentage of the appreciation which is equal to the ratio of the City principal to the fair market value of the inclusionary unit at the time of initial sale.

“Developer” means any person, firm, partnership, association, joint venture, corporation, or any entity or combination of entities, which seeks City approvals for all or part of a residential development. The term “developer” also means the owner or owners for any such property for which such approvals are sought.

“Development agreement” means an agreement entered into between the City and a developer pursuant to Section 65865 of the California Government Code.

“Director” means the City’s Director of Community Development.

“Discretionary approval” means any entitlement or approval, including, but not limited to, a use permit, variance, design approval, and subdivision map.

“Equity share agreement” means an agreement by which appreciation on the value of an inclusionary unit from the time of the original purchase at an affordable price to the time of resale shall be shared between the purchaser of the inclusionary unit and the City. Such an agreement shall be a condition of sale of the inclusionary unit.

“Fair market value” means the fair market value of an inclusionary unit at the time of initial purchase of that unit without regard to any restrictions on sales price, as substantiated by an appraisal in a form and substance and by an appraiser acceptable to the City.

“Inclusionary housing agreement” means a legally binding, written agreement between a developer and the City, in form and substance satisfactory to the Director and City Attorney, setting forth those provisions necessary to ensure that the requirements of this chapter, whether through the provision of inclusionary units or through an alternative method, are satisfied.

“Inclusionary housing fund” shall have the meaning set forth in Section 16.036.080.A.

“Inclusionary housing plan” means the plan referenced in subsection A of Section 16.036.050 and further described in the Administrative Manual, which sets forth the manner in which the requirements of this chapter be implemented for a particular residential development.

“Inclusionary units” means a dwelling unit developed pursuant to an inclusionary housing agreement that will be offered for rent or sale to low- and moderate-income households, at an affordable housing cost, pursuant to this chapter.

“Los Angeles County area median income” means the annual median income for Los Angeles County, adjusted for household size, as published in the California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Section 6932, or its successor provision.

“Low income households” means households who are not very low income households but whose gross income does not exceed the qualifying limits for lower income families as established from time to time pursuant to Section 8 of the United States Housing Act for Los Angeles County as set forth in Title 25 of the California Code of Regulations, Section 6932, or its successor provision and adjusted for family size and other factors by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.

“Low income units” means inclusionary units restricted to occupancy by low income households at an affordable housing cost.

“Moderate income households” means households who are not low income households and whose gross income does not exceed one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the median income for Los Angeles County, adjusted for family size and other factors by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, as published annually in Title 25 of the California Code of Regulations, Section 6932, or its successor provision.

“Moderate income units” means inclusionary units restricted to occupancy by moderate income households at an affordable housing cost.

“Resale price” means the agreed upon purchase price negotiated between the initial purchaser of an inclusionary unit and the subsequent buyer upon resale, which is used for the purpose of determining the amount of appreciation that is shared under the terms of the equity share agreement. The resale price shall not include any fees, escrow costs or closing costs incurred in connection with the resale of the inclusionary unit. The City may, through the equity share agreement or the regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter, require that the seller of the inclusionary unit provide documentation, including, but not limited to, an appraisal, demonstrating that the resale price is consistent with prevailing market sales prices for comparable homes in the City.

“Residential development” means the construction of new projects requiring any specific plan, development agreement, planned unit development permit, tentative map, minor subdivision, conditional use permit, site plan review or building permit for which an application has been submitted to the City and which would create one or more additional dwelling units to be offered for rent or sale by the construction or alteration of structures. All new construction projects creating one or more additional dwelling units to be offered for rent or sale on contiguous parcels of land by a single developer shall constitute a single residential development subject to the requirements of this chapter, and any accompanying regulations, regardless of whether such projects are constructed all at once, serially, or in phases. The term “residential development” shall include the conversion of rental units to for-sale units.

“Substantial rehabilitation” or “substantially rehabilitated” means the rehabilitation of a dwelling unit(s) that has substantial building and other code violations, and has been vacant for at least six (6) months, such that the unit is returned to the City’s housing supply as decent, safe, and sanitary housing, and the cost of such rehabilitation constitutes at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the after-rehabilitation value of the dwelling unit, inclusive of the land value.

“Total housing costs” means the total monthly or annual recurring expenses required of a household to obtain shelter. For a rental unit, total housing costs include the monthly rent payment and utilities. For an ownership unit, total housing costs include the mortgage payment (principal and interest), utilities, homeowner’s association dues, homeowner’s insurance, property taxes and assessments, mortgage insurance and any other related assessments.

“Unrestricted units” means those dwelling units in a residential development that are not inclusionary units.

“Very low income households” means households whose gross income does not exceed the qualifying limits for very low income families as established from time to time pursuant to Section 8 of the United States Housing Act for Los Angeles County as set forth in Title 25 of the California Code of Regulations, Section 6932, or its successor provision and adjusted for family size and other factors by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, adjusted for family size and other factors by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. (18-10; 13-03; 08-05)

 

16.036.020 APPLICABILITY
This chapter shall apply to all residential developments, except as provided below.

A.     Residential developments proposed to contain four (4) or fewer units.

B.     Residential developments that are exempt from this chapter by State law.

C.    Any dwelling unit or residential development which is damaged or destroyed by fire or natural catastrophes so long as the use of the reconstructed building and number of dwelling units remain the same, and the cost of such rehabilitation constitutes no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the after-rehabilitation square footage of the dwelling unit, inclusive of the land value.

D.    Student dormitories, student apartments owned and developed by educational institutions, and faculty housing associated with boarding schools below the college level. (18-10; 13-03; 08-05)

 

16.036.030 INCLUSIONARY UNIT REQUIREMENT
A.     For Sale Unit

If the residential development consists of seven (7) or more units, a minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of all newly constructed dwelling units in the residential development shall be developed, offered to and sold or rented to moderate income households, at an affordable housing cost.

B.     The inclusionary unit requirement set forth in subsection A of this section may be reduced as follows: if low income units are provided in lieu of required moderate income units, a credit of one and one-half units to every one unit shall be provided; however, the credits may only be applied to the extent such credit equals a whole number.

C.    In the event the calculation for the number of inclusionary units results in a fraction of an inclusionary unit, the developer shall have the option of either: (1) providing a full inclusionary unit within the residential development at an affordable housing costs; or (2) making an in lieu payment to the inclusionary housing fund in an amount equal to the percentage represented by the fractional unit multiplied by the applicable in lieu fee.

D.    The number of inclusionary units required for a particular project will be determined at the time a land use application is filed by the developer for a residential development with the City’s Community Development Department. If a change in the subdivision design results in a change in the total number of units, the number of inclusionary units required will be recalculated to coincide with the final approved project.

E.     For purposes of calculating the number of inclusionary units required by this section, any additional units authorized as a density bonus under Chapter 16.033 and California Government Code Section 65915(b)(1) or (b)(2) will not be counted in determining the required number of inclusionary units. (18-10; 13-03; 08-05)

 

16.036.040 ALTERNATIVES
In lieu of including the inclusionary units in the residential development pursuant to Section 16.036.030, the requirements of this chapter may be satisfied through the following alternatives set forth in this section, in accordance with procedures and standards set forth in the Administrative Manual.

A.     In Lieu Fee

For residential developments proposing five (5) or six (6) units, the developer may, by right, pay a fee in lieu of developing an inclusionary unit on-site. The amount of the in-lieu fee to be paid by the developer pursuant to this section shall be the applicable in-lieu fee set forth in the fee schedule adopted by the City Council. For all residential developments proposing seven (7) units or more, the developer may request to pay a fee in lieu of all or some of the inclusionary units otherwise required by this chapter in lieu of developing inclusionary units on-site. The fee shall be paid as follows:

1.     The amount of the fee to be paid by the developer pursuant to this subsection shall be the fee schedule established by resolution of the City Council.

2.     One-half of the in-lieu fee required by this subsection shall be paid (or a letter of credit posted) prior to issuance of a building permit for all or any part of the residential development. The remainder of the fee shall be paid before a certificate of occupancy is issued for any unit in the residential development.

3.     The fees collected shall be deposited in the inclusionary housing fund.

4.     No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any corresponding unrestricted units in a residential development unless fees required under this section have been paid in full to the City.

B.     Land Dedication

In lieu of building inclusionary units, a developer may request to dedicate land to the City suitable for the construction or rehabilitation of inclusionary units that the City Council reasonably determines to be equivalent or greater value than is produced by applying the City’s in lieu fee to be the developer’s inclusionary obligation.

C.    City Council Determinations

Notwithstanding the foregoing in this section, to the extent not entitled to pay the fee in lieu of developing an inclusionary unit on-site by right, the City Council may approve the developer’s requests under this section only upon making all of the following determinations:

1.     The developer has provided all information necessary to establish compliance with the Administrative Manual.

2.     The developer would incur an unreasonable economic hardship in meeting the requirements under this section and the Administrative Manual as part of the residential development and there are no feasible financial, design, and development methodologies for providing the inclusionary units within the residential development.

3.     The developer has explored and exhausted all alternative possibilities including the reduction of development cost and participation in such programs including, but not limited to: (a) low income housing tax credits; (b) below market rate financing from governmental affordable housing programs; (c) tax-exempt bond financing; and (d) other available government programs. (18-10; 13-03; 08-05)

 

16.036.050 PROCEDURES AND REGULATIONS
A.     At the times and in accordance with the standards and procedures set forth herein and in the Administrative Manual, developer shall:

1.     Submit an inclusionary housing plan for approval by the Director, setting forth in detail the manner in which the provisions of this chapter will be implemented for the proposed residential development. If land dedication or off-site units are proposed, the inclusionary housing plan shall include information necessary to establish site location, suitability, development, constraints, and the number of inclusionary units assigned pursuant to the Administrative Manual.

2.     Execute and cause to be recorded an inclusionary housing agreement, unless developer is complying with this chapter pursuant to Section 16.036.040.A (in lieu fee).

3.     If the residential development consists of sale units, as a condition of the sale of each inclusionary unit, require that the purchaser enter into an equity sharing agreement with the City and execute a second deed of trust in favor of the City securing the equity sharing agreement against each inclusionary unit. The equity sharing agreement and second deed of trust shall be in a form and include terms that are in accordance with the requirements of the Administrative Manual, as they may be amended from time to time.

B.     No discretionary approval shall be issued for all or any portion of a residential development subject to this chapter until the developer has submitted an inclusionary housing plan.

C.    No building permit shall be issued for the residential development, or any portion thereof, subject to this chapter unless the Director has approved the inclusionary housing plan and the inclusionary housing agreement (if required) is recorded.

D.    No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for the residential development, or any portion thereof, subject to this chapter unless the approved inclusionary housing plan has been fully implemented.

E.     The Community Development Department of the City shall establish, and may amend from time to time, regulations for the implementation of this chapter. (18-10; 13-03; 08-05)

 

16.036.060 STANDARDS
A.     Inclusionary units shall be reasonably dispersed throughout the residential development; shall be proportional, in number of bedrooms, to the unrestricted units. If the residential development offers a variety of unit plans with respect to design, materials and optional interior amenities, the inclusionary units shall be identical with the residential development’s base-plan in terms of design, appearance, materials, finished quality and interior amenities. If multiple floor plans with the same number of bedrooms are proposed, the inclusionary units may be the units with the smaller floor plans. The inclusionary units may have non-garage parking or garages smaller than the unrestricted units so long as the inclusionary unit otherwise conforms with the standards set forth herein and in the Administrative Manual.

B.     All inclusionary units in a residential development shall be constructed concurrently with or prior to the construction of the unrestricted units. In the event the City approves a phased project, the inclusionary units required by this chapter shall be constructed and occupied in proportion to the number of units in each phase of the residential development.

C.    Inclusionary units shall be rented or sold to low- and moderate-income households at the ratios established pursuant to the Administrative Manual and shall be provided at the applicable affordable housing cost. An inclusionary unit that is for rent shall remain reserved for the target income level group at the applicable affordable housing cost in perpetuity, as secured by recorded covenants.

D.    The number of bedrooms must be the same as those in the unrestricted units, except that if the unrestricted units provide more than four (4) bedrooms, the inclusionary units need not provide more than four (4) bedrooms.

E.     The equity share agreement for inclusionary units that are for sale shall be in a form approved by the City in conformance with this chapter and the Administrative Manual prepared in accordance herewith. The equity share agreement shall include the following terms:

1.     Upon resale of an inclusionary unit between the date of the initial sale and the ten (10) year anniversary of the sale, the seller must repay to the City an amount equal to the sum of: (a) the City principal from the inclusionary unit; plus (b) one hundred percent (100%) of the City share of appreciation.

2.     Upon resale of an inclusionary unit between the date of the ten (10) year anniversary of the initial sale and the fifteen (15) year anniversary of the sale, the seller must repay to the City an amount equal to the sum of: (a) the City principal from the inclusionary unit; plus (b) eighty percent (80%) of the City share of appreciation.

3.     Upon resale of an inclusionary unit between the date of the fifteen (15) year anniversary of the initial sale and the twenty (20) year anniversary of the sale, the seller must repay to the City an amount equal to the sum of: (a) the City principal from the inclusionary unit; plus (b) sixty percent (60%) of the City share of appreciation.

4.     Upon resale of an inclusionary unit between the date of the twenty (20) year anniversary of the initial sale and the twenty-five (25) year anniversary of the sale, the seller must repay to the City an amount equal to the sum of: (a) the City principal from the inclusionary unit; plus (b) forty percent (40%) of the City share of appreciation.

5.     Upon resale of an inclusionary unit between the date of the twenty-five (25) year anniversary of the initial sale and the thirty (30) year anniversary of the sale, the seller must repay to the City an amount equal to the sum of: (a) the City principal from the inclusionary unit; plus (b) twenty percent (20%) of the City share of appreciation.

6.     Upon resale of an inclusionary unit after the thirty (30) year anniversary of the initial sale the seller must repay to the City an amount equal to the City principal. (18-10; 13-03; 08-05)

 

16.036.070 ENFORCEMENT
A.     The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all developers and their agents, successors and assigns proposing a residential development. All inclusionary units shall be rented or sold in accordance with this chapter and the Administrative Manual adopted pursuant to Section 16.036.050.A. It is a misdemeanor to violate any provision of this chapter. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, it shall also be a misdemeanor for any person to sell or rent to another person an inclusionary unit under this chapter at a price exceeding the maximum allowed under this chapter or to rent or sell an inclusionary unit to a household not qualified under this chapter, provided that such restriction shall not prohibit a household that purchased an inclusionary unit in accordance with this chapter and the Administrative Manual from selling its unit in accordance with the terms of the equity share agreement. It shall further be a misdemeanor for any person to provide false or materially incomplete information to the City or to a seller or lessor of an inclusionary unit to obtain occupancy of housing for which he or she is not eligible.

B.     Any individual who sells or rents an inclusionary unit in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be required to forfeit all monetary amounts so obtained. Recovered funds shall be deposited into the inclusionary housing fund.

C.    The City may institute any appropriate legal actions or proceedings necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter, including, but not limited to: (1) actions to revoke, deny or suspend any permit, including a building permit, certificate of occupancy, or discretionary approval; (2) civil actions for injunctive relief or damages; (3) actions to recover from any violator of this chapter civil fines, restitution to prevent unjust enrichment, and/or enforcement costs; and (4) any other action, civil or criminal, authorized by law or by any regulatory document, restriction, or agreement under this chapter.

D.    In any action to enforce this chapter or an inclusionary housing agreement recorded hereunder, the City shall be entitled to recover its reasonable attorney’s fees and costs.

E.     Failure of any official or agency to fulfill the requirements of this chapter shall not excuse any person, owner, developer or household from the requirements of this chapter.

F.     The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive and shall not preclude the City from any other remedy or relief to which it would otherwise be entitled under law or equity. (18-10; 13-03; 08-05)

 

16.036.080 GENERAL PROVISIONS
A.     Inclusionary Housing Fund

There is hereby established a separate fund of the City, to be known as the inclusionary housing fund. All monies collected pursuant to Section 16.036.040.A, 16.036.060.E or 16.036.070.B shall be deposited in the inclusionary housing fund. Additional monies from other sources may be deposited in the inclusionary housing fund. The monies deposited in the inclusionary housing fund shall be subject to the following conditions:

1.     Monies deposited into the inclusionary housing fund must be used to increase and improve the supply of housing affordable to moderate-, low- and very low-income households in the City. Monies may also be used to cover reasonable administrative or related expenses associated with the administration of this section.

2.     The fund shall be administered by the Director of Community Development, or designee, who may develop procedures to implement the purposes of the inclusionary housing fund consistent with the requirements of this chapter and any adopted budget of the City.

3.     Monies deposited in accordance with this section shall be used in accordance with the City’s housing element, or subsequent plan adopted by the City Council to construct, rehabilitate, or subsidize affordable housing or assist other government entities, private organizations, or individuals to do so. Permissible uses include, but are not limited to, assistance to housing development corporations, equity participation loans, grants, pre-home ownership co-investment, pre-development loan funds, participation leases, or other public-private partnership arrangements. The inclusionary housing fund may be used for the benefit of both rental and owner-occupied housing.

B.     Administrative Fees

The City Council may by resolution establish reasonable fees and deposits for the administration of this chapter.

C.    Appeal

Within ten (10) calendar days after the date of the Director’s decision, an appeal may be filed pursuant to Chapter 16.321 of this title.

D.    Taking Determination

1.     Commencing upon the approval or disapproval of the inclusionary housing plan by the Director pursuant to the Administrative Manual, and within ten (10) days thereafter, a developer may request a determination that the requirements of this chapter, taken together with the inclusionary incentives, as applied to the residential development, would legally constitute a taking of property of the residential development without just compensation under the California or Federal Constitutions. The developer has the burden of providing economic information and other evidence necessary to establish that application of the provisions of this chapter to the residential development would constitute a taking of the property of the proposed residential development without just compensation. The Director shall make the determination, which may be appealed in the manner and within the time set forth in subdivision C of this section, except that the City Council shall serve as the review body.

2.     In making the taking recommendation or determination, the decision maker shall consider each of the following:

a.     Application of the inclusionary housing requirement to the residential development;

b.     Application of the inclusionary incentives;

c.     Utilization of the most cost-efficient product type for the inclusionary units; and

d.     External funding where reasonably likely to occur.

3.     If it is determined that the application of the provisions of this chapter would be a taking, the inclusionary housing plan and the inclusionary housing agreement shall be modified to reduce the obligations in the inclusionary housing component to the extent and only to the extent necessary to avoid a taking. If it is determined no taking would occur through application of this chapter to the residential development, the requirements of this chapter remain applicable. (18-10; 13-03; 08-05)

Chapter 16.040 MU MIXED USE DISTRICTS
16.040.000 INTENT
A.     The MU (Mixed Use) Districts have been established to encourage the development and redevelopment of specific areas of the City into quality, dynamic, pedestrian-oriented environments by permitting a combination of commercial, office, service, entertainment, and residential uses within these areas. In MU Districts, new development shall emphasize the interface between uses and pedestrian connections in addition to site aesthetics and amenities. All development shall be constructed in a manner that provides interaction between adjacent uses whether the uses are part of the same development or are located in adjacent development within the same district. The landscaping, placement of street furniture, lighting, and similar amenities shall be such that it will enhance the pedestrian quality of the mixed-use development. Building design should provide for “informal” surveillance of shared areas by residents, business tenants, and users of the development. The types and mix of uses, the intensity of development, and the residential density permitted in the MU Districts vary by individual mixed use district.

B.     The intent of the MU Districts is to provide for a combination of land uses within the boundaries of the districts, not necessarily a combination of uses on individual lots. A combination of uses may not be feasible or appropriate on an individual lot based upon the unique characteristics of the lot, including the lot’s size, shape and location, existing development on the lot, and/or the lot’s surrounding uses and development.

C.    Within a MU District, the integration of different categories of land uses may involve complementary uses on different floors of a building or within a complex, or complementary uses located side by side along a City block on the same lot or separate legal lots.

D.    This chapter applies to all land in the MU Districts. Any and every building, premises, and land in the MU Districts shall be used for or occupied, and every building shall be erected, constructed, established, altered, enlarged, maintained, moved into, or within the MU Districts only in accordance with all applicable sections of this chapter, and regulations of this Code. (08-05)

 

16.040.010 CHARACTERISTICS OF MIXED USE DISTRICTS
The Mixed Use (MU) Districts are as follows:

A.     MU1 (Indian Hill/Arrow Highway Mixed Use District). The MU1 District is located southeast of Indian Hill Boulevard and Arrow Highway. Emphasis is on retail uses on the ground floor along Indian Hill Boulevard and Arrow Highway frontages, with residential/offices on the upper floor. Residential uses are encouraged, and retail commercial uses need not be included adjacent to the adjoining single-family neighborhood. Commercial development has a maximum floor area ratio (FAR) of 1.3. Residential development has a maximum density of 22 units to the acre.

B.     MU2 (College Avenue/South Village Transit-Oriented Mixed Use District). The MU2 District is located south and east of the Claremont Transit Center. Development in this district should be a positive addition to the Claremont Village environment and be designed to encourage use of alternative modes of transportation. A mix of uses are encouraged with an emphasis on residential uses with limited office/commercial possible along College Avenue and First Street, and other ground floor areas. Development on individual lots need not include both commercial and residential uses, but shall complement uses on surrounding properties. Commercial development has a maximum floor area ratio (FAR) of 1.5. Residential development has a maximum density of 22 units to the acre.

C.    MU3 (W. Foothill Boulevard Mixed Use District). The MU3 District includes properties that front on Foothill Boulevard and back up to single-family residential development. Mixed uses will include an emphasis on ground floor retail along Foothill Boulevard with residential uses permitted on upper floors and/or as a transition to adjacent single-family residential development. Commercial development has a maximum floor area ratio (FAR) of 1.5. Residential development has a maximum density of 15 units to the acre.

D.    MU4 (Base Line Road Corridor Mixed Use District). The MU4 District is located southeast of Towne Avenue and Base Line Road, north of the 210 Freeway. Uses shall include a retail commercial component along the Towne Avenue frontage to serve freeway travelers and adjacent neighborhoods. Residential and office uses may be included on upper floors and/or adjacent to the commercial uses. Commercial development has a maximum floor area ratio (FAR) of 1.5. Residential development has a maximum density of 15 units to the acre. (08-05)

 

16.040.020 USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED
A.     The only uses and development permitted in MU Districts are those uses specified as permitted uses in the MU Districts pursuant to Table 16.051.A, or as otherwise specifically permitted elsewhere in this title.

B.     All uses noted in Table 16.051.A as permitted with a “CUP” require approval of a conditional use permit, pursuant to Chapter 16.303. Uses permitted with a “SUDP” require approval of special use and development, pursuant to Chapter 16.306.

C.    A use that is not permitted, permitted as a conditional use (CUP), or permitted with a special use and development permit (SUDP) is prohibited unless the Director of Community Development determines that such use is the same as, or similar to, a permitted use, conditional use, or special use pursuant to Chapter 16.339.

D.    Multiple-family development is permitted at a maximum density of 22 dwelling units per acre in the MU1 and MU2 Districts, and a maximum density of 15 units per acre in the MU3 and MU4 Districts. Areas devoted to commercial uses shall be included in determining residential densities. Allowable densities in all Mixed Use Districts may be increased through the provision of affordable housing in accordance with applicable state and federal laws.

E.     Live-work units are permitted in MU Districts subject to the regulations of this chapter, and if located in a commercial structure, live-work units shall not be included in determining the residential density of a project.

F.     The provisions of Chapter 16.051 related to outside uses, manufacturing, fabrication or wholesaling of goods, sale of alcohol beverages, auto service centers, and drive-through facilities shall be applicable to all MU Districts, unless otherwise specified by this title. (10-03; 08-05)

 

16.040.030 LIVE-WORK DEFINITION
A live/work unit means a residential dwelling unit where there is one or more rooms containing working space located within, adjacent to, or near the residential unit, and one or more individuals living in the residential unit regularly use the working space to earn their livelihood, usually in professional or design-related activities. (08-05)

 

16.040.040 DEVELOPMENT INTEGRATION
All new development shall be designed and developed to promote the integration of uses and development within the Mixed Use Districts, and, if feasible, to share access and parking with adjacent development. Property owners shall be encouraged to consolidate properties and/or to work together to create unified development complexes. (08-05)

 

16.040.050 MINIMUM LOT SIZE
The minimum lot size in the Mixed Use Districts is one acre, except lots of less than one acre may be created as pads for buildings that are part of a larger complex in which parking and access is shared. (08-05)

 

16.040.060 BUILDING FORM AND LOCATION
The development standards in Table 16.040.2 shall apply to all Mixed Use (MU) Districts.

 

TABLE 16.040.2

Number of stories and building height

MU1 and MU2: maximum three stories or 42 feet

MU3 and MU4: maximum two stories or 28 feet

Building placement

Developers are encouraged to place buildings forward on properties towards the public street(s), and structures may occupy the entire width of a property, excepting that a minimum building setback of 10 feet is required along a street frontage and any residential district. Any third story facing an interior lot line that is a boundary of a single-family residential district shall have an additional 10-foot setback. There are no other required setbacks from lot lines.

FAR/density

See MU District characteristics above. Calculations of FAR shall not include underground parking.

Usable open space

150 sq. ft. per residential unit for 5 or fewer units, 120 sq. ft. per unit for more than 5 units. Usable open space may be any combination of private and common open space, and may include, but is not limited to, private patios and balconies, shared use plazas and courtyards, and/or shared recreation areas. Usable open space shall have a minimum dimension of 6 feet for private open space, and a minimum dimension of 15 feet for common open space. Internal walkways and pathways connecting such open areas and amenities shall not be included in calculations of open space for purposes of meeting the minimum usable open requirement.

Residential parking

One covered parking space is required for dwelling units 600 gross square feet or less. Dwelling units greater than 600 gross square feet require 2 covered parking spaces. In addition, 0.5 uncovered or covered parking spaces per dwelling unit are required for visitor parking. In mixed-use development, visitor parking may share the required parking provided for nonresidential uses.

Live/work parking requirements

In the MU1, MU3, and MU4 Districts: Required parking shall be the combined total of the following:

► One covered parking space per unit if the area designed or used for residential living is 600 square feet or less, or 2 covered parking spaces per unit if the area designed or used for residential living is greater than 600 square feet; plus

► One covered or uncovered visitor space per 350 square feet of building area designed or used as work/office space.

In the MU 2 District: Required parking shall be combined total of the following:

► One covered parking space per unit if the area designed or used for residential living is 600 square feet or less, or 1 covered space plus 0.5 uncovered parking space per unit if the area designed or used for residential living is greater than 600 square feet; plus

► One covered or uncovered visitor space per 500 square feet of building area designed or used as work/office space.

Non-residential parking

In MU1, MU3, and MU4 Districts: Retail, service and office uses require 1 parking space per 250 square feet of net floor area. Restaurant uses require 1 parking space per 100 square feet of net floor area of interior area of restaurant, and 1 parking space per 175 square feet of net floor area designated for outdoor dining in connection with a specific restaurant. For other uses, the parking requirements shall be as required for such uses in the CH District.

 

In MU2 District: Retail and service uses require 1 parking space per 500 square feet of net floor area. Office uses require 1 parking space per 350 square feet of net floor area. Restaurant uses require 1 parking space per 150 square feet of interior area of restaurant, and 1 space per 200 square feet of net floor area designated for outdoor dining in connection with a specific restaurant. For other uses, the parking requirements shall be as required for such uses in the CV District.

Parking for “micro-breweries in connection w/restaurant” in the MU1 District includes the individual parking requirements for areas used for the micro-brewery (beer manufacturing, storage and off-site distribution) at 1 space per 400 square feet of gross floor area as this light-manufacturing use has a lower parking demand than retail and food service uses. Restaurant, dining and outdoor dining areas of a business will be subject to the existing parking standards for restaurant uses.

Approval of reduced parking

The Architectural Commission may grant a reduction in the amount of required parking for a mixed-use project when it can be demonstrated that the parking demand from the different uses will vary during the day and/or week, and the parking demands for the uses can be jointly met by the reduced parking. Uses for which shared parking is approved must share parking facilities and driveways, and have interconnected pedestrian pathways. The Architectural Commission may also grant a reduction for available street parking or when an applicant can demonstrate that there are special characteristics of the development that will result in less parking demand than the required parking. One such special characteristic could be that the project is designed and located as transit oriented development. If parking for a use is located on a lot other than the lot where the use is located, there shall be an agreement for shared parking facilities and driveways by legal instrument, to which the City is a party.

Signs

In MU1 District, signs are subject to the sign regulations applicable to the CL (Commercial Limited) District.

 

In MU2 District, signs are subject to the sign regulations applicable to the CV (Claremont Village) District.

 

In MU3 and MU4 Districts, signs are subject to the sign regulations applicable to the CH (Commercial Highway) District.

(18-07; 12-01; 08-05)

 

16.040.070 MIXED USE DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT PLAN
A.     In order to provide that new development in the MU Districts is compatible with adjacent uses and meets the goals of the General Plan and the intent of the MU Districts, the Director of Community Development shall review all proposed development projects in the MU Districts to determine if Planning Commission review of the projects is required. A proposed development project in the MU Districts shall require review by the Planning Commission prior to project approval if the Director finds that the proposed development project would result in any of the following conditions:

1.     A new development consisting of a combination of commercial and residential uses.

2.     A new residential use within an existing commercial center or grouping of commercial uses that share parking or driveway access from a public street.

3.     A new residential use that abuts an existing commercial use.

4.     A new commercial use within an existing residential development or that would abut an existing residential development within a MU District.

B.     In addition, the Director may refer to the Planning Commission for review any proposed development project in the MU Districts where the Director determines there is a land use issue that may not be consistent with the intent of the MU Districts and/or could result in development inconsistent with other uses in the surrounding area.

C.    In reviewing a proposed project, the Planning Commission shall make a finding of whether the project meets the following criteria:

1.     The project and the proposed uses are consistent with characteristics of the district and the planned uses for the district as set forth in the General Plan and this chapter.

2.     The proposed project provides for the efficient development of a site, and demonstrates an understanding of the site’s unique characteristics.

3.     The project includes a commercial component, if feasible and appropriate given the district characteristics as set forth in the General Plan and this chapter, and the site’s unique characteristics, including the property’s size, shape and location, existing development on the site, and surrounding uses and development.

4.     The planned uses in the project are compatible with and complementary to existing and/or planned uses in surrounding areas, and are designed in a manner that will minimize potential impacts of noise, glare, privacy, and safety to adjacent properties.

5.     The project emphasizes a pedestrian-oriented environment and encourages interaction between existing and/or planned adjacent development to the extent feasible considering the characteristics of the site and the surrounding development.

6.     The project will enhance the mixed-use district in which it is located, and shall promote the City’s goals and policies as stated in the General Plan.

D.    The Planning Commission shall report its finding on the above criteria prior to the architectural review of the project.

E.     All proposed projects in the MU Districts shall be subject to Section 16.040.080 pertaining to design guidelines for mixed-use development and the architectural review criteria in Chapter 16.300. (12-01)

 

16.040.080 DESIGN GUIDELINES FOR MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT
The design guidelines in Table 16.040.3 shall be considered in the review of new mixed-use development projects. While the guidelines are not absolute requirements, proposed mixed-use projects should adhere to each of the guidelines unless it is determined by the review body that a guideline is not feasible and/or appropriate for a specific project. In addition, prior to approval of any new development project in the MU Districts, the required architectural review findings shall be made by the review body pursuant to Chapter 16.300. The review body may include staff, Architectural Commission or City Council.

 

Table 16.040.3

Design Guidelines for Mixed Use Development

Architectural character and massing:

• Design development to complement the public streetscape

• Utilize front facades of buildings to create streetwalls that define the public realm of the street, support a strong relationship between the building, the sidewalk, and the street, and create a comfortable and welcoming pedestrian environment

 

• Design buildings that have size and scale compatible with the community setting

 

• Provide a quality of architecture that contributes positively to the community’s character and sense of place with architectural elements that are an integral part of the design to avoid the appearance of being “tacked on”

 

• Use articulated building facades that minimize massing, and break down the scale of the buildings, and offer variety as experienced at the street level

 

• Incorporate appropriately scaled windows, doors, and other building details consistent with the style of architecture to achieve stylistic coherence of development

 

• Use good quality building materials

 

• Provide design treatment on all facades

 

• Use materials and colors to unify building appearance

 

• Design entries to be pedestrian-oriented

 

• Provide design features as appropriate to the architectural style of the buildings to provide sun protection and give buildings a distinct identity

Conservation:

• Use energy efficient designs including appropriate site orientation, passive solar and ventilation techniques, and energy efficient materials

• Use fuel-efficient heating and cooling equipment and other appliances

 

• Provide drought tolerant landscaping where landscaping is appropriate

 

• Reuse and recycle construction and demolition materials

 

• Demonstrate compliance with the National Pollutant Discharge and Elimination System (NPDES) objectives

Historic Preservation

• Protect and enhance historic and cultural resources that contribute to the City’s image, unique character, and sense of place

 

• Design new construction that is compatible with surrounding historic and cultural resources

 

• Respect the site’s context within the larger community

Outdoor open space:

• Create network of open spaces with pedestrian connections to/through buildings and to adjacent development

 

• Design open space and pedestrian connections to be attractive and functional site features that are compatible with the desired function, size of project, and surrounding development

 

• Include trees and landscaping as appropriate for the function of the open space

 

• Provide special features such as public art and water elements

 

• Provide outdoor light to enhance pedestrian environment that is also appropriately designed so as to minimize impacts to adjacent residential neighborhoods

Screening of equipment and service access:

• Screen mechanical, ventilating, and security equipment

• Design service areas to avoid conflicts with pedestrians and other vehicles, and to minimize potential impacts on neighboring development

Compatibility with surrounding development and between different uses on site:

• Provide adequate parking to minimize parking overflow to other sites and surrounding neighborhoods

• Address potential impacts on surrounding development such as trash, noise, and glare

 

• Provide for passageways of light and air

Treatment of adjacent single-family districts:

• Provide for privacy of adjacent detached single-family residential development

• Minimize traffic intrusion into residential neighborhoods

 

• Provide a transition in the massing and scale of new development to that of surrounding residential development

Parking:

• Locate parking away from street frontage behind structures, underground, or in parking structures that provide retail, office or residential uses on ground floor if adjacent to street frontage

 

• Provide for interconnected parking areas and directional signs as needed to direct residents and visitors to designated parking areas

Access:

• Incorporate shared driveway access

 

• Provide directional signs to parking areas and uses

 

• Utilize access from side streets and alleys where present

 

• Provide for decorative crosswalks at driveways

Parkway improvements:

• Provide ample sidewalks for pedestrians with curb bump-outs at intersections

 

• Enhance streetscape with landscaping

 

• Provide street trees that will provide shade to pedestrians

Signs:

• Provide signs that meet the objectives of the City’s sign ordinance

 

• Develop sign program as appropriate to achieve aesthetic compatibility of signs within a development project

Alternative transportation:

• Provide facilities for bicycle and carpool parking

 

• Provide bus stop improvements where services are available

(12-01; 08-05)

Chapter 16.051 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
16.051.000 INTENT
The Commercial Districts are intended to provide for developments and uses involving the retail sale of goods, the provision of services to the public, and office functions. The Commercial Districts are of such number and character so as to differentiate among the various areas of commercial developments and uses, provide for optimum locations for various commercial uses with respect to access and service areas, achieve compatibility of uses within each district, and minimize adverse impacts to uses in adjacent districts. These Commercial Districts, and the uses permitted and development standards contained in this chapter, are based on the goals and objectives of, and locations shown on, the General Plan of the City of Claremont. Consistent with the General Plan, the City strives to maintain the character of its commercial districts, and encourages a mix of retail, office, and professional uses that will broaden the local tax base, create employment, and benefit the citizens of Claremont.

This chapter shall apply to all land in the Commercial Districts. Any and every building, premises, and land in the Commercial Districts shall be used or occupied, and every building shall be erected, constructed, established, altered, enlarged, maintained, moved into or within the Commercial Districts only in accordance with all applicable sections of this chapter and regulations of this title. (08-05)

 

16.051.010 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT CHARACTERISTICS
The Commercial Districts are as follows:

A.     CP Commercial Professional District

The CP Commercial Professional District is intended primarily for the development of professional/administrative offices, financial institutions, exhibit facilities, and related support services rather than commercial retail sales. This district is generally located adjacent to residential areas and may serve as a transitional zone between residential and commercial retail uses. Uses in the district shall generally be ones that do not generate high volumes of traffic, result in significant light or noise, and involve nighttime activities. In considering uses permitted with a conditional use permit, the Planning Commission shall consider the possible adverse impacts that the uses may have on adjacent development. No use shall involve the manufacture or sale of any goods, except when the Director of Community Development determines that such activities are minor and clearly ancillary to a permitted use. The limited permitted uses and the district development standards make the CP Commercial Professional District relatively compatible with residential uses.

Multiple-family residential uses may be permitted in the CP Commercial Professional District with a conditional use permit approved pursuant to Chapter 16.303. The residential density shall not exceed one dwelling unit per 3000 square feet of lot area, except when a density bonus is granted pursuant to Chapter 16.033. The density bonus will be the density bonus available to properties within the RM 3000 District under Chapter 16.033. For development of multiple-family structures within this district, the development standards applicable to RM 3000 District under Chapters 16.013 and 16.033 shall apply.

B.     CN Commercial Neighborhood District

The CN Commercial Neighborhood District is intended to provide for limited, small-scale retail sales and service businesses to meet the needs of residents in adjacent neighborhoods. Administrative offices are also appropriate uses for this district. The district is encircled by residential uses and the uses permitted in the district are those that will not generate many vehicular trips from residents or businesses located from outside the adjacent neighborhoods.

All development within the CN Commercial Neighborhood District shall be planned, developed, maintained, and managed as single commercial complexes with shared access and parking to minimize any adverse impacts to the adjacent residential neighborhoods. A development plan shall be required in conjunction with any application for a zone change to the CN Commercial Neighborhood District. This district has a lower maximum height standard, and greater side and rear setback requirements than those required of development in other commercial districts to ensure that development in this district will be compatible with adjacent residential areas.

C.    CL Commercial Limited District

The CL Commercial Limited District is intended for the development of small retail shopping centers with limited uses to serve the day-to-day living needs of residents of the City. The districts are located at the edges of residential neighborhoods along arterial streets to protect residential areas from intrusive and unnecessary vehicular traffic.

All development within the CL Commercial Limited Districts shall consist of shopping centers planned, developed, maintained, and managed as a single commercial complex with shared access and parking. A development plan shall be required in conjunction with any application for zone change to the CL Limited Commercial District.

D.    CH Commercial Highway District

The CH Commercial Highway District is intended to provide for a broad spectrum of general retail, service, and office uses to serve local, as well as broader regional, market areas. These uses can be stand-alone businesses located as individual developments that face directly onto major or secondary arterial streets, or they may be located in larger commercial complexes or shopping centers located along arterial streets. They may be more intense and/or are typically more dependent on their visibility to large volumes of traffic than the uses located in the City’s other commercial districts. Outdoor uses such as plant nurseries, lumberyards, automobile sales, and outdoor recreational facilities may also be permitted in the CH Commercial Highway District with a conditional use permit.

E.     CF Commercial Freeway District

The CF Commercial Freeway District is intended to provide for a concentration of major commercial uses such as hotels, service stations, restaurants, auto sales, and big box retail that are dependent on their exposure to large volume freeway traffic, and uses that are related to and serve the needs of the motoring public. The concentration of such uses in this district makes this district a major trade area of significant economic importance to the City.

1.     Minimum Lease Space

The use and development standards for this district are intended to promote viable, high-quality commercial development that will increase the local tax base. In order to facilitate the development of large commercial spaces for businesses that serve the region, no commercial lease spaces of less than 4,000 square feet shall be created, constructed, established, or divided in the CF Commercial Freeway District after July 27, 2000, except as follows:

a.     Uses With Approved Outdoor Facilities

For a use that includes outdoor facilities such as an outdoor sales display or service area, drive-through lane, or outdoor seating approved with a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 16.303, the area of the approved outdoor facility may be combined with the area of the indoor lease space to meet the required minimum lease space requirement.

b.     In-Line Lease Spaces

In-line lease spaces that are attached to and/or part of a building which contains a major tenant space of no less than 20,000 square feet may be created, provided that each resulting in-line lease space is no less than 900 square feet.

2.     Nonconforming Development

All existing commercial lease spaces in the CF Commercial Freeway District that do not meet the requirements of this section are deemed nonconforming development subject to Chapter 16.400. (08-05)

 

16.051.020 USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED
A.     Permitted Uses

The uses and development permitted in the Commercial Districts are listed in the following Table 16.051.A as indicated in the columns beneath each commercial district. Where indicated with the letter “P,” the use or development shall be permitted. Where indicated with the letters “CUP,” the use or development shall require approval of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 16.303. Where indicated with the letters “SUDP,” the use or development shall require approval of a special use and development permit pursuant to Chapter 16.306. Where indicated with the symbol < >, the use is prohibited. In the event a use is not listed or there is difficulty in categorizing a use as one of the uses listed in Table 16.051.A, the use shall be prohibited unless a Finding of Similar Use is approved by the Director of Community Development pursuant to Chapter 16.339. In addition, a permitted use may include ancillary uses, provided the Director of Community Development determines such ancillary uses are appropriate, compatible with, and secondary to the permitted use, and are consistent with the intent of the district in which such uses are located.

 

PERMITTED USE CHART – TABLE 16.051.A

Permitted, Special and Conditional Uses and Developments for
Commercial and Industrial Districts

 

USE

ZONE

CP

CN

CL

CH

CF

CV/ CVO*

CVO w/ display window

B/IP

MU1**

MU2**

MU3**

MU4**

1) Administrative/Professional

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Architectural, design, and engineering services

P

P

P

P

< >

P

< >

P

P

P

P

P

Art studios with less than 15% sales area

P

P

P

P

< >

P

< >

P

P

P

P

P

Attorney/legal services

P

P

P

P

< >

P

< >

P

P

P

P

P

Banks, credit unions and remote ATMs (stand alone facilities – without drive-through)

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

< >

P

P

P

P

Banks, credit unions and remote ATMs (with drive-through) See Chapter 16.094

< >

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

< >

CUP

CUP

Brokerage firms and financial institutions

P

P

P

P

CUP

P

< >

< >

P

P

P

P

Business management services

P

P

P

P

< >

P

< >

P

P

P

P

P

Exhibit halls and galleries with 15% or less retail sales area (For galleries with more than 15% retail sales area – see art gallery under 6) General Merchandise)

P

P

P

P

< >

P

< >

P

P

P

P

P

General administrative offices

P

P

P

P

< >

P

< >

P

P

P

P

P

Government offices

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

Insurance and accounting offices

P

P

P

P

< >

P

< >

P

P

P

P

P

Massage/acupressure as primary use (see also Municipal Code Chapter 5.36 and special CVO parking standards in Section 16.060.030.A.6)

CUP

< >

CUP

CUP

< >

CUP

< >

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

CUP

Massage as ancillary use to primary permitted use – less than 40% of gross floor area of business (see Municipal Code Chapter 5.36)

CUP

< >

CUP

CUP

< >

CUP

CUP

CUP***

< >

CUP

CUP

CUP

Medical/dental/electrolysis offices – see use under 9) Medical/Health Services

Real estate, escrow & property management offices

P

P

P

P

< >

P

< >

P

P

P

P

P

Recording/film studios

CUP

< >

< >

CUP

< >

CUP

< >

CUP

< >

CUP

CUP

CUP

2) Animal Services

CP

CN

CL

CH

CF

CV/ CVO*

CVO w/ display window

B/IP

MU1**

MU2**

MU3**

MU4**

Feed, tackle supplies for large animals (large animal defined in Section 6.20.010)

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

< >

< >

Pet grooming

< >

< >

P

P

P

< >

< >

P

P

< >

P

P

Pet hospitals and boarding/kennels

CUP

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

Pet sales and supplies (no outdoor storage)

< >

< >

P

P

P

P

P

< >

P

P

P

P

Veterinarian office (with no boarding of pets)

P

P

P

P

< >

P

< >

P

P

P

P

P

3) Alcoholic Beverage Sales

CP

CN

CL

CH

CF

CV/ CVO*

CVO w/ display window

B/IP

MU1**

MU2**

MU3**

MU4**

Alcoholic sales for off-site consumption with or without tasting room

< >

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

< >

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

On-site sales in connection w/restaurant

< >

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

< >

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

Manufacturing, wholesale and distribution, including winery or micro-brewery with or without tasting room and no restaurant

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

SUDP

< >

< >

< >

< >

Micro-breweries in connection w/restaurant

< >

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

< >

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

4) Educational/Instructional/Day Care Uses

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Adult day care

CUP

CUP

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

Children tutorial classes

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

< >

SUDP

< >

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

CUP

Colleges

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

Elementary, junior and high schools

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

Music, art, dance, gymnastic, martial arts instruction, yoga, talent/acting studio with greater than 1,500 sq. ft.

CUP

P

P

P

< >

CUP

CUP

CUP

P

CUP

P

P

Music, art, dance, gymnastic, martial arts instruction, yoga, talent/acting studio with less than 1,500 sq. ft.

SUDP

P

P

P

< >

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

P

SUDP

P

P

Licensed nurseries, pre-schools and day care facilities for children

CUP

CUP

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

Adult vocational classes, trade schools, computer training, traffic and driving schools greater than 500 sq. ft.

CUP

< >

< >

CUP

< >

CUP

< >

CUP

< >

CUP

CUP

CUP

Adult vocational classes, trade schools, computer training, traffic and driving schools less than 500 sq. ft.

SUDP

< >

< >

SUDP

< >

SUDP

< >

SUDP

< >

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

Ancillary uses to permitted primary uses

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

Online educational institutions

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

CUP

< >

CUP

< >

< >

CUP

< >

5) Food/Restaurants/Eating Establishments

CP

CN

CL

CH

CF

CV/ CVO*

CVO w/ display window

B/IP

MU1**

MU2**

MU3**

MU4**

Bakeries – commercial with ancillary sales – see use under 8) Manufacturing/Industrial Uses

Bakery – primarily retail sales

< >

P

P

P

P

P

P

< >

P

P

P

P

Catering services as primary use – may include on-site dining facilities

< >

< >

< >

P

CUP

P

< >

P

< >

P

P

P

Commercial test kitchen

CUP

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

< >

< >

Convenience store – see use under 6) General Merchandise/Retail Trade

Ice cream, juice, tea and candy shops

< >

P

P

P

P

P

P

< >

P

P

P

P

Food markets – see Food/drug and kindred products under 6) General Merchandise/Retail Trade

Micro-brewery in connection w/restaurant – see use under 3) Alcoholic Beverage Sales

Restaurant w/drive through – see Chapter 16.093 for special standards.

< >

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

Restaurants/coffee shops with no drive through facilities (for entertainment permit, see Chapter 5.45 of Municipal Code)

< >

P

P

P

P

P

P

SUDP

P

P

P

P

Retail food including specialty food markets – see Food/drug and kindred products category under 6) General Merchandise/Retail Trade

6) General Merchandise/Retail Trade

CP

CN

CL

CH

CF

CV/ CVO*

CVO w/ display window

B/IP

MU1**

MU2**

MU3**

MU4**

Antiques retail sales (for antique warehouse, see warehouse distribution/operations under 19) Warehouse/Storage)

< >

P

< >

P

SUDP

P

P

< >

< >

P

P

P

Appliance, consumer electronic, computer and phone/telecommunication equipment retail sales

< >

P

P

P

P

P

P

< >

P

P

P

P

Art gallery with retail sales (If retail sales area is less than 15% – see exhibit hall and gallery under 1) Administrative/Professional)

< >

P

P

P

P

P

P

SUDP

P

P

P

P

Art supplies, framing

< >

P

P

P

P

P

P

SUDP

P

P

P

P

Beauty supplies

< >

P

P

P

P

P

P

< >

P

P

P

P

Books and magazines

< >

P

P

P

P

P

P

< >

P

P

P

P

Camera and photographic supplies

< >

P

P

P

P

P

P

< >

P

P

P

P

Clothing/shoes stores

< >

P

P

P

P

P

P

< >

P

P

P

P

Cigar/cigarette/smoke shops/electronic cigarettes as a primary use

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

< >

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

Consignment clothing sales

< >

P

P

P

P

P

P

< >

P

P

P

P

Convenience stores

< >

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

< >

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

Discount variety, volume liquidation/seconds/cut-rate merchandise, army surplus, or thrift stores

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

Equipment sales/rentals w/outdoor storage

< >

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

Equipment sales/rentals with no outdoor storage

< >

< >

< >

CUP

P

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

Floor covering

< >

< >

P

P

P

P

CUP

< >

P

P

P

P

Florists

< >

P

P

P

P

P

P

< >

P

P

P

P

Food/drug and kindred products

< >

P

P

P

P

P

P

< >

P

P

P

P

Fabric stores

< >

< >

P

P

P

P

P

< >

P

P

P

P

Firearms, ammunition and related products – retail sales

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

< >

< >

Furniture, office and home furnishings

< >

< >

P

P

P

P

P

< >

P

P

P

P

Garden supply with outdoor display of plants

< >

< >

< >

P

P

P

P

CUP

P

P

P

P

General merchandise, specialty, gift, craft items, candles, house wares, and variety (non-discount) stores

< >

P

P

P

P

P

P

< >

P

P

P

P

Hardware/home improvement stores

< >

P

P

P

P

P

P

< >

P

P

P

P

Health, herbal, botanical stores

< >

P

P

P

P

P

P

< >

P

P

P

P

Hobby, toy and game

< >

P

P

P

P

P

P

< >

P

P

P

P

Hookah lounge/smoking room

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

< >

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

Indoor swap meets/concession malls

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

Interior decorating, linen, and bath stores

< >

< >

P

P

P

P

P

< >

P

P

P

P

Jewelry sales and repair

< >

P

P

P

P

P

P

< >

P

P

P

P

Leather goods and equipment

< >

P

P

P

P

P

P

< >

P

P

P

P

Luggage sales

< >

P

P

P

P

P

P

< >

P

P

P

P

Music, CD, tape and video sales

< >

P

P

P

P

P

P

< >

P

P

P

P

Musical instruments

< >

P

P

P

P

P

P

< >

P

P

P

P

Office supplies/stationery/cards

< >

P

P

P

P

P

P

< >

P

P

P

P

Outdoor sale or display of merchandise, or provision of services in conjunction with primary use in a building – see Chapter 16.090 for restrictions and special permit requirements

Pharmacies (without drive-through)

< >

P

P

P

P

P

P

< >

P

P

P

P

Pharmacies (with drive-through) See Chapter 16.094

< >

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

CUP

CUP

Shoe stores

< >

P

P

P

P

P

P

< >

P

P

P

P

Sporting goods and equipment (no gun sales)

< >

< >

P

P

P

P

P

< >

P

P

P

P

Thrift stores – see Discount variety, volume liquidation/seconds/cut-rate merchandise, army surplus, and thrift stores under 6) General Merchandise/ Retail

Travel agencies

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

< >

P

P

P

P

7) Lodging Places

CP

CN

CL

CH

CF

CV/ CVO*

CVO w/ display window

B/IP

MU1**

MU2**

MU3**

MU4**

Bed and breakfast facilities

CUP

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

CUP

< >

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

CUP

Hotels and motels

< >

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

CUP

< >

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

CUP

8) Manufacturing/Industrial Uses

CP

CN

CL

CH

CF

CV/ CVO*

CVO w/ display window

B/IP

MU1**

MU2**

MU3**

MU4**

Apparel/textile products

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

P

< >

< >

< >

< >

Assembly of products

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

P

< >

< >

< >

< >

Auxiliary uses that the Community Development Director finds appropriate and compatible with a permitted manufacturing/industrial use

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

SUDP

< >

< >

< >

< >

Bakery - commercial with ancillary sales

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

P

< >

< >

< >

< >

Blueprint services

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

P

< >

< >

< >

< >

Catalog distribution with no retail sales on the premises

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

P

< >

< >

< >

< >

Electronic, optical and scientific products

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

P

< >

< >

< >

< >

Food and kindred products

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

P

< >

< >

< >

< >

Furniture and household products

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

P

< >

< >

< >

< >

Limited retail in conjunction with permitted manufacturing/ industrial use (provided retail < 20% total floor area and < 20% of gross sales revenue)

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

P

< >

< >

< >

< >

Laundry/dry cleaners – commercial

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

P

< >

< >

< >

< >

Lumber/wood products

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

< >

< >

Manufacturing as a minor ancillary use to a permitted retail use

< >

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

P

< >

CUP

CUP

CUP

Metalwork fabrications

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

< >

< >

Micro-brewery, winery, distillery – manufacturing, wholesale, tasting – see Manufacturing, wholesale and distribution under 3) Alcoholic Beverage Sales

Micro-brewery in connection w/restaurant – see this use under 3) Alcoholic Beverage Sales

Outside operations with permitted manufacturing/industrial uses

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

< >

< >

Paper products

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

< >

< >

Photocopying, computer publishing and related personal services – see photocopying and photo development under 11) Personal Services

Printing/publishing – commercial, large volume/heavy equipment

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

P

< >

< >

< >

< >

Research, development and testing of products

CUP

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

P

< >

< >

< >

< >

Sand and gravel extraction

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

< >

< >

Stone, clay and glass products

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

P

< >

< >

< >

< >

Water resource development

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

< >

CUP

CUP

9) Medical/Health Services

CP

CN

CL

CH

CF

CV/ CVO*

CVO w/ display window

B/IP

MU1**

MU2**

MU3**

MU4**

Acute care/walk-in medical services

CUP

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

Ambulance services

CUP

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

< >

P

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

Hospitals

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

< >

< >

Medical/dental/counseling/psychology/electrolysis/hearing aids/acupuncture/ homeopathy/physical therapy/sports therapy – (for massage, see use under

1) Administrative/Professional)

P

P

P

P

< >

P

< >

CUP

P

P

P

P

Optometry related sales

P

P

P

P

CUP

P

P

< >

P

P

P

P

10) Motor Vehicles Services

CP

CN

CL

CH

CF

CV/ CVO*

CVO w/ display window

B/IP

MU1**

MU2**

MU3**

MU4**

Automobile body and painting as primary use

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

< >

< >

Automobile broker offices

SUDP

< >

SUDP

SUDP

CUP

SUDP

< >

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

Automobile car washes

< >

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

Automobile, motorcycle, and RV sales – new

< >

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

Automobile, motorcycle, and RV sales – used cars sales permitted only in connection with new car sales

Automobile rental agencies with parking for vehicle rentals

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

CUP

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

< >

CUP

CUP

Automobile/motorcycle repair – general, including quick lube, smog check, transmission service

< >

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

Automobile upholstery

< >

< >

< >

P

P

< >

< >

P

< >

< >

P

P

Automobile car alarm and stereo installation (within an enclosed building only)

 

< >

< >

P

P

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

P

P

Commercial parking lots and garages

< >

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

CUP

< >

CUP

< >

CUP

CUP

CUP

Gas/service station (see Chapter 16.087)

< >

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

Gas station with mini mart, car wash and/or restaurant (see Chapter 16.087 for special standards)

< >

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

Limousine service with parking for limousine vehicles

< >

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

Truck, trailer and equipment rentals

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

< >

< >

11) Personal Services

CP

CN

CL

CH

CF

CV/ CVO*

CVO w/ display window

B/IP

MU1**

MU2**

MU3**

MU4**

Banks, credit unions, financial institutions – see use under 1) Administrative/Professional

Barbers, hair/nail/skincare/tanning salons and day spas *(see special parking standards for CV District, Section 16.060.030.A.6)

< >

P

P

P

P

P

< >

< >

P

P

P

P

Body art (tattooing, body piercing, and/or permanent cosmetics)

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

P

< >

< >

< >

< >

Check cashing/deferred deposit or payday advance uses with or without ancillary services

< >

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

Cemeteries and mausoleums

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

Crematory

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

< >

< >

Dry cleaners/laundry – non-commercial (for com., see use under 8 Manufacturing/Industrial Uses)

< >

< >

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

Fortune telling (see also Municipal Code Chapter 5.38)

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

P

< >

< >

< >

< >

Funeral parlors

CUP

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

Locksmith and key shops

< >

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

Pawnshops/cash for gold and diamonds (as primary use)

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

Photocopying and photo developing -retail

< >

P

P

P

P

P

P

< >

P

P

P

P

Photography studios

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

Printing/publishing – commercial, large volume/heavy equipment – see this use under 8) Manufacturing/Industrial Uses

Postal services/mail box rentals

< >

P

P

P

P

P

P

< >

P

P

P

P

Shoe repair

< >

P

P

P

P

P

P

< >

P

P

P

P

Tailor and alterations

< >

P

P

P

P

P

P

< >

P

P

P

P

12) Public Facilities/Utilities

CP

CN

CL

CH

CF

CV/ CVO*

CVO w/ display window

B/IP

MU1**

MU2**

MU3**

MU4**

Government office uses – see use under 1) Administrative/Professional

Public park

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

< >

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

Public maintenance yard and other non-office uses

CUP

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

Public utility structures

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

< >

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

13) Recreation/Entertainment

CP

CN

CL

CH

CF

CV/ CVO*

CVO w/ display window

B/IP

MU1**

MU2**

MU3**

MU4**

Cyber cafe/billiards and pool halls/game and video arcades

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

Golf course and driving ranges

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

Indoor – amusement/recreation/sports and health clubs/skating/batting cages/roller hockey facilities (not within a public park) – for instructional uses, see 4) Educational/Instructional/Day Care Uses

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

CUP

< >

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

Outdoor – amusement/recreation/sport club/skating/batting cages/roller hockey facilities (not within a public park)

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

Public assembly/auditoriums/meeting halls

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

Theatres (live stage and movie) and concert halls

< >

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

14) Religious Institutions

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Churches and places of worship with accessory uses including garths and columbariums

CUP

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

Monasteries and religious group quarters permitted only in conjunction with a church or place of worship

15) Repair Services

CP

CN

CL

CH

CF

CV/ CVO*

CVO w/ display window

B/IP

MU1**

MU2**

MU3**

MU4**

Antique restoration

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

P

< >

< >

< >

< >

Equipment and appliance repair

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

P

< >

< >

< >

< >

Furniture refinishing

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

P

< >

< >

< >

< >

Furniture upholstery

< >

< >

< >

P

P

< >

< >

P

< >

< >

P

P

16) Residential

CP

CN

CL

CH

CF

CV/ CVO*

CVO w/ display window

B/IP

MU1**

MU2**

MU3**

MU4**

Assisted living facilities

CUP

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

Caretaker’s or watchman’s quarters

CUP

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

< >

< >

Congregate care facilities

CUP

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

Continuing care facilities

CUP

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

Convalescent care

CUP

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

Group care 7 or more people

CUP

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

Multiple family development (for MU districts, see Chapter 16.040)

CUP

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

P

P

P

P

Residential within mixed use development having a commercial component (may include senior and other types of apartments) – for MU districts, see Chapter 16.040

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

< >

CUP

< >

< >

P

P

P

P

Senior housing – for MU districts, see Chapter 16.040

CUP

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

P

P

P

P

Student housing/dormitory/group quarters

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

Residential use of existing residential development – see Section 16.060.010.H

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

17) Service/Non-Profit Organizations

CP

CN

CL

CH

CF

CV/ CVO*

CVO w/ display window

B/IP

MU1**

MU2**

MU3**

MU4**

Offices for philanthropic, charitable and service organizations

P

P

P

P

< >

P

< >

P

P

P

P

P

Temporary political campaign offices and headquarters

P

P

P

P

P

P

< >

P

P

P

P

P

Public utility structures – see use under 12) Public Facilities/Utilities

Second-hand clothing/household goods sales – see Discount variety, volume liquidation/seconds/cut-rate merchandise, army surplus, and thrift stores under 6) General Merchandise/Retail

Social clubs/meeting halls – see Public assembly/auditoriums/meeting halls under 13) Recreation/Entertainment

18) Temporary and Special Uses (Chapter 16.306)

CP

CN

CL

CH

CF

CV/ CVO*

CVO w/ display window

B/IP

MU1**

MU2**

MU3**

MU4**

Christmas tree and pumpkin sales (temporary outside sales)

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

Commercial/office use of residential structures

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

Fruit stands

SUDP

< >

SUDP

SUDP

< >

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

Large family day care

SUDP

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

Mobile recycling and reverse vending units

< >

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

< >

< >

SUDP

SUDP

< >

SUDP

SUDP

Parking lot sale

< >

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

Temporary outdoor displays, sales, storage and provisions of services

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

Temporary parking lots

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

< >

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

Temporary use of structures for carnivals, farmers markets, fairs, circuses & religious gatherings

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

Temporary use of structures, trailers and facilities related to established uses

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

SUDP

19) Warehouse/Storage Uses

CP

CN

CL

CH

CF

CV/ CVO*

CVO w/ display window

B/IP

MU1**

MU2**

MU3**

MU4**

Lumber yard as primary use (for lumber yard as an ancillary use see Hardware/ Home Improvement or Discount/big box under 6) General Merchandise/Retail Trade)

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

< >

< >

Mini-storage/warehouse facilities – see Chapter 16.096

CUP

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

< >

< >

Outdoor storage as primary use

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

< >

< >

Outdoor storage as ancillary use to a permitted use in a building

< >

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

CUP

CUP

Outdoor storage for gardening/landscape companies

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

< >

< >

Parcel delivery service

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

< >

< >

Warehouse distribution/operations

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

P

< >

< >

< >

< >

Wholesale building materials w/outdoor storage

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

CUP

< >

< >

< >

< >

Wholesale building materials w/no outdoor storage

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

< >

P

< >

< >

< >

< >

20) Wireless Antennas – see Chapter 16.100 for permitted antennas

 

P

=

Permitted

SUDP

=

Special Use & Development Permit Required

CUP

=

Conditional Use Permit Required

< >

=

Not Permitted

CP

=

Commercial Professional

CN

=

Commercial Neighborhood

CL

=

Commercial Limited

CH

=

Commercial Highway

CF

=

Commercial Freeway

CV/CVO*

=

Commercial Village/Overlay without display window

CVO w/display window

=

Commercial Village Overlay w/display window on ground floor

B/IP

=

Business/Industrial Park

 

**        MU1, MU2, MU3, MU4 – Development in Mixed Use Districts requires approval of MUDDP (see Chapter 16.040)

***      Massage in B/IP zone permitted with CUP only if ancillary to the following uses: gym, health club, yoga studio, pilates studio, or similar use.

 

B.     Outside Uses

All sales, services, and storage in the Commercial Districts shall only be conducted within a totally enclosed building, except as otherwise specifically permitted in this title. Temporary and minor special outdoor uses may be permitted with approval of a special use and development permit pursuant to Chapter 16.306, and incidental outdoor uses abutting and operated as part of permanent commercial uses, including incidental outdoor displays, outdoor seating, and sidewalk sales, may be permitted pursuant to Chapter 16.090.

C.    Manufacturing, Fabrication or Wholesaling of Goods Prohibited

No manufacturing, fabrication, or wholesaling of goods shall be permitted in the Commercial Districts, except as otherwise permitted by this title or when the Director of Community Development determines that the manufacturing of goods is minor and clearly ancillary to a permitted commercial use located on the same lot.

D.    On-Site Sale of Alcoholic Beverages

The on-site sale of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted in the Commercial Districts only in conjunction with a bona fide public eating-place, as defined in the State Business and Professions Code (Business and Professions Code Section 23038) and with approval of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 16.303. Such eating-places shall make meals available to patrons at all times when serving alcoholic beverages. “Meals” means the usual assortment of foods commonly ordered at various hours of the day; the service of such food and victuals only as sandwiches or salads shall not be deemed a compliance with this requirement.

E.     Sale of Alcohol for Off-site Consumption

In granting a conditional use permit for the sale of alcohol for off-site consumption, the Planning Commission shall be required to make the finding that the public convenience or necessity will be served by the proposed use in addition to the required findings in Chapter 16.303. Such finding shall be written and submitted to the local office of the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control as required by Section 23958.4 of the Business and Professions Code.

F.     Automobile Service Centers

Automobile service stations shall be subject to Chapter 16.087 Automobile Service Stations.

G.    Drive-Through Facilities

No drive-through facilities shall be permitted in the Commercial Districts, except a drive-through restaurant may be permitted in the CF Commercial Freeway District with approval of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapters 16.093 and 16.303.

H.    Mixed Residential/Commercial Use Developments

Residential development may be permitted in the Commercial Districts, except in the CF Commercial Freeway District, with a conditional use permit approved pursuant to Chapter 16.303, and provided such residential development is a component of a larger mixed-use development. Such mixed-use development shall include commercial uses located on the ground floor. Residential uses are encouraged to be located on the second floor above commercial uses. Parking for the residential uses shall be provided as required by the parking standards for the RM 2,000 District except if reduced with the approval of a density bonus pursuant to Chapter 16.033. No residential uses shall be permitted in the CF District. (18-07; 16-03; 15-09; 14-04; 12-01; 08-05)

 

16.051.030 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
The property development standards contained in the following chart shall apply to all land and structures in the Commercial Districts. For exceptions and explanatory description of these standards, off-site improvement and dedication requirements in conjunction with new developments, standards of fences, and walls, see Chapters 16.130 through 16.154, and standards for signs, see Title 18.

District

Min. Lot Size and Dimensions1

Min. Setbacks2

Building3

Parking Spaces Required4

 

Size (Sq. Ft.)

Width (Ft.)

Depth (Ft.)

Front (Ft.)

Interior Side (Ft.)

Street Side (Ft.)

Rear (Ft.)

Max. No. of Stories

Max. Height3 (Ft.)

(for General Uses)

CP

—

—

—

10

*

10

*

3

40

One for each 250 sq. ft. of net floor area

CN

Min. 1 acre Max. 2 acres

—

150

10

20

10

20

1

20

One for each 250 sq. ft. of net floor area

CL

Min. 3 acres Max. 10 acres

—

300

10

10

10

10

2

30

One for each 250 sq. ft. of net floor area

CH

—

—

200

10

*

10

*

2

305

One for each 250 sq. ft. of net floor area

CF

—

150

200

10

*

10

*

25

305

One for each 250 sq. ft. of net floor area

CV

For Development Standards, see Chapter 16.060.

*— None required except where abutting a residential district in which case a minimum side or rear yard of ten (10) feet is required on that side of the lot abutting the residential district.

 

1     For existing lots not meeting these standards, see Chapter 16.400.

2     For exceptions and landscaping requirements, see Chapter 16.130.

3     For exceptions, see Chapter 16.130.

4     For parking area development standards, and loading space requirements, for reduced requirements for common parking areas, and for parking requirements for special uses, see Chapter 16.136.

5     In a regional shopping center, with a conditional use permit no specific height limit shall be applied except as may be determined by the Planning Commission.

(08-05)

 

16.051.040 VILLAGE DESIGN PLAN
Development of property that is located within the Claremont Village Design Plan’s boundaries shall conform to the Claremont Village Design Plan. The intent of the plan is to ensure that development will enrich and preserve the character of the Village. Development proposals shall be reviewed by the Architectural Commission for conformance to the Claremont Village Design Plan. (08-05)

 

16.051.050 INCIDENTAL INDOOR SEATING EXEMPT FROM PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Incidental indoor seating for use in connection with the consumption of food is permitted in retail bakeries, retail food markets, and other retail food establishments, provided the maximum square footage of the seating area does not exceed 25 percent of the total gross floor area of the business. No additional parking is required for such indoor seating beyond the amount set forth for retail or general uses by the district development standards of this title. Any indoor seating that exceeds 25 percent of the total gross floor area of the business is subject to the standard parking requirements as specified by the district development standards. (12-01)

 

16.051.060 HOTELS/MOTELS
A.     A hotel/motel is to be used only for transient occupancy. No person shall utilize a hotel or motel as his or her primary residence, except a resident manager of the hotel/motel. All guests at a hotel/motel shall have another, primary residence.

B.     The following shall apply to every hotel/motel in the City, except if the hotel or motel is specifically approved as a long-term stay business hotel:

1.     All guest rooms shall be used only for short-term, overnight accommodations for transients whose guest stays at such hotel/motel are 30 consecutive calendar days or less, and 60 cumulative days or less in any 180-consecutive-day period. It is the intent of this section that if a guest room(s) is rented, let, or otherwise provided to any party for either of the maximum time periods allowed by this section, then the hotel/motel shall not rent, let, or otherwise provide a guest room to that same party or any person that was a member of said party.

2.     The operator of the hotel/motel shall require all guests as a condition of occupancy to execute an agreement in writing that the entire stay is occupancy of 30 days or less. The form of agreement shall be reviewed and approved by the City.

3.     No guest room shall contain a kitchen or cooking facilities, except that a microwave oven and/or small refrigerator are permitted.

4.     Any property left in a guest room by a person or party that has checked out shall be removed by the operator of the hotel or motel and stored or otherwise disposed of in accordance with applicable laws.

5.     A hotel/motel may include one dwelling unit for use as a resident manager’s unit.

C.    No long-term stay business hotel may be established except as specifically permitted by a conditional use permit approved pursuant to Chapter 16.303. A long-term business hotel shall be subject to all of the following criteria:

1.     A long-term stay business hotel shall be specifically designed and operated to primarily accommodate business travelers whose guest stays vary in general from several days to a month or more.

2.     The hotel shall be located in an area with a concentration of amenities for hotel guests including restaurant, retail, recreation, open space, and exercise facilities.

3.     The hotel shall be of an architectural and visual quality and character, which harmonizes and enhances the surrounding area.

4.     Fireproof safety deposit boxes must be available to all of the occupants.

5.     All guest rooms shall have a computer/fax data port, or provide wireless computer connections.

6.     The hotel shall provide a business/conference center.

Guest rooms in a long-term stay business hotel may contain kitchens.

D.    Room rates shall be charged by the day. No operator of a hotel/motel shall accept an hourly rate or any increment less than the rate for a full day’s room rental. No weekly or monthly rates shall be offered.

E.     Transient occupancy tax (TOT) shall be paid for each occupied guest room in a hotel/motel or a long-term stay business hotel pursuant to Municipal Code Chapter 3.28.

F.     Every operator of a hotel/motel shall keep written record of the name and permanent address of all persons renting a unit, together with the dates of occupancy, length of stay, and room rate. Each record shall be subject to audit and verification by the City or its authorized agents, who are hereby authorized to examine, audit, and inspect such books and records as may be necessary in their judgment to verify and determine the accuracy of the report. The report shall not be binding or conclusive.

Every operator shall keep and preserve all records for a period of not less than (4) four years and shall make the records available to the City or its agents at all reasonable times for purposes of making an audit. In the event such books and records cannot be made available to the City, the operator shall reimburse the City for the cost of all transportation, lodging, meals, portal-to-portal travel time, and other incidental costs reasonably incurred by the City in conducting the audit. Appropriately identified confidential or proprietary information furnished to the City as part of an audit shall remain confidential unless they are furnished to the City as part of a civil action or criminal prosecution. (08-05)

Chapter 16.054 B/IP BUSINESS/INDUSTRIAL PARK DISTRICT
16.054.000 INTENT
The Business/Industrial Park (B/IP) District is intended to provide for a variety of professional and office uses, restricted industrial uses primarily engaged in research and testing, or in light manufacturing and the treatment of materials, that will maintain and enhance employment opportunities in the community. The B/IP District is also intended for commercial uses that do not serve community and neighborhood needs and/or commercial uses that are not compatible with other commercial uses allowed in commercial zoning districts elsewhere in the City. All uses are required to meet the Environmental Protective Standards of Chapter 16.154 to protect and maintain the residential character of the City.

All development in the B/IP District shall be designed to provide attractive sites that will complement one another, and be compatible with surrounding residential areas and other adjacent development. The allowable development intensity in this district is intended to be lower than in commercial districts to maintain and enhance the general residential character of the City.

The regulations in this chapter shall apply to all land in the B/IP District. Any and every building, premises, and land in the B/IP District shall be used or occupied and every building shall be erected, constructed, established, altered, enlarged, maintained, moved into or within this district only in accordance with all applicable sections of this chapter and regulations of this title. (08-05)

 

16.054.010 USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED
A.     Permitted Uses and Development

The only uses and development permitted in the B/IP District are those uses listed in Table 16.051.A as indicated in the column beneath the B/IP District. Where indicated with the letter “P,” the use or development shall be permitted in the district. Where indicated with the letters “CUP,” the use or development shall require a conditional use permit approved pursuant to Chapter 16.303. Where indicated with the letters “SUDP,” the use or development shall require a special use and development permit approved pursuant to Chapter 16.306. Where indicated with the symbol < >, the use is prohibited. In the event a use is not listed or there is difficulty in categorizing a use as one of the uses listed in Table 16.051.A, the use shall be prohibited unless the Director of Community Development approves a Finding of Similar Use pursuant to Chapter 16.239.

B.     Environmental Protective Standards

No new use or development may be initiated, or existing use altered or expanded, in the B/IP District until plans and specifications for such use or development are presented to and approved by the Director of Community Development as being capable of meeting the Environmental Protective Standards in Chapter 16.154, and the Planning Commission concurs with said approval. The Director of Community Development may require the preparation of a report that would indicate the environmental effects to be expected from said use or development as related to the Environmental Protective Standards. A qualified engineering, planning, or environmental consulting firm as determined by the Director shall prepare the report. The applicant shall pay all costs associated with the preparation and review of the report.

C.    Prohibited Uses

No use involving the manufacture, processing or treatment of products, which by nature of the operation are likely to result in the emission of offensive odor, dust, smoke, noxious gases, noise, vibration, glare, heat, other adverse impact, and/or hazard to the public health, safety and welfare by way of materials, process, product wastes or other methods, shall be permitted in the B/IP District unless mitigation measures to address these impacts and/or hazards are submitted and are acceptable to the Director of Community Development. (08-05)

 

16.054.020 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
The property development standards contained in the following chart shall apply to all land and structures in the B/IP Park District. For exceptions and explanatory description of these standards, off-site improvement and dedication requirements in conjunction with new developments, standards of fences and walls, see Chapters 16.130 through 16.154, and standards for signs, see Title 18.

A.     Minimum Lot Size and Dimensions (1)

Size

Width (ft.)

Depth (ft.)

Parking Spaces Required (2)

One acre

150

200

One per each 400 sq. ft. of gross floor area; except for warehouse facilities – one per each 1,000 sq. ft of gross floor area.

(1)    For existing lots not meeting these standards, see Chapter 16.400.

(2)    For parking area development standards, see Chapter 16.136.

 

B.     Building Height

The maximum building height shall be two stories or 35 feet with the following exception:

For those lots which do not abut a residential zoning district, or which are not across the street from a residential district, the building height may be increased to a maximum of four stories or 50 feet with the provision that for every foot of building height in excess of 35 feet the required front and street side setback be increased by 2 feet.

C.    Setbacks

1.     Front and street side setbacks. The minimum front and street side setbacks shall be 25 feet. Where a lot fronts or sides on a major or secondary street as indicated on the General Plan, or is across the street from a residential district, the front or street side setback shall be 35 feet. These setback areas, with the exception of perpendicular drives, shall be landscaped. The Architectural Commission may allow structures to encroach within these setback areas in order to achieve a better design quality as long as the total area of required landscaping is not diminished.

2.     Interior side setbacks. The minimum interior side setback shall be 10 feet. Where an individual lot abuts a residential zoning district, the abutting side setback shall be increased to 50 feet. The Architectural Commission may allow structures to encroach within these setback areas in order to achieve a better design quality as long as the total linear length of required setback is not diminished.

3.     Rear setbacks. The minimum rear setback shall be 10 feet. The Planning Commission may allow an exception in cases where an industrial site abuts another industrial site. Where an individual lot abuts a residential district, the abutting rear setback shall be 50 feet. (08-05)

 

16.054.030 VILLAGE DESIGN PLAN
Development of property that is located within the Claremont Village Design Plan’s boundaries shall conform to the Claremont Village Design Plan. The intent of the plan is to ensure that development will enrich and preserve the character of the Village. Development proposals shall be reviewed by the Architectural Commission for conformance to the Claremont Village Design Plan. (08-05)

Chapter 16.060 CV CLAREMONT VILLAGE DISTRICT
16.060.000 INTENT
The CV Claremont Village District is intended to provide for various developments and uses involving the retail sale of goods, the provision of services to the public, office functions, and residential uses that will preserve and enhance the character of the urban Village in the downtown area and extend it to those sites where development opportunities exist. Important components of the CV Claremont Village District include its pedestrian scale, storefront design, and the fact that it is such a good walking place. Existing uses in the CV Claremont Village District are largely proprietary businesses.

This chapter shall apply to all land in the CV Claremont Village District. Any and every building, premises and land in the CV Claremont Village District shall be used or occupied, and every building shall be erected, constructed, established, altered, enlarged, maintained, moved into or within the CV Claremont Village District, only in accordance with all applicable sections of this chapter and regulations of this title. (08-05)

 

16.060.010 USES AND DEVELOPMENTS PERMITTED
A.     Permitted Uses

Uses and development permitted in the CV Claremont Village District are the uses listed in Table 16.051.A as indicated in the column beneath “CV” District. Where indicated with the letter “P,” the use or development shall be permitted. Where indicated with the letters “CUP,” the use or development shall require approval of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 16.303. Where indicated with the letters “SUDP,” the use or development shall require approval of a special use and development permit pursuant to Chapter 16.306. Where indicated with the symbol < >, the use is prohibited. In the event a use is not listed or there is difficulty in categorizing a use as one of the uses listed in Table 16.051.A, the use shall be prohibited unless the Director of Community Development approves a Finding of Similar Use pursuant to Chapter 16.239.

B.     Outside Uses

All sales, services and storage in the CV Claremont Village District shall only be conducted within a totally enclosed building, except as otherwise specifically permitted in this Title. Temporary and special minor uses may be permitted with a special use and development permit pursuant to Chapter 16.306, and incidental outdoor uses abutting and operated as part of permanent commercial uses, including incidental outdoor displays, outdoor seating, and sidewalk sales, may be permitted pursuant to Chapter 16.090.

C.    Manufacturing, Fabrication or Wholesaling of Goods Prohibited

No manufacturing, fabrication, or wholesaling of goods shall be permitted in the CV Claremont Village District, except as otherwise permitted in this title or when the Director of Community Development determines that the manufacturing of goods is minor and clearly ancillary to permitted commercial use on the same lot.

D.    On-Site Sale of Alcoholic Beverages

The on-site sale of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted in the CV District only in conjunction with a bona fide public eating place, as defined in the State Business and Professions Code (Business and Professions Code Section 23038) and with approval of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 16.303. Such eating place shall make meals available to patrons at all times when serving alcoholic beverages. “Meals” means the usual assortment of foods commonly ordered at various hours of the day; the service of such food and victuals only as sandwiches or salads shall not be deemed a compliance with this requirement.

E.     Sale of Alcohol for Off-Site Consumption

In granting a conditional use permit for the sale of alcohol for off-site consumption, the Planning Commission shall be required to make the finding that the public convenience or necessity will be served by the proposed use in addition to the required findings in Chapter 16.303. Such finding shall be written and submitted to the local office of the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control as required by Section 23958.4 of the Business and Professions Code.

F.     Drive-Through Facilities

No drive-through facilities shall be permitted in the CV Claremont Village District.

G.    Mixed Residential/Commercial Use Developments

New residential development may be permitted in the CV Claremont Village District with approval of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 16.303, provided the residential development is one component of a larger mixed-use development. Such mixed-use development shall include commercial uses on the ground floor. Residential uses are encouraged to be located on the second floor above commercial uses. Parking shall be provided as required by Section 16.060.030.

H.    Existing Residential Development

Existing residential buildings in the CV Claremont Village District are encouraged to be preserved and used as residences. New residential construction is permitted on existing residential lots, pursuant to Chapter 16.400. The conversion of a residential building for commercial use shall require the approval of a special use and development permit, pursuant to Chapters 16.103 and 16.306. The use of a residential structure for a combined commercial and residential use shall require approval of a conditional use permit, pursuant to Chapter 16.303. Any building that was designed and constructed for residential use and occupancy, but which was later approved for commercial use, may be returned to residential use subject to approval of the City’s Building Official. (12-01; 08-05)

 

16.060.020 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
A.     Minimum Setbacks

No setbacks are required except where a lot abuts a residential district, in which case a minimum side or rear yard of ten (10) feet is required on that side of the lot abutting a residential district.

B.     Building Height

No building or structure shall exceed three (3) stories or 40 feet (for exceptions, see Chapter 16.130).

C.    Parking and Loading

Parking and loading spaces shall be in compliance with Chapter 16.136.

D.    Commercial Conversion of a Residential Structure

Commercial conversions of a residential structure shall meet the requirements of Chapter 16.103. (08-05)

 

16.060.030 PARKING
A.     Minimum Parking Requirements

The minimum parking requirements for developments and uses in the CV District shall be as follows:

1.     Administrative or professional uses – one off-street parking space per each 350 square feet of net floor area.

2.     Retail or service businesses – one off-street parking space per each 500 square feet of net floor area.

3.     Restaurants

a.     Inside dining – one off-street parking space for each 150 square feet of net interior floor area.

b.     Outside dining – one off-street parking space for each 200 square feet of net outdoor dining area.

4.     Auditoriums, theaters, stadiums, meeting places, churches and similar places of public assembly – one space for each five permanent seats or one space per 100 square feet of net floor area, whichever is greater.

5.     Residential uses in conjunction with commercial uses – one off-street parking space for each dwelling unit. The Planning Commission may reduce or increase the specific amount of parking upon a finding that such reduction or increase is necessary, reasonable and would not defeat the purpose of this requirement.

6.     Barbers, beauty, skin care and nail services, and tanning salons – one space per 350 square feet of net floor area.

B.     Reduction for Limited Occupancy

Existing structures which do not meet current parking requirements may be permitted to open for new, more intense uses on a limited occupancy basis if the Director of Community Development determines that:

1.     The applicant has met the parking requirement for the limited occupancy;

2.     There is at that time no feasible way to provide required parking spaces for total occupancy; and

3.     There is adequate security for compliance by the applicant with the restrictions of its occupancy.

A use permitted on a limited occupancy basis shall be one where a restriction is placed on the total area within the building where the use is permitted to operate or on the number of persons permitted to occupy the building where the use is operating, either at all times or only when operating before 5:30 p.m. with the approval of the Director, pursuant to Section 16.060.030C.

The determination of the Director of Community Development shall be subject to review by the Planning Commission at its first meeting following receipt of notice of the Director’s determination.

C.    Reduction for Evening Operation

The parking requirements for any commercial use operating after 5:30 p.m. may be reduced up to 100 percent for its operations after 5:30 p.m. with the approval of the Director of Community Development. Before granting such a reduction, the Director must determine that the number of parking spaces required for the use under Section 16.060.030A are readily available.

Notice of the Director’s determination under this subsection shall be given to the Planning Commission at its next regular meeting. If the Planning Commission takes no action, then the Director’s decision shall thereupon become effective. If any member of the Planning Commission requests review of the decision, then the Director’s decision shall not be effective unless and until it is approved by the Planning Commission.

D.    Parking Credit

1.     Parking spaces provided by a parking assessment district shall be credited to the parking requirements for uses on parcels in the assessment district in proportion to the assessments levied against each parcel or value of land contributed by the owners of such parcel. Such credit shall be rounded to the nearest half-space with no contributing parcel receiving less than one space credit.

2.     Existing structures which are nonconforming due to lack of sufficient parking as required on January 1, 1975, are granted a nonconforming credit for those spaces that the existing use as of January 1, 1975 would have required. The minimum credit per structure is two (2) spaces and the maximum credit is ten (10) spaces. This credit shall apply as partial fulfillment of parking needs for any change of use and shall accrue to new uses, provided the previous commercial use had not been vacant for more than one year. Said credit shall be utilized upon initiation of any new use and may be claimed only once.

E.     Fees In Lieu of Providing Required Off-Street Parking

1.     Applicability of In-Lieu Fees

a.     Director’s Determination of Feasibility of Providing Required Parking

The Director of Community Development shall review all projects in the CV District, which do not require Architectural Commission review, to determine if required off-street parking can be provided in conjunction with the projects. If, when reviewing a project, the Director determines that it is not feasible for such project to include the required off-street parking, the payment of a fee shall be permitted in lieu of providing the required parking.

b.     Architectural Commission’s Determination of Impracticality of Providing Required Parking

In reviewing projects in the CV District, the Architectural Commission shall determine if it is feasible or practical for required off-street parking to be provided in conjunction with the projects. The payment of a fee shall be required in lieu of providing required off-street parking if the Architectural Commission determines that it is not feasible or practical that a project include required parking. In determining whether it is practical for a project to include required off-street parking, the Architectural Commission shall use the following criteria:

i.      Providing additional off-street parking will result in an inappropriate land use pattern, in that the Village storefront image would not be emphasized or the pedestrian circulation pattern of the Village would not be maintained; or

ii.     Construction of a parking area will be incompatible with adjacent uses; or

iii.     Providing required off-street parking will result in an inefficient site plan, an architectural style incompatible with surrounding development, or both.

2.     Time for Payment of In-Lieu Fees

a.     New Construction

An applicant shall pay the in-lieu parking fee prior to the issuance of a building permit, except the fee shall be required to be paid prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy if the City has not appropriated in-lieu parking funds, or the City has not adopted a proposed construction schedule for the parking improvements or facilities to be provided in the CV District through the in-lieu parking fees.

b.     No New Construction

If there is no new construction subject to a building permit, the applicant shall pay the in-lieu parking fee prior to the issuance of certificate of occupancy.

c.     Approval of Payment of Fees in Installments

The City Council may authorize the payment of the in-lieu parking fee in annual or monthly installments with interest. Agreement to pay the in-lieu parking fee in installments shall be documented by a promissory note secured by a deed of trust recorded in Los Angeles County or by a UCC-1 security instrument filed with the California Secretary of State against the owner’s or tenant’s business equipment.

3.     Assistance of City in Paying In-Lieu Fee

Applications may be made to the City of Claremont to request assistance of the City in paying all or part of an in-lieu fee.

4.     Amount of In-Lieu Fee

The amount of the in-lieu parking fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council.

5.     Accounting and Disbursement of Fees

a.     Fees collected pursuant to this subsection shall be used solely for the following:

i.      To pay for City land acquisition and development of parking facilities designed to serve the CV District; or

ii.     To reimburse other developers who have contributed to Village parking facilities beyond those needed to mitigate the impacts of the developer’s project(s) and who are entitled to reimbursement under a written agreement.

b.     The fees collected pursuant to this subsection shall be placed in a separate and special account along with any interest earnings on that account.

6.     Review of Parking in the CV District

Staff shall from time to time review the status of parking in the CV District and prepare a report to the City Council on the use of in-lieu fees paid to the City. (14-04; 08-05)

 

16.060.040 VILLAGE DESIGN PLAN
Development regulated in this chapter shall conform to the Claremont Village Design Plan. The intent of the plan is to enrich and preserve the character of the Village development proposals shall be reviewed by the Architectural Commission for conformance to the Claremont Village Design Plan. (08-05)

Chapter 16.063 CVO CLAREMONT VILLAGE OVERLAY DISTRICT
16.063.000 INTENT
The CVO Claremont Village Overlay District is intended to preserve the economic stability and health of the retail commercial core of the CV Claremont Village District. Standards established for this overlay district support retail uses that supplement the underlying CV Claremont Village District. It is important to maintain the pedestrian nature of the CVO Claremont Village Overlay District by encouraging retail uses that attract passersby or frequent customer visits, to locate in first floor commercial spaces that have display windows facing a public sidewalk. The regulations of this chapter are intended to promote retail uses in order to maintain the vitality of the heart of the City and are based on the goals of the General Plan.

This chapter shall apply to all land in the CVO Claremont Village Overlay District. Any and every building, premises, and land in the CVO Claremont Village Overlay District shall be used or occupied, and every building shall be erected, constructed, established, altered, enlarged, maintained, moved into or within the CVO Claremont Village Overlay District only in accordance with all applicable sections of this chapter and regulations of this title. (08-06)

 

16.063.010 USES PERMITTED
A.     Ground Floor Commercial Spaces With Display Window Facing Sidewalk

The only uses permitted on the ground floor of commercial spaces that have a display window facing a public sidewalk are those uses listed as permitted in Table 16.051.A in the column beneath the heading “CVO w/display window.”

B.     Commercial Spaces Without Ground Floor Display Window Facing Sidewalk

In commercial spaces that are not located on the ground floor and/or ground floor lease spaces that do not have a display window facing a public sidewalk, the permitted uses are those listed in Table 16.051.A in the column beneath the heading “CV/CVO.”

C.    Modifications to Existing First Floor Commercial Spaces

No single existing first floor commercial space having a display window facing the public sidewalk shall be modified so as to create one or more separate commercial spaces that will not have display windows facing the public sidewalk, except if at least 50 percent of the first floor depth of the building in which the commercial space is located remains part of the commercial space having the display window.

D.    Ancillary Uses

No ancillary use may occupy any portion of a first floor commercial space having a display window, except if all of the following requirements are met:

1.     The ancillary use is secondary and related to an established permitted use in the CVO District; and

2.     The ancillary use is a use listed as permitted in Table 16.051.A in the column beneath the heading “CV/CVO”; and

3.     The primary use in the commercial space occupies at least 60 percent of the total floor area of the commercial space; and

4.     The primary use is located in that portion of the commercial space that is next to the display window.

In Table 16.051.A, where the letter “P” is shown, the listed use is permitted. Where the letters “CUP” are shown, the listed use requires approval of a conditional use permit, pursuant to Chapter 16.303. Where the letters “SUDP” are shown, the listed use requires approval of a special use and development permit, pursuant to Chapter 16.306. Where the symbol “< >” is shown, the listed use is prohibited. In the event a use is not listed or there is difficulty in categorizing a use as one of the uses listed in Table 16.051.A, the use shall be prohibited unless the Director of Community Development approves a Finding of Similar Use pursuant to Chapter 16.339. (08-06)

 

16.063.020 EXISTING USES
A.     The following uses that existed as of February 22, 2008 and which were initiated pursuant to the ordinances and regulations in effect at the time of their initiation shall be considered legal, conforming uses not subject to the provisions of Chapter 16.400 entitled Nonconformities, provided the uses remain at their same location and there is no expansion of square footage of such uses. If such uses are destroyed by fire or earthquake or other natural catastrophe, such uses may be reestablished at their same locations, provided the size and footprint of any replacement structures are the same as the destroyed structures they are replacing.

1.     Personal care service uses including barbers, hair/nail/skin care/tanning salons and day spas.

2.     Office uses that are not currently listed as permitted, conditional, or special uses in the CVO Claremont Village Overlay District pursuant to Table 16.051.A.

3.     Other uses that are not currently listed as permitted, conditional, or special uses in the CVO Claremont Village Overlay District pursuant to Table 16.051.A.

B.     If any existing use in the CVO Claremont Village Overlay District is discontinued for a period of 90 days of more, the use shall not be re-established except if such use is currently listed as a permitted, conditional, or special use in the CVO Claremont Village Overlay District pursuant to Table 16.051.A. For the purposes of this section, discontinuation of a use shall not include periods during which the business may be closed due to (1) interior remodeling or (2) rebuilding due to natural catastrophe, where such remodeling or rebuilding is evidenced by an active building permit. (08-06)

 

16.063.030 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
The development standards applicable to the CV, Claremont Village District, Chapter 16.060, Section 16.060.020, shall apply to all land and structures in the CVO Claremont Village Overlay District. (08-06)

Chapter 16.066 CR COMMERCIAL RECREATION DISTRICT
16.066.000 INTENT
The CR Commercial Recreation District is intended to provide for large commercial health, fitness, and recreation complexes to serve a large regional market area. Development in the district can include a wide variety of outdoor and indoor facilities for swimming, tennis, racquetball, squash, handball, basketball, sand volleyball, golf, personal fitness, weight training, group exercise, physical therapy, and similar activities. Other related amenities and services that could be provided in conjunction with a large health, fitness, and recreation complex are steam rooms, saunas, spas, locker rooms, child care, youth activities/classes, massage, personal/beauty services, food service, meeting and special event facilities, miscellaneous retail sales of fitness attire, exercise equipment, and personal grooming supplies, and similar activities. (08-05)

 

16.066.010 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED
All new development or major changes to existing development in the CR Commercial Recreation District requires approval of a conditional use permit or approval of an amendment to an existing conditional use permit, pursuant to Chapter 16.303. A site plan is required in conjunction with any conditional use permit application or any amendment to an existing conditional use permit.

In reviewing a site plan as part of a conditional use permit application, the Planning Commission shall consider the potential impact the proposed development may have on surrounding development. Potential impacts could include, but are not limited to, excessive or disturbing noise, light overspill or glare, increased traffic congestion, and/or parking overflow into neighborhoods. Appropriate conditions of approval shall be required of development projects to minimize potential adverse impacts to levels considered acceptable to the Commission. (08-05)

 

16.066.020 MINIMUM SETBACKS
A.     Setbacks from Streets

All buildings and structures (including courts and pools), parking areas, and related facilities shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from any street right-of-way.

B.     Setback From a Residential District/Use

The minimum setback from a property boundary abutting or adjacent to a residential district/use shall be as follows:

1.     All buildings and structures greater than eight feet in height shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from a property boundary abutting a residential district/use.

2.     Ground level facilities including, but not limited to, outdoor pools or tennis courts, or uncovered parking area shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from the property boundary abutting a residential district. When a recreational facility has a higher finished grade than the abutting residential district/use, the setback shall be increased one foot for every foot of grade difference.

3.     Perimeter fencing with a maximum height of eight feet is permitted along an interior property boundary abutting a residential district/use. Fencing greater than eight feet in height may be permitted by the Architectural Commission if the Commission finds that such fencing will not adversely impact adjacent development because of variations in the grades of the project site, and the abutting development or such fencing is abutting a greenbelt or landscape area owned and maintained by a homeowners association, and/or the fencing is needed to provide privacy to the residential uses.

C.    Other Setbacks

There are no setback requirements from property boundaries where property does not have street frontage and does not abut a residential district/use. (08-05)

 

16.066.030 HEIGHT
The maximum height of buildings and structures in the CR Commercial Recreation District is as follows:

A.     For any portion of the building or structure located within 100 feet of a residential district, the maximum height is 30 feet.

B.     For any portion of the building or structure located 100 feet or more from a residential district, the maximum height is 40 feet. (08-05)

 

16.066.040 FLOOR AREA RATIO
The maximum floor area ration (FAR) in the CR Commercial Recreation District is 1.0. (08-05)

 

16.066.050 PARKING
A.     The required parking for uses and development in the CR Commercial Recreation District shall be as shown in Table 16.066.1. The required parking for a use shall be the combined total for all applicable factors listed (indoor floor area, racquet courts, swimming pool). For parking area development standards, see Chapter 16.136.

 

Table 16.066.1

USE

PARKING REQUIREMENTS

Indoor floor area (including areas used for personal services, physical therapy, and all other indoor uses)

1 space per 250 square feet of net interior floor area, not including stairways, elevator shafts, and similar unusable spaces

Outdoor tennis, racquetball, and squash courts

3 spaces per court

Outside pool

1 space per 250 square feet of pool surface

Stadium seating provided in conjunction with special facilities

1 space per 4 seats; if seating is provided through benches, 18 inches of bench length shall be equal to one seat

Outdoor facilities including, but not limited to, pool decks, outdoor track, basketball and volleyball courts, patios, and sitting areas

1 space per 1000 square feet of area devoted to such facilities

 

B.     The amount of parking required by the table above may be reduced by the Planning Commission if a parking demand study prepared by an independent traffic engineer provides justification for the reduction. The cost of such study shall be borne by the project applicant.

C.    If an existing use does not have the amount of parking required by this section, and an expansion or addition is proposed in connection with such use, the parking shall be increased as required for the amount of square footage being added with the expansion/addition, plus an additional 25 percent of the parking that is required for the expansion/addition shall be provided in order to reduce the parking deficiency over time. (08-05)

Chapter 16.069 I INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICTS
16.069.000 INTENT
A.     The intent of the Institutional Districts is to provide for the development and growth of educational and residential institutions wherein all directly related and ancillary uses may be located.

B.     No building, structure, or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be erected, altered, or enlarged in the Institutional Districts except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

C.    The development standards of this chapter apply to all land and structures in the Institutional Districts unless in conflict with an approved master plan. For exceptions and explanatory descriptions of standards, applicable general development standards, and required off-site improvements and dedication, see Chapters 16.130 through 16.139. (08-05)

 

16.069.010 INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT CHARACTERISTICS
The Institutional Districts are as follows:

A.     IE Institutional Educational District

The IE Educational District provides for the development and enhancement of campuses for schools and colleges, affiliated institutions, places of assembly, and associated housing for students, staff, and faculty.

B.     IR Institutional Residential District

The IR Residential District provides for the development and enhancement of residential development that provides housing for seniors and others with special needs, together with affiliated service and health care facilities, facilities used for religious worship, and secondary uses that serve residents or users of an established permitted use. (08-05)

 

16.069.020 USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED
A.     The uses and development permitted in the Institutional Districts are as indicated in Table 16.069.A in the columns beneath the names of each Institutional District. If the table indicates that a CUP is required, the use shall require approval of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 16.303. Where the table indicates that a special use and development permit is required, the use shall require approval of a special use and development permit pursuant to Chapter 16.306. A use that is not listed is prohibited unless the Director makes a finding that the use is similar to a permitted or conditionally permitted use pursuant to Chapter 16.339.

Table 16.069.A

USE

INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT

IE Educational Institution

IR Residential Institution

Adult and child day care

Permitted

Permitted

Cultural institutions, museums, theaters for live performances

Permitted

Permitted

Educational facilities for pre-school, primary, junior, high school and collegiate level students

Permitted

Requires CUP

Garths and columbariums

Requires CUP

Permitted

Student group quarters, student dormitories and apartments, and other student housing facilities

Permitted

Prohibited

Staff and/or faculty housing maximum density of 30 units per acre

Permitted

Permitted

Emergency shelter, supportive housing, and transitional housing

Permitted

Permitted

Multiple family residential housing, maximum density of 30 units per acre, that is not designated for student housing, faculty, or staff

Requires CUP

Permitted

Multiple family residential housing, maximum density of 30 units per acre, that is not designated for student housing, faculty, or staff where the site is within high density residential overlay

Permitted

Permitted

Use of existing institutional facilities by community and other organizations for special events, workshops, seminars, conferences, and similar uses

Permitted

Permitted

Offices for non-profit organizations

Permitted

Permitted

Places of assembly and/or worship, meeting halls, clubs, lodges, churches

Permitted

Permitted

Secondary uses and development that provide a service or benefit to residents or users of an established permitted use, or which are closely related but secondary to an established permitted use, including, but not limited to, facilities for common dining, recreation or sports (including gymnasiums, athletic fields or courts, pools and stadiums), shared parking, health care, maintenance buildings, yards and sheds, and similar types of supportive facilities

Permitted

Permitted

Senior housing for independent living, assisted living, congregate care, skilled nursing and/or acute care

Prohibited

Permitted

(17-07; 09-16)

 

16.069.030 MASTER PLANS
A.     The emphasis of master plans shall be to provide for more cohesive institutional campuses and to address the interface between adjacent uses and development. A master plan should address issues such compatibility with adjacent uses, sustainable building practices, conservation, streetscape design, vehicular and pedestrian circulation, building locations, landscaping concepts, sign programs, campus lighting, and other issue areas listed below in subsection D.

B.     All institutions are strongly encouraged to prepare master plans and submit the plans to the City for approval. Master plans may provide for greater flexibility than would otherwise be permitted by the development standards of this chapter and the City’s general development standards, provided master plans are consistent with the intent of this chapter and the City’s General Plan. Provisions in an approved master plan shall take precedence over the provisions of Title 16 in case of conflict.

C.    The intent of master plans is to permit and encourage:

1.     A more creative and imaginative approach to the design of institutional campuses;

2.     Better interface between an institutional campus and surrounding neighborhoods, and between adjacent institutional campuses; and

3.     A more cohesive pattern of development, an efficient use of land, and increased commitment to principles of green building and sustainability.

D.    Master plans should address the following:

1.     Overall campus design

2.     Interface with surrounding development

3.     Building pattern, massing, physical characteristics of, and conceptual design guidelines for buildings

4.     General building location, orientation, and size

5.     Floor area to land area ratio

6.     Open spaces

7.     Housing needs

8.     Campus parking lay-out

9.     Protection of adjacent residential properties from potential impacts of noise, glare, increased activity that reduces privacy, or safety

10.   Traffic impacts to adjacent streets and neighborhoods

11.   External and internal campus streetscapes

12.   Pedestrian and bicycle circulation/connections

E.     Master plans shall demonstrate an institution’s sensitivity to any historic resources affected by its master plan.

F.     Master plans shall also demonstrate the institution’s commitment to minimize its consumption of energy and water, and to promote other principles of sustainability by addressing issues such as, but not limited to, the following:

1.     Design of energy efficient buildings with appropriate site orientation, passive solar and ventilation techniques, and energy efficient materials

2.     Implementation of sustainable building practices including reuse and recycling of construction and demolition material

3.     Use of fuel-efficient equipment and appliances

4.     Use of landscape practices that promote water conservation

5.     Implementation of strategies for reducing single-occupancy vehicle trips

6.     Other principles and practices for sustainable design and construction that are promulgated in City policies and ordinances

G.    Master plans and amendments to approved master plans are subject to review and approval by the Planning Commission.

1.     Applications for a master plan shall be made on forms provided by the Department of Community Development together with any applicable fees. Applications shall include all materials needed to provide for a complete understanding of the project and demonstrate compliance with this chapter, as determined by the Community Development staff. Application fees shall be established by resolution.

2.     Upon completion of any draft environmental review documents, the application for a master plan shall be referred to the Architectural Commission for preliminary review and recommendation before it is presented to the Planning Commission for approval.

3.     Notice of the Commissions’ review shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the City, and mailed to owners of property within 300 feet of the master plan or to property owners within a larger radius as determined appropriate by the Director of Community Development.

H.    Before approving a master plan, the Planning Commission is required to find that the master plan meets the following criteria:

1.     The master plan is consistent with the General Plan and the intent of this chapter, and is in conformity with the requirements of this chapter and other applicable ordinances and regulations.

2.     The master plan provides for the efficient development of the institution and incorporates appropriate principles and practices of sustainable design and construction.

3.     The master plan adequately addresses the interface between adjacent uses and development, and demonstrates sensitivity to historical resources that could be affected by the master plan.

4.     The master plan will not be detrimental to the public interest, health, safety, convenience, or welfare.

I.      Individual projects consistent with master plans approved by the City shall not require separate environmental review provided no new information of substantial importance is submitted to the City requiring subsequent environmental review pursuant to State CEQA Guidelines Section 15162. (14-04; 08-08)

 

16.069.040 VILLAGE DESIGN PLAN GUIDELINES
Development of Institutional property that is located within the boundaries of the Claremont Village Design Plan (CVDP) shall conform to the guidelines of the CVDP. The intent of the CVDP is to promote development that will enrich and preserve the character of the Claremont Village. (08-05)

 

16.069.050 MINIMUM SETBACKS
A.     When Abutting or Adjacent to a Residential Use

The minimum building setback from a property boundary abutting a residential district, or separated by a street or alley from a residential district, is 25 feet plus one foot for each one foot of building height above 30 feet, excepting that any building with a height of more than 30 feet located within 100 feet or a height of 45 feet located within 200 feet from the boundary of the I (Institutional) District, requires approval of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 16.303. Fencing, walls, signs, parking and other minor improvements may be permitted within the required building setback provided such minor improvements are compatible with the existing adjacent streetscape and will not negatively impact other nearby development, as determined during the architectural review process pursuant to Chapter 16.300.

B.     When Abutting a Street or Alley That Is Not a Boundary of a Residential District

The minimum building setback from a public or private street or alley that is not a boundary of a residential district is 25 feet unless otherwise a reduced setback is approved by the Architectural Commission. In considering a reduced building setback, the Architectural Commission shall consider the characteristics of the street and the surrounding development. The building setback shall be measured from the property boundary, or from the face of the curb of a private street. For the purpose of this section, parking lot drive aisles, service roads, and similar vehicular paths shall not be considered to be streets, from which setbacks are required. Fencing, walls, signs, parking and other minor improvements may be permitted within the required building setback provided such minor improvements are compatible with the existing adjacent streetscape and will not negatively impact other nearby development, as determined during the architectural review process pursuant to Chapter 16.300.

C.    When Not Abutting or Adjacent to a Residential Street or Alley

There are no setback requirements where the building site does not abut or is not adjacent to a residential district, street, or alley. (12-01)

 

16.069.060 HEIGHT
The maximum height for buildings and structures in the I Districts shall be determined by the setback of the buildings and structures from the boundary of an I District that abuts or is separated by a street or alley from a single-family residential district as follows:

A.     Any portion of a building or structure that is set back no more than 25 feet from such I District boundary shall have a maximum height of 25 feet.

B.     When a portion of building or structure is set back more than 25 feet from such I District boundary, the maximum height of that portion of the building or structure shall be as follows:

1.     If within 100 feet, the maximum height is 25 feet plus one foot for each foot of setback greater than 25 feet, to a maximum height of 30 feet.

2.     If set back more than 100 feet, but within 200 feet, the maximum height is 45 feet.

3.     If set back more than 200 feet, the maximum height shall be 100 feet.

C.    With approval a conditional use permit, a building or structure may be permitted to exceed the above maximum heights provided the Planning Commission can make the required findings pursuant to Chapter 16.303. (08-05)

 

16.069.070 MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE
Buildings, surface parking areas, and driveways shall not exceed 60 percent of the total area of an institution’s campus, or project site if not part of a larger campus. Sidewalks, plazas, outdoor patios, recreational areas, playing fields, and subterranean parking structures that do not extend above the natural grade shall not be deemed a covered portion of a campus or project site when calculating maximum lot coverage. (08-05)

 

16.069.080 FLOOR AREA RATIO
The floor area ratio (FAR) for an institutional campus, or the project site if not part of a larger campus, shall not exceed 1.0. (08-05)

 

16.069.090 PARKING
A.     The required parking for uses and development in the Institutional Districts shall be as shown in Table 16.069.B. The required parking for a use shall be the combined total for all applicable uses (students, employees, places of assembly, etc.) listed, except if a parking reduction for shared parking is granted pursuant to this section. For parking area development standards, see Chapter 16.136.

Table 16.069.B

USE

PARKING REQUIREMENTS

Education – College

Students – one space for each two regularly enrolled students

Employees – one space for each two employees

Auditoriums and similar places of public assembly, one space for each five permanent seats and one for each 40 square feet of area that is designed or can be used for temporary seating

Education – High school (private)

Students – one space for each four students

Employees – one space per employee

Auditoriums and similar places of public assembly, one space for each five permanent seats and one for each 40 square feet of area that is designed or can be used for temporary seating

Education – Intermediate, elementary and pre-school (private)

Students – one space for each ten students

Employees – one space per employee

Auditoriums and similar places of public assembly, one space for each five permanent seats and one for each 40 square feet of area that is designed or can be used for temporary seating

Emergency shelter, transitional housing, and supportive housing – group quarter housing

Beds – one space for each three beds

Homeless shelter and transitional housing

Employees – one space per employee

Beds – one space per four beds

Multiple-family dwelling units (not for seniors)

Units 600 sq. ft. or less – 1 space plus 0.5 space for visitors per unit

Units greater than 600 sq. ft. – 2 spaces plus 0.5 space for visitors per unit

Senior independent living, assisted living, congregate, skilled nursing, and acute care

See Chapter 16.136 for parking requirements

Services – Child day care centers, adult day care centers, medical offices

Theaters, auditoriums, meeting houses, churches, and similar places of assembly (not part of a college or other school)

Transitional and supportive housing – multiple-family units

Units 600 sq. ft. or less – one space plus 0.5 space for visitors per unit

Units greater than 600 sq. ft. – two spaces plus 0.5 space for visitors per unit

Uses not listed

Parking requirements shall be those required for similar uses from most applicable section of this title.

 

B.     Prior to approval of new development, institutions shall be required to have a parking management plan that satisfactorily addresses how the parking requirements of this section, Chapter 16.136, and other applicable sections will be met; how impacts to the adjacent neighborhoods will be minimized; and what enforcement tools will be used to prevent spill over parking into adjacent residential neighborhoods.

C.    All required parking is subject to the development standards of Chapter 16.136, excepting as follows:

1.     Required parking for institutions shall be located within the same Institutional District as the use served; and within 800 feet of the building it is intended to serve.

2.     The above distance requirements may be modified by the Planning Commission if an institution’s parking management plan demonstrates that the proposed parking will be used by those it is intended to serve, and will not increase the demand on other surrounding parking areas or result in spill over parking into any surrounding residential neighborhoods.

D.    For new development, the Planning Commission may grant a reduction in the amount of required parking for shared uses not exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the total parking required for such uses, if it is demonstrated that there are special characteristics of the different uses that will result in less parking demand than the required parking subject to Section 16.136.020. Uses for which shared parking is approved must share parking facilities and interconnected pedestrian pathways.

E.     The Planning Commission may also grant a reduction in the amount of required parking when an institution provides car pool spaces, public transit incentives, flex-car sharing programs, secure bicycle parking with shower and clothing locker facilities, and/or other transportation demand management measures when it is demonstrated that such measures will result in reduced parking demands. The maximum reduction shall be two percent of the required parking for each such program/measure.

F.     The Community Development Director shall grant a reduction in the amount of required student parking when an undergraduate college institution submits proof to the Director that the college has adopted a written policy prohibiting all members of an incoming or continuing academic year class (e.g., freshman, sophomore, etc.) from parking motor vehicles on campus. The policy shall contain a description of the measures that are in place and enforced by the college and may contain exemptions for up to five percent (5%) of the students in any academic year class subject to the policy, for various reasons including mobility limitations, students residing off-campus, or other hardships identified in the policy. The reduction shall be twenty percent (20%) for each academic year class that is so restricted, up to a maximum reduction of forty percent (40%).

G.    Institutions are responsible for implementing, monitoring, and enforcing their parking management plans, and shall submit to the City annual evaluations of their plans to ensure compliance with the provisions of the plan and this chapter. The annual evaluation shall include appropriate corrective actions to address any deficiencies of the plan or identified parking related problems within the Institutional District and/or adjacent residential neighborhoods. Such evaluation shall be submitted each year prior to the last day of November.

H.    Failure to comply with any of the requirements of this section shall be a violation of this Code and is punishable as provided for in Chapter 16.406. (10-05; 08-05)

 

16.069.100 EMERGENCY SHELTERS, TRANSITIONAL HOUSING, AND SUPPORTIVE HOUSING
A.     Emergency shelters, supportive housing, and transitional housing facilities shall comply with all applicable state and local standards and regulations.

B.     Pursuant to Government Code Section 65583(a)(4) emergency shelters, supportive housing, and transitional housing shall be subject to the same development and management standards that apply to other similar residential uses permitted in the Institutional districts, except the following objective standards shall also apply:

1.     Facilities shall be operated under the authority of a governing agency or private, non-profit organization that provides, or that contracts with recognized community organizations to provide, emergency shelters and transitional housing, and which, when required by law, is properly registered and licensed. The provider shall have a history of managing facilities similar to that proposed, and shall demonstrate that such facilities were well managed to the satisfaction of the Director of Community Development.

2.     Prior to the establishment of a shelter, supportive housing, or transitional housing, there shall be a written agreement between the City and owner/manager of the facility/housing units addressing all of the following:

a.     The provision of on-site management 24 hours a day to oversee the facilities or housing units.

b.     Ongoing enforcement of written rules of conduct for residents.

c.     Plan for handling complaints from neighboring properties.

d.     Discouragement of loitering of residents and others near the facility/housing units and/or in adjacent neighborhoods.

e.     Implementation of a security plan with appropriate security measures.

f.      The provision of counseling, vocational, and other supportive services to persons/families being housed.

g.     Ongoing maintenance of structures and landscaping.

h.     Availability of the operator to meet with City officials to resolve complaints.

3.     There shall be an annual inspection and review to ensure compliance with the agreement.

4.     The operator of the facility shall not discriminate in any services provided, and shall not require participation by residents in any religious or philosophical ritual, service, meeting, or rite as a condition of eligibility.

5.     Any one dwelling unit shall have a maximum occupancy of one household per unit.

6.     The design of the facilities shall be appropriate for the proposed use and shall take clients’ special needs into consideration. The facility may provide meals, counseling, and other services, as well as common areas for residents of the facility. If appropriate, the facility shall have childcare and play areas.

7.     The maximum length of stay at an emergency shelter is six months. A family or household may occupy transitional housing for a temporary period up to two years. Supportive housing has no limit on the length of stay pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 50675.14. (09-16)

Chapter 16.072 P/RC PARK/RESOURCE CONSERVATION DISTRICT
16.072.000 INTENT
A.     The Parks/Resource Conservation (P/RC) District is intended to assure open space areas for uses such as public parks, outdoor recreation, cemetery uses, protection of natural habitat, preservation of cultural resources, management of groundwater resources, protection and conservation of mineral resources, and the protection of the public health and safety due to hazardous or special conditions.

B.     No building, structure, or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be erected, altered, or enlarged, in the P/RC District except in accordance with the provision of this chapter. (08-05)

 

16.072.010 USES AND DEVELOPMENT
Only the following uses and development shall be permitted as a matter of right in the P/RC District:

A.     Parks and outdoor recreation facilities such as playgrounds, playing fields, and trails, open to the public and for which no admission fee is charged.

B.     Community, senior and youth activity centers.

C.    Cemetery uses.

D.    Highway and freeway landscaping.

E.     Water recharge facilities, settling basins, and drainage channels.

F.     Natural habitat protection.

G.    Preservation of architectural, historic, cultural and natural resources.

H.    The growing of plants, provided no sales occur at the site.

I.      Facilities for use by the public such as benches, picnic tables, shade structures, paved walkways, parking lots, fencing, restroom buildings, other minor buildings, and ancillary improvements such as lighting related to permitted uses.

J.     Commercial antenna/wireless telecommunication facilities pursuant to Chapter 16.100. (12-01; 08-05)

 

16.072.020 SPECIAL USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED
The uses and development listed in Chapter 16.306 as permitted subject to issuance of a special use and development permit may be allowed in the P/RC District if determined to be consistent with the intent of this chapter and approved with a special use and development permit. (08-05)

 

16.072.030 CONDITIONAL USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED
The following uses may be permitted in the P/RC District only upon approval of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 16.303:

A.     Minor structures that are not intended for use by the public on privately owned property.

B.     Private recreational facilities where an admission or use fee is charged, or club membership is required. (08-05)

 

16.072.040 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
The following standards shall apply to all privately owned land and structures in the P/RC District:

A.     Height. The maximum height of a building or structure is 30 feet unless otherwise permitted by this title. No building may exceed two stories. The maximum wall or fence height is eight feet.

B.     Setbacks. Any building or structure with a height of more than eight feet shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from any street and 10 feet from any interior lot abutting a residential district boundary.

C.    Parking spaces for private uses shall be provided as required by the Planning Commission. An applicant may be required to submit a parking study to demonstrate the appropriate amount of parking for a proposed use of property. Parking areas shall be subject to the standards of Chapter 16.136. (08-05)

Chapter 16.075 WP WILDERNESS PARK DISTRICT
16.075.000 INTENT
The WP Wilderness Park District is intended to assure the preservation of the natural characteristics of hillside properties that have been acquired by the City, while providing the public opportunities for recreation and passive enjoyment. (08-05)

 

16.075.010 PERMITTED USES
Properties in the WP District shall remain essentially undeveloped. Only the following uses are permitted in the WP Wilderness Park District:

A.     Low intensity, outdoor recreation activities such as hiking, running, mountain bike riding, horseback riding, photography, bird watching, and picnicking.

B.     Conservation projects, student research, or education programs involving the study of nature, ecology, or earth sciences.

C.    Outdoor programs, lectures, and organized community activities.

D.    Unobtrusive ancillary facilities for use by the public such as benches, shade structures, informational signs, and trails approved by the City Council.

E.     Parking areas for park visitors, restroom buildings, fencing, trash receptacles, information kiosks, message boards, and other ancillary facilities, located in staging areas adjacent to park entrances and at the beginning of trails.

F.     Vegetation management as determined necessary by the City and County of Los Angeles Fire Department (LACFD) to reduce hazardous wildfire conditions. (08-05)

 

16.075.020 REGULATIONS
All permitted activities shall be subject to provisions of Chapter 11.10 of the Municipal Code and the Claremont Hills Wilderness Park Management Plan. (08-05)

Chapter 16.078 P PUBLIC DISTRICT
16.078.000 INTENT
The intent of the Public (P) District is to delineate on Claremont’s Official Zoning Map the location of public uses and/or publicly owned property. No building, structure, or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be erected, altered, or enlarged except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (08-05)

 

16.078.010 PERMITTED USES
Only the following uses are permitted in the P Public District:

A.     Public uses, including government agencies, schools, libraries, post offices, fire stations, public safety facilities, community centers, museums, theaters, civic center, and similar local, state, or federal uses.

B.     Governmental maintenance yards.

C.    Utilities structures, substations, and distribution facilities, provided all equipment and appurtenances are within an enclosed structure or screened from view.

D.    Parking facilities.

E.     Parks.

F.     Open space and highway landscaping.

G.    Water treatment, retention, and distribution facilities.

H.    Wireless communication facilities pursuant to Chapter 16.100. (08-05)

 

16.078.020 CONDITIONAL USES
The following uses may be permitted in the P Public District only with approval of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 16.303: utility structures, substations, and distribution facilities where equipment and appurtenances are not within an enclosed structure or screened from view. (08-05)

 

16.078.030 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Development standards for the P Public District shall be determined on a site-by-site basis. Consideration shall be given to surrounding properties and developments in order to blend the developments with, and to keep it consistent with, the surrounding area. Additional factors to be considered for the determination of standards are topography, water drainage, circulation, use of site, and any other environmental factors related to the site. (08-05)

Chapter 16.081 SP SPECIFIC PLAN DISTRICT
16.081.000 INTENT
It is the intent of these provisions to provide greater specificity and flexibility in carrying out the General Plan of the City that would be possible in other districts. This district is for areas that are subject to a specific plan adopted under Article 8 of Chapter 3 of Title 7 of the Government Code (Section 65450 and following) and Chapter 16.318 of this title. (08-05)

 

16.081.010 USES AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITTED
A.     The uses, types of development and development standards in an area zoned specific plan are those permitted by the specific plan adopted for that area. Each separate Specific Plan District and its accompanying specific plan shall be sequentially numbered.

B.     If land is placed in the Specific Plan District before a specific plan is adopted for that land, the standards of the immediately preceding zoning shall continue to apply until a specific plan is adopted, except uses and development in Specific Plans Areas #10, 12, and 13 shall be subject to the standards and regulations applicable to the CH Commercial Highway District. (08-05)

 

16.081.020 SPECIFIC PLAN AREAS
Specific plan areas include the following:

A.     Specific Plan Area 1 (Claremont Business Park) is no longer applicable to any land in the City.

B.     Specific Plan Area No. 2 (Meadowood Residential Development) applies to Tract No. 41878, an area bounded on the south by Miramar Avenue, on the east by Mills Avenue, on the west by Bonnie Brae Avenue, and on the north by Alamosa Drive.

C.    Specific Plan Area No. 3 is no longer applicable to any land in the City.

D.    Specific Plan Area No. 4 is no longer applicable to any land in the City.

E.     Specific Plan Area No. 5 (Williams Avenue) applies to Tract 46523, an area generally located south of 210 Freeway, east of Williams Avenue, and north of College Way.

F.     Specific Plan Area No. 6 (Claremont Hills) applies to Tract 50568, an area located north of Mt. Baldy Road, east and west of Padua Avenue.

G.    Specific Plan Area No. 7 (The Grove) applies to Tract 48694, an area located at the northwest corner of the intersection of Pomello Avenue and Padua Avenue.

H.    Specific Plan Area No. 8 (Claremont Village Expansion) applies to area generally bounded on the north by Bonita Avenue, on the east by the alley immediately east of Indian Hill Boulevard, on the south by the Metrolink Railway right-of-way, and on the west by the Berkeley Avenue right-of-way.

I.      Specific Plan Area No. 9 (Old School House/Claremont Inn Revitalization) applies to area located at the northwest corner of the intersection of Foothill Boulevard and Indian Hill Boulevard.

J.     Specific Plan Area No. 10 applies to an area west of the Specific Plan Area No. 9, on the northeast corner of the intersection of Colby Circle and Foothill Boulevard.

K.     Specific Plan Area No. 11 applies an area located north of the City’s corporate yards, and bounded on the west by Claremont Boulevard, on the north by 210 Freeway, and on the east by the Los Angeles/San Bernardino county boundary.

L.     Specific Plan Area No. 12 applies to an area situated at the southwest corner of the intersection of San Jose Avenue and Indian Hill Boulevard.

M.    Specific Plan Area No. 13 applies to an area situated at the southeast corner of the intersection of San Jose Avenue and Indian Hill Boulevard.

N.    Specific Plan Area No. 14 applies to an area situated west of the Los Angeles/San Bernardino county boundary, north of Base Line Road, and southeast of 210 Freeway. (08-05)

Chapter 16.087 AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS
16.087.000 INTENT
It is the intent of this chapter to provide for service stations on adequate sites at proper and desirable locations with respect to traffic patterns and adjacent land uses, and to ensure that service stations do not have adverse impact on adjacent land uses. (08-05)

 

16.087.010 APPLICABILITY
No new service station shall be constructed, and no service station use of an existing station which has been vacated for more than 12 months, shall be initiated, unless a conditional use permit is issued by the Planning Commission, pursuant to Chapter 16.303.

All new service station developments and modifications to existing service stations shall be required to be in conformance with the development standards of this chapter. Existing service stations, as well as new service stations, shall comply with all operational regulations of this chapter. (08-05)

 

16.087.020 LOCATION
Automobile service stations shall only be permitted in those districts as provided in Chapter 16.051. All automobile service stations shall require a conditional use permit, and shall be permitted only in conjunction, and compatible with, a larger commercial development (e.g., shopping center, traveler complex, auto service center), located at the intersection of a major or secondary arterial with the freeway or another arterial street as shown in the City’s General Plan. All automobile service station facilities shall be located no less than 100 feet from any residential use. (08-05)

 

16.087.030 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
A.     Lot Area

For all new service stations, the minimum area of a site for an automobile service station shall be 30,000 square feet.

B.     Setbacks

For all new service stations, all buildings, including canopies, shall be set back 10 feet from any property line and 20 feet from a public right-of-way. Pump islands shall be set back 25 feet from any property line.

C.    Curb Cuts and Driveways

For all new service stations, there shall be no more than one driveway with a maximum width of 35 feet on any one street frontage. At corners, driveways shall not be located closer than 50 feet from the point of intersection of the street side property lines. Entrance to an abutting commercial development or combined driveways will be encouraged to facilitate good circulation.

D.    Parking

Parking of vehicles on-site is prohibited except for vehicles in the process of being serviced, vehicles belonging to customers and employees, service trucks owned by the establishment, and rental vehicles as provided in Section 16.087.050. Tow trucks shall not be parked at the site unless approved as part of the conditional use permit for the automobile service station. Temporary overnight outdoor storage and parking of vehicles waiting for repair or pickup may only be permitted if appropriate and specific parking areas are set aside on the site for such use as part of the conditional use permit. No vehicle may be parked on-site for the purpose of offering such automobile for sale. A minimum of one parking space shall be provided for each 250 square feet of gross interior floor area used for any office/cashier space, mini-mart, service bay and/or restaurant area, and at least one specially marked parking space shall be provided in a convenient location for air and water services. All parking spaces shall be constructed, marked, and landscaped in compliance with the development standards for parking areas with six or more spaces in Chapter 16.136.

E.     Architecture

All new automobile service station developments and modifications to existing automobile service stations shall be subject to architectural review pursuant to Chapter 16.300.

F.     Signs

All signs are subject to Title 18 of this Code.

G.    Perimeter Walls

Walls may be required on the property lines and along the street planted areas if the Planning Commission determines that the site should be buffered from abutting properties. No wall shall be constructed within five feet of a driveway entrance or vehicle accessway opening onto a street or alley which would obstruct a view of pedestrians on the sidewalk, alley, or elsewhere by motorists entering or standing on the parcel.

H.    Refuse and Recycling Areas

An enclosed area for refuse and recyclable materials integrated with the design of the station shall be provided to meet the specifications of the Director of Community Services.

I.      Restrooms

Every new service station shall provide accessible restrooms for men and women. Such restrooms shall be designed such that the entrance to the restrooms are from within the service station building or related retail/restaurant building, or if the use of restrooms can be continually monitored by a service station employee, the restrooms can be designed to be accessed from the outside.

J.     Lighting

1.     All lamps in exterior lighting shall be so arranged and shielded so as to prevent direct illumination from striking abutting property and from striking the occupants of vehicles passing on the public right-of-way.

2.     All light fixtures under the canopies and on the buildings shall be designed so that all the light rays emitted by the fixtures are projected below a horizontal plane at a point below the lowest part of the lamp (fully cut-off light fixture).

3.     All lamps in fixtures shall be covered with diffusing lenses. In under canopy lighting, no lens shall extend below the bottom of the light fixture (i.e., no drop down lenses permitted).

4.     Parking lot lighting shall be subject to the standards for parking lot lighting in Chapter 16.136.

5.     Architectural review is required for all new and modified exterior, under canopy, and parking lot lighting.

K.     Landscaping

New landscaping and modifications to existing landscaping at automobile service stations shall be subject to architectural review pursuant to Chapter 16.303. All automobile service stations shall conform to the following minimum standards:

1.     A minimum of 15 percent of the site shall be landscaped and shall include, but not be limited to, all of the following:

a.     A 10-foot setback along the street frontages, except where there are driveways (planting not to exceed three feet in height except trees).

b.     A minimum 200 square-foot landscaped area at the intersection of two property lines at a street corner.

c.     A planting strip at least five feet wide along all interior parcel lines.

d.     A planting strip at least three feet wide adjacent to buildings, except where there are walkways.

e.     Parking area landscaping required by Chapter 16.136.

2.     City parkway areas shall be landscaped (not to exceed three feet in height except on state highway rights-of-way where it must be low ground cover). Street trees shall be provided as determined by the Director of Community Services.

3.     All landscaped areas shall have permanent automatic irrigation systems and shall be kept well maintained.

4.     All planting areas, except adjacent to sidewalks or in the public right-of-way, shall be surrounded by six-inch P.C.C. curbs unless they have higher planter walls.

5.     Extensive planting of trees and retention of existing trees is encouraged.

L.     Off-Site Improvements

The developer shall construct and/or provide all public improvements as required by the City’s adopted Public Improvement Policy.

M.    Drainage

All requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) shall be complied with as determined by the City Engineer, and an NPDES permit shall be obtained prior to construction and/or occupation or use of the site, whichever occurs first.

N.    Paving

All areas not landscaped or used for building must be paved to meet City specifications. All concrete pavement areas except sidewalks shall be tinted with pigment. (14-07; 12-04; 12-01; 08-05)

 

16.087.040 SALE OF BEER AND WINE
The sale of beer and wine for off-site consumption may be permitted in conjunction with an automobile service station if such use is included in the original conditional use permit for the gas station or an amendment to the original conditional use permit, or a new conditional use permit is approved for such use at an existing automobile service station, and the sale of beer and wine for off-site consumption is a permitted or conditional permitted use in the zoning district in which the automobile service station is located. (08-05)

 

16.087.050 OPERATIONS
A.     Operations of an automobile service station shall be limited to the sale of such automobile items and services generally required in the operation and maintenance of motor vehicles, and to the sale of such non-automotive items as are required by the motorist. The display of automotive merchandise shall be permitted only within the building. There shall be no body and fender work, painting, repair and rebuilding of electro-chemical batteries, or other hazardous work of a similar nature.

B.     Operations permitted outside shall be limited to:

1.     The retail sale of petroleum products.

2.     The supply of air and water.

3.     Waxing and polishing automobiles.

4.     Tire changing.

5.     Battery servicing, charging, and changing.

6.     Installation of minor accessories, e.g., windshield blades and arms, gas caps, lamps, lamp globes, and performing of minor repair jobs.

All other operations related to the servicing of motor vehicles shall be conducted within the building.

C.    The sale of non-automotive retail items, such as convenience goods including, but not limited to, beverages, food, candy, snacks, maps, toiletries, and hardware items, shall be permitted only inside the building. A specific area of the building may be designated for the sale of convenience goods only if included as part of the conditional use permit for the service station. Any new construction for the sale of convenience goods, or the conversion of existing office space or an existing service bay to such a purpose, shall require amendment to the existing conditional use permit or approval of a new conditional use permit. The use of less than 50 square feet of existing office space or service bays for the placement of coin operated dispensers, refrigerated cases, or display racks shall not require an amended conditional use permit. Vending machines may be placed outside, adjacent to the building in a designated area not to exceed 32 square feet, if screened from public view.

D.    A restaurant may be permitted in conjunction with an automobile service station if approved as part of the original conditional use permit or as part of an amendment to an existing conditional use permit.

E.     A mechanical car wash may be permitted as an accessory use to an automobile service station if approved as part of the original conditional use permit or as part of an amendment to an existing conditional use permit, provided that it is clearly ancillary to the service station use and in a roofed structure, enclosed on at least two sides. A noise study may be required to demonstrate that the car wash use will be in compliance with the City’s noise standards. Roll-up doors shall be installed at both ends of the car wash tunnel. The doors shall be in a closed position to secure the building during hours of non-operation for safety, and to prevent trespassing and vandalism.

F.     The rental of cars or trailers shall be permitted as an accessory use to the service station business, provided that:

1.     A separate conditional use permit for the vehicle rental use is obtained (unless included as part of the use permit for the station).

2.     An on-site area sufficient for the parking of rental vehicles must be provided in addition to the minimum area required for the service station and no more than 10 percent of the total lot area may be occupied by rental vehicles.

3.     Rental vehicles may not be parked in the required automobile parking spaces, nor in the area between the building setback lines and the street right-of-way lines.

4.     Rental trailers must be parked within a six-foot high solid enclosure screening them from view of the street or adjacent property.

5.     The rental of trucks, tractors, or similar large vehicles or implements is prohibited.

G.    No outdoor storage of equipment and/or miscellaneous retail items shall be permitted. (08-05)

 

16.087.060 VACATION OR ABANDONMENT
If any service station is vacant for a period of 12 months or longer, it shall be declared abandoned, and the conditional use permit shall be void. (08-05)

 

16.087.070 NONCONFORMING SERVICE STATIONS
Existing service station lots, structures, and site development which do not conform to the location or development standards of this chapter and which do not have conditional use permits are deemed nonconforming and the provisions of Chapter 16.400 shall apply. If a nonconforming service station is discontinued for a period of 90 days or more, it shall not be re-established unless a new conditional use permit is approved by the Planning Commission. Before approving a new conditional use permit, the Planning Commission shall require that the service station be brought into compliance with the requirements of this chapter as determined feasible by the Commission.

An existing nonconforming service station may be renovated, remodeled or rebuilt upon obtaining a conditional use permit provided that the Planning Commission finds that the proposed improvements brings the station into substantial compliance with the requirements and restrictions of this chapter. (08-05)

 

16.087.080 MODIFICATION OF STANDARDS
The above standards constitute the minimum deemed necessary under general circumstances and in most cases to prevent adverse effect on the public peace, health, safety, and general welfare by automobile service station uses, and that where necessary to prevent such adverse effect in a particular case under appropriate circumstances, conditions may be added to any conditional use permit. Any one or more of the above standards may be modified or waived for existing stations for which modifications are proposed by appropriate action of the Planning Commission upon a showing by the applicant that its imposition would be unnecessary, unfair, or unduly burdensome. (08-05)

Chapter 16.090 INCIDENTAL OUTDOOR USES
16.090.000 INTENT
The intent of this chapter is to provide for incidental outdoor uses connected to and operated in conjunction with permanent commercial uses located inside adjacent buildings, provided that such uses complement existing storefronts and do not require the construction of new doorways or other significant exterior changes to existing commercial buildings or pavement, and are compatible with and have no adverse effect on surrounding development. Creativity in the design of outdoor uses is encouraged and the quality, character and design of all items placed outside should contribute in a positive way to the visual appearance of the community.

The provisions of this chapter are applicable to outdoor uses located on or adjacent to public sidewalks as well as privately owned walkways in shopping centers and pedestrian arcades. (08-05)

 

16.090.010 PERMITTED INCIDENTAL OUTDOOR USES
Notwithstanding any other provisions of Chapters 16.051 through 16.097, the following incidental outdoor uses may be permitted in all Commercial Districts subject to the provisions of this chapter:

A.     Incidental outdoor displays.

B.     Outdoor seating.

C.    Sidewalk sales. (08-05)

 

16.090.020 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR INCIDENTAL OUTDOOR USES
All outdoor uses permitted by this chapter shall be subject to the following standards:

A.     A minimum two-foot clear space shall be maintained from the edge of the street curb or parking area.

B.     A minimum five-foot wide continuous path, not including the required two-foot clear space from street curb or parking area, shall be maintained for pedestrian traffic. Such path shall have a vertical clearance of not less than eight feet above the surface of the path. For a sidewalk sale, the width of the path may be reduced to four feet with the approval of staff.

C.    All outdoor use areas shall be continuously supervised by management or employees of the business to which they are connected to ensure required pathways are kept clear.

D.    All outside use areas shall be maintained in a clean and safe manner.

E.     All items placed outside shall be maintained in good repair, and no item may be hazardous to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or extend into the safe line-of-sight distances at intersections, as determined by the City Engineer.

F.     All entrances and emergency exits shall be kept clear.

G.    No items may be placed on turf or other planted areas.

H.    Outdoor uses shall not extend beyond the boundaries of a business’ street frontage.

I.      No item placed outside shall have a vertical height of more than six feet above the surface of the sidewalk, except as specifically approved by staff.

J.     All items placed outside shall be removed each evening, unless otherwise approved by staff.

K.     All signing must comply with Title 18 of this Code.

L.     If an outdoor use is to be located on private property, the business owner shall obtain prior authorization from the owner or management company of such property.

M.    If an outdoor use is to be located within the public right-of-way, the business owner shall first obtain an encroachment permit from the City Engineer, and provide the City with a certificate of insurance of general commercial liability insurance for an amount as required by the Director, naming the City as an additional insured. Such insurance shall be placed with a company satisfactory to the Director.

N.    No services shall be provided outdoors in conjunction with any outdoor use, except for table service of food in conjunction with approved outdoor seating.

O.    No outdoor storage shall be permitted in conjunction with any outdoor use. (08-05)

 

16.090.030 ADDITIONAL STANDARDS FOR INCIDENTAL OUTDOOR DISPLAYS
All outdoor displays shall be subject to the above general standards and the following additional standards:

A.     Displays of more than six square feet require approval of a special outdoor use permit pursuant to Chapter 16.330.

B.     Display items are limited to merchandise sold by the business or decorative items which are related to or complement the goods and services sold or provided by the business.

C.    All items shall be placed adjacent to the building. The placement of items on private property is encouraged. If displays extend into the public right-of-way, they shall not encroach into the right-of-way more than 24 inches.

D.    No display may significantly obstruct the view of any display window.

E.     All sales transactions shall occur inside the building to which the outdoor use is appurtenant.

F.     Outdoor displays shall not require additional parking beyond that which is otherwise required for the permanent use. (08-05)

 

16.090.040 ADDITIONAL STANDARDS FOR OUTDOOR SEATING
All outdoor seating shall be subject to the above general standards and the following additional standards:

A.     Incidental outdoor seating may be permitted in connection with a permitted business or in a common area of a shopping center or pedestrian arcade subject to the standards of this section. All outdoor seating shall require a special outdoor use permit approved pursuant to Chapter 16.230 or a conditional use permit approved pursuant to Chapter 16.303. Outdoor seating may include tables if provided in connection with a retail food or restaurant business.

B.     With a special outdoor use permit, a business may have no more than a single row of tables parallel to the building frontage, and seating area may not be separated from the public right-of-way or pedestrian walkway by a fence, wall or other structure, except if seating is located in a common open area of a shopping center or pedestrian mall.

C.    With a conditional use permit, a business may have more than a than a single row of tables parallel to the building frontage, or a private patio dining area separated from the public right-of-way or pedestrian walkway by a fence, wall or other structure.

D.    All tables and chairs shall be of sturdy construction, made of good quality materials, and designed to complement the character of the streetscape.

E.     No parking shall be required for outdoor seating subject to the following restrictions:

1.     If the outdoor seating is connected to a retail food business, outdoor seating shall be for no more than four persons.

2.     If the outdoor seating is connected to a restaurant which has an indoor dining area for which parking has been provided, parking credit has been granted, and/or in lieu fees have been paid; the outdoor seating shall be for no more than 12 persons. However, before approving outdoor seating for more than six persons, the City may conduct a parking review. As part of the parking review, the City may require the business to provide a plan for employee parking; or

3.     If outdoor seating is in a common area of a shopping center or pedestrian mall, the outdoor seating is for general use and is not restricted to a single business, and the City determines that the proposed seating will not adversely impact parking for surrounding development, the outdoor seating shall be limited as determined appropriate by staff.

All outdoor seating which exceeds that as specified above or which otherwise does not meet the above restrictions shall be subject to standard parking requirements. (12-01; 08-05)

 

16.090.050 ADDITIONAL STANDARDS FOR SIDEWALK SALES
All sidewalk sales shall be subject to the general standards for incidental outdoor uses and the following additional standards:

A.     A sidewalk sale shall be conducted only by the business(es) located within the building which fronts the right-of-way or property where such sale is to be located.

B.     A retail business is permitted up to 12 sidewalk sale days per year provided the sale events comply with all applicable standards. The 12 sale days may be consecutive or spread throughout the calendar year.

C.    The City may prohibit sales at certain times. At least 10 days prior to having a sidewalk sale, or before advertising for a sidewalk sale, a business owner shall obtain approval of date(s) from staff. The City may prohibit a sale event at certain times to prevent a conflict with community events, filming, street or sidewalk repairs, utility repairs, other special events, or an excessive number of sidewalk sales in very close proximity to each other on the same dates.

D.    No sidewalk sale permitted pursuant to this chapter shall extend into any parking area, except if the sale occurs before 8:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m., and if staff determines that the use of the parking area is necessary for the sale to occur and the event will not impact other businesses or City operations. (The use of a parking area after 8:00 a.m. and before 6:00 p.m. shall require a special use and development permit pursuant to Chapter 16.306 or a special event permit pursuant to Chapter 12.42, as applicable.)

E.     Sidewalk sales shall not be subject to parking requirements. (08-05)

 

16.090.060 ENFORCEMENT
All violations of this chapter are punishable as provided in Chapter 16.406, Violations and Enforcement. (08-05)

Chapter 16.093 DRIVE-THROUGH RESTAURANT FACILITIES
16.093.000 INTENT
The intent of this chapter is to permit drive-through facilities in connection with restaurants which also have indoor dining, provided that such uses are located at proper and desirable locations in the City with respect to adjacent land uses and traffic patterns, and other potential impacts, such as aesthetic incompatibility, vehicular/pedestrian conflicts, noise, light and glare, odor and emissions, litter and loitering are adequately minimized. (08-05)

 

16.093.010 APPLICABILITY
The provisions of this chapter are applicable to all drive-through restaurants. (08-05)

 

16.093.020 DRIVE-THROUGH RESTAURANTS PERMITTED
Drive-through restaurants shall be permitted only in the CF Commercial Freeway District with approval of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 16.303. (08-05)

 

16.093.030 INDOOR DINING
A drive-through facility shall be operated only as part of a restaurant which also has an indoor dining area. (08-05)

 

16.093.040 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
All drive-through facilities shall be subject to the following performance standards:

A.     Separation From Sensitive Land Uses

1.     A drive-through facility shall be separated from any residential development or residential district by no less than 300 feet, or a freeway.

2.     The drive-through facility shall be buffered and visually screened from residential development with a wall and landscaping, by other natural or constructed barriers, such as other commercial development or freeway, or combination thereof.

B.     Minimum Site or Part of Center or Development Complex

A restaurant with drive-through facilities shall have a minimum one acre land area or shall be part of a commercial center or larger development complex of at least one acre.

C.    Setbacks

All structures, parking areas, drive-through stacking and exit lanes, intercom system, trash enclosure, etc., shall be set back 10 feet or more from any property line, or if part of a commercial center or larger development complex, 10 feet or more from any perimeter property line of the center or complex.

D.    Aesthetics

All structures, signs, and related facilities shall be subject to architectural review pursuant to Chapter 16.300. All development shall be visually compatible to surrounding uses in form, materials, colors, and scale.

In addition, all signs are subject to Title 18 of this Code.

E.     Circulation

1.     All streets that serve the site shall be adequate in width to carry the quantity of traffic generated by the use without significantly lowering the existing level of service of that street or nearby intersection.

2.     Vehicle conflicts with pedestrians and bicycles shall be minimized.

3.     The project applicant shall prepare and submit to the City as part of the initial application a traffic study. The study shall address: (i) the adequacy of the street(s) that serve the subject site; (ii) the placement, design, and adequacy of the vehicle queuing aisle; (iii) the on-site circulation, parking lot design and pedestrian/bicycle safety; and (iv) additional information as requested by the City Engineer. The traffic study shall identify potential adverse impacts and include measures for mitigating such impacts.

4.     There shall be no more than two curb cuts for driveways to the development on any one street. No curb cut shall be closer than 75 feet from the beginning of the curb return at the corner of the intersection. Adequate sight distance shall be provided for exiting.

F.     Parking

1.     One parking space shall be provided for each 100 square feet of gross interior floor area plus one space for each 175 square feet of gross outdoor dining area.

2.     All parking areas shall comply with development standards of Chapter 16.136, of this title.

3.     Parking shall be restricted to customers and employees only. There shall be time limits on customer parking to discourage loitering at and around the site. The parking restrictions shall be posted in the parking lots and enforced by the restaurant management.

G.    Restrooms

Access to bathroom facilities located within the restaurant development shall be from within the structure, with no direct access from the parking area.

H.    Noise

1.     Noise levels from the drive-through facilities shall not exceed the City noise standards of Chapter 16.154 of this title or cause the existing ambient noise to increase by more than five dBA as measured at the property line.

2.     The project applicant shall provide the plans and specifications for any potential noise sources, such as intercom system, trash compactor, etc. Plans shall include measures to mitigate any potential adverse impact from such noise sources.

3.     A sound attenuation wall may be required along the property lines if determined necessary by the City to control noise and vibrations generated by the facility.

4.     Speaker boxes of any point to point intercom system shall be oriented away from residential development and other sensitive receptors located in the general area of the drive-through facility.

5.     Outdoor maintenance and cleaning activities shall be limited if determined necessary by the City to achieve compatibility with surrounding land uses.

6.     The on-site manager shall not permit any loud music, noise or other sounds by means of phonograph, radio, or other broadcasting apparatus or device, and shall not permit fighting, quarreling, loitering, or loud noise or other nuisance which disturbs the quiet and peace of the premises or the neighborhood.

7.     Hours of operation shall be limited as determined necessary by the City to achieve compatibility with surrounding land uses.

I.      Light and Glare

1.     A wall, hedge, or berm along the outer perimeter of the parking area(s) and drive-through lane(s), except for areas of ingress and egress, may be required if determined necessary by the City to prevent unwanted light and glare. The height, design, and specific location of such barrier shall be subject to architectural review pursuant to Chapter 16.300.

2.     All lighting fixtures shall be designed, installed, and maintained so as to direct light only onto the subject property.

3.     All lighting in the parking lot(s) and drive-through area(s) shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 16.136, lighting for parking lots.

4.     All lighting shall be subject to a 30-day lighting level review period, during which time illumination levels shall be evaluated and adjusted where determined necessary by the City.

J.     Maintenance

1.     The site shall be maintained in a litter free condition and no undesirable odors shall be generated on the site. The on-site manager shall make all reasonable efforts to see that the trash or litter originating from the use is not deposited on adjacent properties. Trash enclosures and bins shall be enclosed on all sides to suppress odors and prevent spillage of materials. Employees shall be required daily to pick up trash or litter originating from the site within 300 feet of the perimeter of the property. Graffiti shall be removed within 48 hours.

2.     The project applicant shall prepare and submit a litter control plan and a recycling plan to the City.

3.     The on-site manager of the use shall take whatever steps are deemed necessary to assure the orderly conduct of employees, patrons, and visitors on the premises.

4.     A copy of the above maintenance standards and any applicable conditional use permit conditions shall be posted alongside the necessary business licenses and be visible at all time to employees. (08-05)

 

16.093.050 SPECIAL NOTICE REQUIREMENTS
In addition to the notice requirements in Chapter 16.303 applicable to all conditional use permits, notice of any public hearing on a proposed drive-through facility or a physical modification of an existing drive through facility shall be given to the blind, aged, and disabled communities, in order that they may participate in the hearing. (08-05)

 

16.093.060 ADDITIONAL CONDITIONS
The above performance standards constitute the minimum deemed necessary under general circumstances and in most cases to prevent adverse effects from drive-through facilities. Other and further standards may be required as conditions of approval to ensure that such uses are in accord with the intent of this chapter and the findings required by Chapter 16.303, Conditions of Approval. (08-05)

 

16.093.070 DISCONTINUATION OF USE
If any drive-through facility approved pursuant to this chapter is discontinued for a period of 12 months or longer, the conditional use permit for such use shall be void pursuant to Chapter 16.300. (08-05)

Chapter 16.094 DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES FOR BANKS AND PHARMACIES
16.094.000 INTENT
The intent of this chapter is to establish standards and regulations for retail pharmacies and financial institutions such as banks and/or credit unions that sell products or provide services to occupants in vehicles, including drive-in or drive-up windows or drive-through services. When the word “Banks” is referred to in this chapter, it shall include credit unions and other federally regulated financial institutions. The special standards and regulations are intended to reduce or minimize impacts on adjacent uses, promote safety and efficient on-site vehicular and pedestrian circulation, and reduce traffic conflicts with traffic on adjacent streets. (10-03)

 

16.094.010 APPLICABILITY
All bank and pharmacy establishments that include the operation of a drive-up or drive-through facility to provide retail sales of pharmaceuticals or banking services while a customer remains in a motor vehicle shall meet the requirements of this chapter. (10-03)

 

16.094.020 DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES PERMITTED
It shall be unlawful for any person or business to operate a drive-up or drive-through facility that does not meet the requirements of this chapter and other applicable provisions of Title 16 and without a conditional use permit approved pursuant to Chapter 16.303. If a conditional use permit is approved pursuant to this chapter the provisions of Chapter 15.051 pertaining to drive-through facilities shall not be applicable. (10-03)

 

16.094.030 SITE LOCATION CRITERIA
A bank or pharmacy with a drive-in or drive-through facility permitted under this chapter shall be sited as a stand-alone facility or within a commercial center that has street frontage along a major or secondary arterial street as such are designated in the City’s General Plan. (10-03)

 

16.094.040 SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
In addition to meeting all applicable commercial development standards of Chapters 16.040 and 16.051, all bank and pharmacy drive-through facilities shall also meet the following standards and requirements specific to pharmacy drive-through facilities:

A.     Design

All drive-through facilities shall be integrated with the design of the principal building in which the bank or pharmacy is located. The building and site layout shall be such that the design supports a pedestrian friendly environment and is oriented toward the street. To the extent possible, stacking lanes, vehicle service windows, and parking should be located to the rear and sides of a building, maximizing the view of the building from the street edge.

B.     Separation from Sensitive Uses

All drive-through facilities shall be visually screened from residential development with landscaping, decorative concrete walls, other constructed development, or a combination thereof. The facility shall be oriented such that headlights of vehicles utilizing drive-through aisles do not directly illuminate nearby residential development or other sensitive uses.

C.    Curb Cuts

The number of curb cuts shall be kept to the minimum determined necessary by the City Engineer. No curb cut shall be closer than 50 feet from the point of intersection of the street side property lines. Unless the City Engineer finds that additional curb cuts will improve on-site vehicular/pedestrian circulation, curb cuts for drive-through facilities shall be limited as follows:

1.     If the bank or pharmacy is part of a commercial center, curb cuts shall be allowed only for driveways shared by the uses in the center.

2.     If not part of a larger commercial center, there shall be no more than two curb cuts on any one street for driveways to the bank or pharmacy, and no more than one curb cut per street for driveways to the bank or pharmacy if located at the intersection of two streets. Where feasible, combined driveways with adjacent development are encouraged. In determining the feasibility of combined driveways, the City Engineer shall consider the typography of adjoining sites, building locations, and vehicle/pedestrian safety.

D.    Cross Access Easements

Cross access easements with abutting properties shall be established wherever feasible and appropriate considering adjacent uses. Design features shall make it visually obvious that the abutting properties can be accessed via service drives between the properties. Stub-outs shall be provided if abutting properties are not yet developed.

E.     On-Site Circulation

All sites with drive-through facilities shall provide an on-site circulation pattern that minimizes conflicts between drive-through traffic, and pedestrians and bicyclists. If pedestrian walkways intersect drive-through aisles, the walkways shall have clear visibility, be emphasized with enriched paving and striping, and include warning signs aimed at both the pedestrian and vehicle.

F.     Drive-Through Aisles

No drive-through aisles shall exit directly into a public street. Aisles should be integrated with the on-site circulation and to merge with the driveway. Drive-through aisles shall have a minimum width of 11 feet on curves and a minimum 10 feet on straight sections.

G.    Stacking Lane

A lane shall be provided for vehicles waiting for drive-through service. Such lanes shall be physically separated from other traffic circulation on the site. The stacking lane shall accommodate a minimum of two cars per drive-through window or automatic teller machine (ATM) in addition to car(s) receiving service. Where adjacent to other travel lanes, the stacking lane shall be separated from the other traffic lanes by landscaping, concrete or asphalt curbing, or other suitable protective device. On-site circulation shall be such that customers that park and shop are not forced to exit the parking area through the stacking lane.

H.    Directional Signing

Pavement markers and signs shall be provided that indicate the entrance, exit, and one-way path of drive-through lanes.

I.      Idling Limitation Signs

Signs shall be provided that instruct drivers to turn off engines while they are waiting in the drive-through queue.

J.     Lighting

All exterior lighting sources shall be installed, arranged, and shielded so as to prevent direct illumination of residential development or other sensitive uses. All lamps in exterior light fixtures shall be covered with diffusing lenses. No drop down lens shall be permitted in under canopy lighting (lens shall not extend below the bottom of the light fixture in under canopy lighting). Parking lot lighting shall be subject to parking lot lighting standards in Chapter 16.136 and a 30-day lighting level review pursuant to Chapter 16.154.

K.     Noise

Any speaker boxes shall be oriented so as not to adversely impact residential development. As a condition of the conditional use permit, the speakers shall be subject to a 30-day staff review after they become operational. During the 30-day review the speaker noise will be evaluated. If staff finds the speaker noise to be excessive or a nuisance to adjacent development, the owner of the business shall be required to work with staff in mitigating the noise by reducing the speaker volume, reorienting the speakers, and/or by taking another action determined appropriate by the Director of Community Development.

L.     Hours

Hours of operation shall be established by the Planning Commission as part of the conditional use permit approval as necessary to achieve compatibility with surrounding uses and may be modified over time as determined appropriate by the Planning Commission. (10-03)

 

16.094.050 SPECIAL NOTICE REQUIREMENTS
In addition to the notice requirements in Chapter 16.303 applicable to all conditional use permits, notice of any public hearing on a proposed drive-through facility or a physical modification of an existing drive-through facility shall also be given to one or more locally based organizations that provide support to the blind, aged, and/or disabled communities, in order that they may participate in such hearing. (10-03)

 

16.094.060 ADDITIONAL CONDITIONS
The above standards constitute the minimum deemed necessary under general circumstances and in most cases to prevent adverse effects from permitted drive-through facilities. Other and further standards may be required as conditions of approval to ensure that such uses are in accordance with the intent of this chapter and the findings required for approval of conditional use permits pursuant to Chapter 16.303. (10-03)

 

16.094.070 DISCONTINUATION OF USE
If any drive-through facility approved pursuant to this chapter is discontinued for a period of twelve (12) months or longer, the conditional use permit for such facility shall be void pursuant to Chapter 16.303. (10-03)

Chapter 16.096 MINI-STORAGE/WAREHOUSE FACILITIES
16.096.000 INTENT
The intent of this chapter is to provide for mini-storage/warehouse facilities on adequate sites subject to standards to ensure such use is compatible with surrounding development. (08-05)

 

16.096.010 APPLICABILITY
No mini-storage/warehouse facilities shall be erected, constructed, established, altered, or enlarged except in accordance with the standards and regulations of this chapter and this title. All new mini-storage/warehouse facilities shall require approval of a conditional use permit approved pursuant to Chapter 16.303. New mini-storage/warehouse facilities shall only be located in the CP Commercial Professional District and the B/IP District. (08-05)

 

16.096.020 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
The following standards shall apply to all mini-storage/warehouse facilities:

A.     The minimum area of a lot for a mini-storage facility shall be two acres.

B.     The minimum setbacks from property lines shall comply with the land use district in which the facility is located.

C.    The maximum building height shall be two stories or 25 feet, except that any building or portion of a building within 25 feet of the front or street side setback shall have a maximum height of one story or 10 feet.

D.    Only one point of ingress and egress shall be allowed, unless the fire department requires another. All driveways shall be radius type, and shall have an unobstructed length of 40 feet from the curb to prevent vehicles and trailers from interfering with traffic flow in the street.

E.     Two covered parking spaces shall be provided adjacent to the manager’s resident/office. In addition, one parking space for every 10,000 square feet of gross floor area, or a minimum of three parking spaces for facilities of less than 30,000 square feet of gross floor area, shall be located adjacent to the office for the use of prospective clients. Required parking shall not be rented or used for vehicle storage.

F.     Building materials and treatment shall complement those existing in the surrounding area. The Planning Commission shall condition its approval of a conditional use permit for a mini-warehouse facility on the Architectural Commission’s review and approval of site plans and building designs. The Architectural Commission may approve, disapprove, or approve with conditions any submittal pursuant to Chapter 16.300.

G.    All signs are subject to Title 18. Architectural Commission approval is generally required. Innovation in design concepts is encouraged.

H.    Outdoor storage of boats, vehicles, or other materials shall not be permitted at mini-warehouse facilities that are adjacent to lots that are zoned for or developed with residential uses. Where outdoor storage is permitted, it shall be permanently screened so as not to be visible from the public right-of-way or from adjacent lots.

I.      Outdoor sales, washing, maintenance, and repair of boats, vehicles, or other materials shall not be permitted.

J.     All utilities shall be underground. No water, gas, or electric service shall be provided to individual units.

K.     Off-site improvements, including curb, gutter, sidewalk, pavement, streetlights, and street trees, shall be installed by the developer. These improvements shall meet City specifications.

L.     On-site, 24-hour management shall be provided.

M.    The Planning Commission shall establish hours of operation as a condition of approval for any mini-warehouse facility.

N.    The Planning Commission shall not approve a conditional use permit for a mini-warehouse unless the applicant demonstrates that all mini-warehouse facilities in Claremont within 1.5 miles of the proposed facility are at least 66 percent occupied no more than 30 days prior to the Planning Commission’s consideration of any proposed new facility.

O.    The Director of Community Development shall review and approve the standard or any special rental agreements to be used by the mini-warehouse facility prior to granting occupancy. (08-05)

Chapter 16.097 ADULT BUSINESSES
16.097.000 INTENT
It is the intent of this chapter to prevent community wide adverse economic impacts, increased crime, decreased property values, and the deterioration of neighborhoods which can be brought about by the location of adult businesses in close proximity to sensitive uses such as parks, schools, religious institutions, and residentially zoned districts or uses, or the concentration of adult businesses in close proximity to each other. The City Council finds that it has been demonstrated in various communities that the concentration of adult businesses causes an increase in the number of transients in the area and an increase in crime, and in addition to the effects described above, can cause other businesses and residents to move elsewhere. It is, therefore, the purpose of this chapter to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of adult businesses or their close proximity to incompatible uses, while permitting the location of adult businesses in certain areas. (08-05)

 

16.097.010 DEFINITIONS
A.     As used herein, the terms and phrases shall have the same meaning as defined in Chapter 5.48 of the Claremont Municipal Code.

B.     Establishment of an adult business.

As used herein, “adult business” shall mean and include any adult business as defined in Chapter 5.48 of the Claremont Municipal Code, and to “establish” an adult business shall mean and include any of the following:

1.     The opening or commencement of any adult business as a new business;

2.     The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult business, to any adult business;

3.     The addition of any of the adult businesses to any other existing adult business, or to another existing non-adult business, with or without expansion of the floor area;

4.     The relocation of any adult business; or

5.     The substantial enlargement of the premises of an adult business. Substantial enlargement means an increase or expansion, over the lifetime of an adult business, of more than ten percent or 100 square feet, whichever is less, in the portion of the floor area of the business which is devoted to products, services, or entertainment with an emphasis on material depicting, describing, or relating to specified anatomical areas and/or specified sexual activities. (08-05)

 

16.097.020 MINIMUM PROXIMITY REQUIREMENTS
No adult business shall be established or located in any zoning district or area in the City other than the Business/Industrial Park (B/IP) District, or within certain distances of certain specified land uses or zones, or other adult businesses as set forth below:

A.     No adult business shall be established or located within 400 feet from any existing residential district or use, park, religious institution, or school, as defined in Chapter 5.48 of the Municipal Code.

B.     No adult business shall be established or located within 150 feet from any existing adult business, whether in the City of Claremont, in an adjoining city, or within an unincorporated area. Where two or more adult business application are submitted for businesses which could be located in closer proximity to each other than 150 feet, the application which was accepted first in time shall be processed by the City, with any later submitted applications deemed nonconforming until such time as a determination is made by the City on the initial application.

C.    The distances set forth above shall be measured as follows:

1.     The distance between any adult business and any residential zoning district or use, park, religious institution, or school shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to the boundaries of the City and intervening structures, from the primary entrance of the adult business to the nearest property line of such residential zoning district or use, park, religious institution, or school.

2.     The distance between any two adult businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to the boundaries of the City and intervening structures, from the closest point of each business.

D.    No more than one adult business shall be allowed within the same building, or portion thereof, or within the same commercial/industrial center or complex unless each business is separated from another adult business by more than 150 feet pursuant to subsection B of this section. No sex supermarket or sex mini-mall as defined in Chapter 5.48 of the Municipal Code is permitted in the City of Claremont. (08-05)

 

16.097.030 COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER 5.48 OF CLAREMONT MUNICIPAL CODE
No adult business shall be established or continued, no substantial enlargement of an adult business shall be undertaken, and no adult entertainers shall perform upon the premises of an adult business without first complying with all requirements of Chapter 5.48 of the Claremont Municipal Code. (08-05)

 

16.097.040 COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS OF THIS CODE
In addition to complying with the requirements of Municipal Code Chapter 5.48, adult businesses shall comply with all applicable standards and regulations of this title, including, but not limited to, standards and regulations pertaining to business location, building setbacks, height and size, architectural review, parking, landscaping, and signs. (08-05)

 

16.097.050 AMORTIZATION OF NONCONFORMING ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS USES
Any use of real property existing on March 28, 2002 which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 5.48 of the Municipal Code, but which was constructed, operated, and maintained in compliance with all previous regulations, shall be regarded as a nonconforming use which may be continued for one year after the March 28, 2002. On or before such date, all such nonconforming uses shall be terminated unless an extension of time has been approved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

A.     Abandonment

Notwithstanding the above, any discontinuance or abandonment of the use of any lot or structure as an adult business shall result in a loss of legal nonconforming status of such use. For purposes of this chapter, vacancy of the lot or structure for 90 days or more shall be conclusive evidence of abandonment regardless of intent.

B.     Amortization of Annexed Property

Any adult business which was a legal use at the time of annexation of the property and which is located in the City, but which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter, shall be terminated within one (1) year of the date of annexation unless an extension of time has been approved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (08-05)

 

16.097.060 EXTENSION OF TIME FOR TERMINATION OF NONCONFORMING USE
The owner or operator of a nonconforming use as described in Section 16.097.050 may apply under the provisions of this section to the Director of Community Development for an extension of time within which to terminate the nonconforming use.

A.     Time and Manner of Application

An application for an extension of time within which to terminate a use made nonconforming by the provisions of this chapter or Chapter 5.48 of the Municipal Code may be filed by the owner of the real property upon which such use is operated, or by the operator of the use. Such an application must be filed with the Director of Community Development or his/her designee, at least 90 days, but no more than 180 days, prior to the time established in Section 16.097.050 for termination of such use. The use may continue pending conclusion of the hearing on the application, and any requested judicial review.

B.     Content of Application—Fees

The application shall state the grounds for requesting an extension of time. The filing fee for such application shall be the same as that for an appeal of an adult business permit as is set forth in the schedule of fees established by resolution from time to time by the City Council. An application which fails to state a basis upon which an extension may be granted, as required herein below in this section, shall be returned to the applicant as nonresponsive, together with the application fee less any administrative costs of processing the application.

C.    Hearing Procedure

The Director of Community Development shall appoint a hearing officer to hear the application. The hearing officer shall set the matter for hearing within 45 days of receipt of the application. All parties involved shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary, and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; and may be represented by counsel. Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final and subject to judicial review pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8.

D.    Approval of Extension—Findings

An extension under the provisions of this section shall be for a reasonable period of time commensurate with the investment involved, and shall be approved only if the hearing officer makes all of the following findings, or such other findings as are required by law.

1.     The applicant has made a substantial investment (including, but not limited to, lease obligations) in the property or structure on or in which the nonconforming use is conducted; such property or structure cannot be readily converted to another use; and such investment was made prior to March 28, 2002, or prior to the date of annexation; and

2.     The applicant will be unable to recoup said investment as of the date established for termination of the use; and

3.     The applicant has made good faith efforts to recoup the investment and to relocate the use to a location in conformance with Section 16.097.020. (08-05)

Chapter 16.098 BODY ART
16.098.010 INTENT
It is the intent of this chapter to prevent public health risks and potential secondary effects that could result from body art activities, a collective term for any single activity or combination of activities defined as tattooing, body piercing, or permanent cosmetics. The City Council finds that body art activities involve invasive procedures that present a risk of transmitting to clients and employees blood-borne pathogens for serious infections unless stringent sanitary protocols followed. The City Council also finds that the presence of body art establishments in areas frequented by families and young children, in close proximity to sensitive uses, and in close proximity to other body art uses, and late night activities at body art establishments, could have adverse secondary impacts to the community. These types of activities could cause parents to keep their children away from areas with such uses, residents to shop elsewhere, and businesses to move to alternative areas, and could result in late night activities inconsistent with the character of the community. It is, therefore, the intent of this chapter to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to reduce public health risks, to prevent the close proximity of body art activities to incompatible uses and the concentration of body art activities in close proximity to each other, and to restrict the hours of operations for body art establishments as appropriate to maintain the existing residential and educational character of the community. (11-06)

16.098.020 DEFINITIONS
The terms and phrases used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as defined in Chapter 8.02 (City’s Public Health Code). (11-06)

 

16.098.030 COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER 8.02
No body art activity or use shall be established, undertaken, continued, maintained, enlarged or altered, and no body art establishment shall be constructed or moved into within the City of Claremont without first complying with all requirements of Claremont Municipal Code Chapter 8.02 (City’s Public Health Code). All owners and operators of body art establishments and persons conducting body art shall obtain and maintain in compliance all permits required by the County of Los Angeles, Department of Public Health. (11-06)

 

16.098.040 COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS
In addition to complying with the requirements of Municipal Code Chapter 8.02, body art activities, uses and establishments shall comply with all applicable development standards and regulations of this title, including, but not limited to, standards and regulations pertaining to business location, building setbacks, height and size, architectural review, parking, landscaping, and signs. (11-06)

 

16.098.050 PERMITTED LOCATIONS AND MINIMUM PROXIMITY REQUIREMENTS
A.     No body art establishment shall be established or located in any zoning district or area of the City other than those districts in which body art is listed as a permitted use in Table 16.051.A in Chapter 16.051.

B.     No body art establishment shall be located within 200 feet from any existing residential district or use, public park, religious institution, or educational institution for minors, whether public or private, from the primary entrance of the body art establishment to the property line of such district or use, public park, religious institution and educational institution.

C.    No body art establishment shall be established or located within 250 feet of any other existing body art establishments, whether in the City, in an adjoining city, or within an unincorporated area, as measured from the closest points of the interior tenant walls of each establishment. When two or more applications are submitted for establishments with locations within 250 feet of each other, the application which was accepted first in time shall be processed by the City, with any later submitted applications deemed nonconforming until such time a determination is made by the City on the initial application.

D.    All distances set forth above shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to boundaries of the City and intervening structures. (11-06)

 

16.098.060 PERMITTED HOURS OF OPERATIONS
A body art establishment shall be open or operating for business only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any particular day. (11-06)

 

16.098.070 EXEMPTIONS
The following are exempt from the body art registration and permitting requirements of the County pursuant to County Health Code Section 11.36.470 and are not subject to the provisions of this chapter:

A.     A physician licensed by the State of California who uses body art activities as part of patient treatment; and

B.     A person who exclusively engages in the piercing of the leading edge or earlobe of the ear, provided he or she does the following:

1.     Performs the procedure through the use of an approved ear perforating mechanical device to force the singe-use stud or single-use needle through the tissue of the ear; and

2.     Utilizes a sterile, disposable, single-use stud or single-use solid needle. (11-06)

 

16.098.080 TEMPORARY OR MOBILE BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS OR EVENTS NOT PERMITTED
No temporary or mobile body art establishment or event is permitted within the City. (11-06)

Chapter 16.099 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
16.099.010 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
This chapter provides standards for massage establishments, where allowed in compliance with Title 16 (Zoning) and Chapter 5.36 (Massage Establishments and Massage Technicians) of this Code.

A.     Definitions

Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in Chapter 5.36 govern the construction of this section.

B.     Permit Requirements

1.     Conditional Use Permit Required

All businesses proposing to conduct massage, including ancillary massage establishments, are subject to the approval of a conditional use permit as referenced in Chapter 16.303 (Conditional Use Permits).

2.     Massage Establishment License Required

All such businesses that are proposing to conduct massage from a location that has an approved and active conditional use permit for massage services, must obtain approval of a massage establishment license prior to the issuance of a business license and initiation of operations.

3.     Ancillary Massage Businesses—Alcoholic Beverage, Permit/License Required

Alcoholic beverages may be sold, served, furnished, kept, consumed, imbibed, or possessed on the premises only after having an approved and active conditional use permit in compliance with Chapter 16.303 (Conditional Use Permits) and any applicable California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control licenses. (Refer to Section 5.36.070(T)).

C.    Facility Requirements

1.     A recognizable and readable sign shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment as a massage establishment; provided that all such signs shall comply with the sign requirements of the City.

2.     A minimum of one separate washbasin shall be provided in each massage establishment for the use of employees of any such establishment. Said basin shall provide soap or detergent and hot and cold running water at all times, and shall be located within or as close as practicable to the area devoted to the performing of massage services. In addition, there shall be provided at each washbasin, sanitary towels placed in permanently installed dispensers.

3.     Table Showers

a.     If an establishment is proposing the use of table showers in the facility, the entire massage room where the table shower is located shall be designed and built as a shower facility.

b.     The floor and walls shall be designed and built to be waterproof, per California Building Code requirements.

c.     The room shall drain properly, per the California Building Code requirements.

4.     No massage establishment employing a massage technician shall be equipped with tinted or one-way glass in any room or office.

D.    Sanitation Requirements

1.     Adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing instruments used in performing the acts of massage shall be provided.

2.     Hot and cold running water shall be provided at all times.

3.     All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms, and all other physical facilities for the establishment must be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry rooms, steam and vapor rooms or cabinets, shower compartments, and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs/table showers shall be cleaned after each use.

4.     Clean and sanitary towels and linens shall be provided for each patron of the establishment, or each patron receiving massage services. No common use of towels or linens shall be permitted.

5.     Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the California Building Code requirements.

E.     Permit Conditions

In approving a conditional use permit to establish a massage use, the review authority may impose conditions (e.g., security and safety measures, light, noise buffers, parking, etc.) on the use to ensure that it operates in a manner that provides adequate protection to the public health, safety, and general welfare.

F.     Inspection by Government Officials

The City Manager, Director of Community Development, or his/her authorized representative, shall have the right to enter massage establishments or businesses, from time-to-time, unannounced, for the purposes of making reasonable inspections to observe and enforce compliance with this section and all laws of the City and State of California.

G.    Nuisances

Any massage establishment operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be unlawful and a public nuisance, and the City Manager may in the exercise of discretion, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in a manner provided by law. Violations of this chapter, or any permit provided pursuant to this chapter, shall also be subject to enforcement under Title 1 of the Claremont Municipal Code or suspension, revocation, or non-renewal of any applicable permit.

H.    Post-Decision Procedures

The procedures and requirements in Chapter 16.303 (Conditional Use Permits), and those related to appeals in Chapter 16.321 (Appeals and Council Review) shall apply following the decision on a massage establishment conditional use permit application.

I.      Amortization of Existing Massage Establishments

1.     All zoning requirements set forth in this chapter are deemed to be necessary for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare and shall be applicable to and govern all existing and proposed massage establishments immediately upon the date the ordinance is codified in this chapter, and shall become effective.

2.     In the event a massage establishment, lawfully in existence, in a commercial or industrial zone of the City (e.g., the zones designated as Commercial Professional, Commercial Recreational, Commercial Limited, Commercial Highway, Claremont Village Overlay with or without display window, Mixed-Use 2, Mixed-Use 3, and Mixed-Use 4, Business/Industrial Park, and the Village Expansion Specific Plan), other than the following zones: Commercial Freeway (CF), Mixed-Use 1 (MU1), and Commercial Neighborhood (CN), prior to the adoption of this chapter, and is not in compliance with the zoning requirements of this title, such massage establishment shall conform to all zoning requirements and obtain all necessary permits required for the operation of a massage establishment identified in this title and Title 5 (Business Regulation) within one (1) year of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

3.     Any existing massage establishment in the Commercial Freeway (CF), Mixed-Use 1 (MU1), or Commercial Neighborhood (CN) zone of the City, which is a nonconforming use as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall be subject to an amortization period of one (1) year.

4.     Upon the conclusion of the amortization period, any massage establishment, which is a nonconforming use, shall cease all business operations, and all signs, advertising and displays relating to such business shall be removed within thirty (30) days thereafter.

5.     Notwithstanding the foregoing, zoning requirements regarding operation, sanitation and attire as set forth in this section shall become immediately effective and must be observed in full force by existing massage establishment as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. All other zoning requirements, including those regarding facility improvement, shall be completed within one (1) year of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

J.     Extension of Massage Establishment Amortization Period

1.     An application for extension of the amortization period for a massage establishment, which is a nonconforming use, shall be made as provided herein.

2.     The owner of the property on which the business is located, or the owner of the business, must submit a complete application for approval of an extension not later than six (6) months prior to the expiration of the amortization period, unless the Director of Community Development determines that good cause is shown for late filing of the application. Such application shall be made in writing on a form prescribed by the Director of Community Development and shall be accompanied by the filing fee established by resolution of the City Council. The person requesting the extension of the amortization period shall bear the burden of proof in establishing that the amortization period established by subsection I of this section is unreasonable, and that the requested extension is a reasonable amortization period under the criteria set forth in paragraph 7 of this subsection J. The person applying for the extension shall furthermore be required, in order to meet its burden of proof, to submit the documentation set forth in this section.

3.     Not later than thirty (30) calendar days after submittal of an application to extend the amortization period, the Director of Community Development shall notify the applicant, in writing, if the application is not complete. The notice shall describe the manner in which the application can be made complete and shall be deemed given upon personal delivery to the applicant or upon deposit in the U.S. mail, first class, postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the address shown on the application. If a written determination is not provided to the applicant within thirty (30) calendar days after the application is submitted, the application shall be deemed complete. A complete application shall include:

a.     The applicant’s name and street address of business.

b.     The address to which notice is to be mailed, at the applicant’s option, a telephone number and/or email address.

c.     The applicant’s signature.

d.     The term of the requested extension.

e.     Documentation relevant to the factors listed in paragraph 7 of this subsection.

f.      The required filing fee.

4.     Within sixty (60) days after a complete application is filed, the Planning Commission shall hear and act on the application and the secretary to the Planning Commission shall give the applicant written notice of the decision and findings made by the Planning Commission. Otherwise, the application shall be deemed granted by operation of law and the business shall be operated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Notice shall be deemed given upon personal delivery to the applicant or upon deposit in the U.S. mail, first class, postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the address shown on the application. The secretary shall give the applicant at least ten (10) calendar days’ written notice of the time and place at which the application shall be heard by the Planning Commission, in the same manner that notice of the decision is to be given pursuant to this subsection.

5.     A decision of the Planning Commission to deny the application may be appealed, in whole or in part, by filing a complete notice of appeal with the City Clerk within fifteen (15) days after notice of the decision was given to the applicant pursuant to paragraph 4 of this subsection. To be deemed complete, the notice of appeal shall be signed by the appellant, shall state the grounds for disagreement with the decision of the Planning Commission, and shall be accompanied by the filing fee established by resolution of the City Council.

6.     Within forty-five (45) calendar days after the appeal is filed, the City Council shall hear and act on the appeal, and the City Clerk shall give the appellant written notice of the decision and findings made by the City Council. Otherwise, the application shall be deemed granted by operation of law and the business shall be operated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Notice shall be deemed given upon personal delivery to the appellant and applicant upon deposit in the U.S. mail, first class, postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the address shown on the application. The notice shall include a written statement verified by oath or affirmation attesting to the date that the decision was mailed to the party by first class mail. The City Clerk shall give the appellant and applicant at least ten (10) calendar days’ written notice of the time and place at which the appeal shall be heard, de novo, by the City Council, in the same manner that written notice of the decision is to be given pursuant to this Subsection.

7.     In determining whether to grant an extension of the amortization period, and in determining the appropriate length of such an extension, the Planning Commission and the City Council on appeal shall consider:

a.     The amount of investment in the business.

b.     The present actual and depreciated value of business improvements.

c.     The applicable Internal Revenue Service depreciation schedule or functional non-confidential equivalent.

d.     The remaining useful life of the business improvements.

e.     The remaining lease term.

f.      The ability of a business and/or land owner to change the use of a conforming use.

g.     The opportunity for relocation to a legally permissible site and the cost of relocation.

h.     The date upon which the property owner and/or business owner received notice of the nonconforming status of the massage establishment business and the amortization requirements.

8.     The Planning Commission or the City Council on appeal shall receive and consider evidence presented by the appellant and any other persons, and shall make findings that the extension to the amortization period it establishes is reasonable in view of the evidence and the criteria set forth in paragraph 7 of this subsection. In no event shall the amortization period extension be longer than four (4) years.

The decision of the Planning Commission shall be final and conclusive, unless a timely and complete appeal is filed with the City Clerk pursuant to paragraph 5 of this subsection. The decision of the City Council on appeal shall be final and conclusive, unless timely judicial review is sought pursuant to Code of Civil Procedures Section 1094.8. In the event that a timely action or proceeding is brought pursuant to Code of Civil Procedures Section 1094.8 from the decision to deny the requested extension, in whole or in part, the decision shall be automatically stayed pending a final decision on the merits by the trial court. As used in this subsection, final decision on the merits does not include rehearing or appellate procedures. (Ord. 15-09)

Chapter 16.100 ANTENNAS AND WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
16.100.000 INTENT
This chapter is intended to protect the health, safety, welfare, and aesthetics of the community and to ensure that antennas and wireless communication facilities are placed, designed, and screened in a manner which is compatible with the small scale, residential character of the City and will not adversely impact neighboring properties. These regulations are the minimum practical regulations necessary to satisfy the health, safety, welfare, and aesthetic concerns of the City. The standards and regulations of this chapter shall apply to all antennas and wireless telecommunications facilities in the City except as otherwise preempted by federal or state law. This chapter shall not apply to antennas/ wireless telecommunication facilities erected by the City of Claremont. (09-02)

 

16.100.010 DEED RESTRICTIONS AND COVENANTS
Provisions of this chapter, including any findings which would otherwise allow an antenna and any use permits which may be issued pursuant thereto, shall not override or displace deed restrictions or covenants (CC&Rs) which may apply to the subject property. (08-05)

 

16.100.020 DEFINITIONS
The following terms, words and phrases and their derivations shall have the meanings as defined in the glossary of this title: antenna; antenna height; antennas, horizontal-wire or sloping-wire; antenna mast-pole; antenna, panel; antenna support structure; antennas, vertical or whip; wireless equipment, accessory; wireless facilities, personal; and wireless telecommunications. (08-05)

 

16.100.030 AMATEUR RADIO ANTENNAS, RESIDENTIAL TELEVISION RECEIVE ONLY ANTENNAS, AND OTHER RESIDENTIAL ANTENNAS
A.     Applicability

1.     The regulations in this section are intended for amateur radio antennas, residential television receive only antennas, and other similar antennas used for residential purposes and not intended to be used in conjunction with a business, commercial enterprise, trade, calling, vocation, profession, occupation, or means of livelihood.

2.     The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) has established a rule partially preempting state and local regulation of amateur radio communication. However, the FCC has not preempted local regulation involving placement, screening, height of amateur radio antennas so long as the regulations are based on health, safety, or aesthetic considerations, represent a reasonable accommodation of amateur radio communication, and constitute the minimum practicable regulation necessary to accomplish the local agency’s legitimate purpose.

B.     Permitted Antennas as Matter of Right

The following antenna types are permitted as a matter of right on lots developed with a main building subject to subsection D below (Required Findings) and subsection E below (General Standards for Residential Antennas):

1.     Antennas and related support structures which have a height of not more than 15 feet.

2.     Vertical or whip antennas, that are not otherwise mounted on antenna support structures, provided such antennas are no higher than 25 feet above the height of the main building.

3.     Horizontal-wire and sloping-wire antennas, provided such antennas have a vertical height of not more than 30 feet, and are attached to and supported only by a main or accessory building, or supported only by mast-poles or natural objects.

4.     Antennas for the very high frequency and ultra high frequency bands above 30 Megahertz, provided such antennas are similar in size to or smaller than home television antennas, as permitted in subsection B.5 below; have a height of not more than 30 feet; and are attached to and supported only by a main or accessory building, or supported only by mast-poles or natural objects.

5.     Home television antennas, provided such antennas have a height of no more than 30 feet, have horizontal dimensions of no more than 12 feet, and are attached to and supported only by a main or accessory building supported by mast-poles or natural objects.

6.     Rotatable, directional “beam”-type antennas for frequencies below 30 Megahertz which have booms, spreaders, radiator elements, director elements, or reflector elements constructed of metal tubing or similarly visible material, provided such antennas have a height of no more than 25 feet and have a turning radius not exceeding 21 feet.

C.    Residential Antennas Requiring Use Permits

Antennas other than those permitted in subsection B above (Permitted Antennas Permitted By Right) are permitted on residential lots with a main building only with a special use and development permit pursuant to Chapter 16.306, or a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 16.303. All antennas shall also be subject to the provisions of subsection D below (Required Findings) and subsection E below (General Standards for Residential Antennas).

1.     For antennas not more than 45 feet in overall height as measured from the ground level, not including vertical and whip antennas more than 25 feet above the height of the main building, shall be permitted with a special use and development permit.

2.     Vertical or whip antennas more than 25 feet above the height of the main building, and other antennas and antenna support structures over 45 feet in height are permitted only with a conditional use permit.

D.    Required Findings

All antennas permitted by this section shall be subject to the following findings. These are in addition to any applicable findings in Chapters 16.300, 16.303, and 16.306, for architectural review, a special use and development permit, or a conditional use permit.

1.     There is adequate space on the property for the antenna and support structure(s) without conflicting with building and other structures on the property.

2.     The antenna and support structure(s) comply with the general standards for antennas in subsection E below.

E.     General Standards for Residential Antennas

All antennas permitted by this section shall be subject to the following requirements:

1.     Antennas shall comply with all applicable building codes.

2.     Antennas and support structures shall be located on the site in a manner which will minimize to the greatest extent practicable the visibility of the antenna and support structure(s) to nearby residents and members of the general public, consistent with reasonable accommodation of amateur radio communications in the case of amateur radio antennas.

3.     No antennas or antenna support structures shall be located within or extend into the required setbacks, or be located between a street and a main residential structure, except however, a single element, horizontal wire or sloping-wire antenna may extend into setbacks or be located between a street and a main residential structure provided any support of such wire antenna is a natural object such as a tree or is an existing permitted structure such as a fence.

4.     Antennas and support structures shall have a height which is compatible with the surrounding neighborhood so existing trees or other tall features of the neighborhood can serve as a backdrop to mask the silhouette of the antenna to the greatest extent possible, consistent with reasonable accommodation of amateur radio communications in the case of amateur radio antennas.

5.     Antennas and support structures shall be screened with landscaping to the greatest extent possible, consistent with reasonable accommodation of amateur radio communications in the case of amateur radio antennas.

6.     Any antenna support structure which has a maximum extended height of more than 25 feet shall be equipped with both an electrical device and a hand operable device, capable of lowering such structure to 25 feet when the antenna is not in operation, unless it is shown by the applicant that it is not feasible to equip the proposed structure with such a device.

7.     Antenna surfaces shall not be painted with reflective or bright colors.

8.     No signing or lighting shall be incorporated into or attached to any antenna or antenna support structure, except as required by the City’s building division, or federal regulations.

9.     The number of amateur radio antennas and antenna support structures exceeding the height of 15 feet above ground on any residential lot shall be no greater than is necessary for reasonable accommodation of amateur radio operation. As a general rule, “reasonable accommodation” regarding the number of amateur antennas shall allow reasonable communication on the amateur frequencies both below and above 30 Megahertz, but not more than one rotatable, directional “beam”-type antennas shall be permitted.

10.   A maximum of two home television antennas and related structures which exceed the height of 15 feet above ground may be permitted on any residential lot.

11.   No more than two antennas and related support structures which are similar to amateur antennas and support structures or to home television antennas and support structures, but which are used for non-amateur or non-home televisions purposes, such as short-wave listening or communications monitoring, and which exceed the height of 15 feet above ground, shall be permitted on any residential lot. (08-05)

 

16.100.040 COMMERCIAL ANTENNAS AND WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES
A.     Applicability

1.     This section shall apply to all wireless telecommunications facilities placed on public and privately owned land in the City except for FCC-licensed amateur radio stations and residential television receive-only antennas.

2.     This section is intended: (a) to protect and promote the public health, safety, and welfare and the City’s aesthetics; (b) to facilitate the creation of an advanced wireless communications infrastructure for citizens, businesses, industries, and schools; and (c) to protect the City from potential adverse effects associated with wireless telecommunications facilities.

B.     Facilities Permitted by Right

A wireless telecommunication facility proposed to be located on any City of Claremont owned and/or leased property is allowed by right regardless of the zoning district. In order to locate the facility on such property, a lease or other agreement needs to be approved by the City Council. In addition, the facility requires insurance as outlined in Section 16.100.040.K.1. The facility is subject to the City’s architectural review process under Chapter 16.300. However, no architectural review shall be required for any antenna that is determined by the Director of Community Development to be for maintenance or replacement. A wireless telecommunication facility proposed to be located on private controlled land is allowed by right when the Director of Community Development determines that no architectural review is necessary because the proposed facility is for maintenance or replacement of existing facilities.

C.    Facilities Permitted with a Special Use and Development Permit (SUDP)

Except as provided in Sections 16.100.040.B and 16.100.040.H.4, no wireless telecommunications facility shall be constructed or installed in the City without a special use and development permit (SUDP). Upon receiving an application pursuant to Section 16.100.040.L, the Director shall issue a SUDP if the applicant meets all the requirements in Sections 16.100.040.D—K, or if the Director determines that the application is for a modification to an existing facility under 47 U.S.C. Section 1455(a).

D.    Required Findings for a Wireless Telecommunications Facility

All wireless telecommunications facilities permitted by this section shall be subject to the following findings:

1.     There is adequate space on the property for the wireless telecommunications facility without conflicting with existing buildings or other structures on the property, or reducing required parking, landscaping, or other development standards.

2.     The design and placement of the wireless telecommunications facility will not adversely impact the use of the property, other buildings, and structures located on the property, or the surrounding area or neighborhood.

3.     The wireless telecommunications facility as proposed is consistent with the requirements of subsections E through K of this section.

E.     Height and Location Standards

1.     No antenna mounted on an existing structure shall extend more than 20 feet above the height of the structure on which it is mounted plus one foot per each two feet that the structure exceeds 40 feet in height. No antenna mounted on a structure with a height of 40 feet or less shall extend more than 20 feet above the height of the structure.

2.     The allowable height limit for a new ground-mounted wireless telecommunication facility shall be determined on a site-by-site basis by the Director. The Director will take into account the height of the surrounding structures located within the adjoining neighborhood, existing trees, and other elements that can serve as a backdrop to mask the silhouette of the wireless telecommunications facility.

3.     No wireless telecommunications facility shall be located within or project into any required setbacks of the underlying land use district.

4.     No wireless telecommunications facility shall be located within or project closer than 10 feet from any right-of-way of a street, freeway, or railroad line, except as set forth in Section 16.100.040.K.

5.     No new ground-mounted wireless telecommunication facility shall be located within 100 feet of an existing residential structure whether such structure is the primary use on a parcel or an accessory/ancillary use. This restriction shall not apply to any new ground-mounted wireless telecommunication facility constructed by the City for public safety services, emergency services, or other City services.

F.     Operation and Security

1.     A wireless telecommunications facility shall comply with all applicable building codes.

2.     A wireless telecommunications facility shall be designed, constructed, maintained, and operated in a manner that minimizes noise and traffic to surrounding areas and that ensures the security of the facility, and the safety of the public.

3.     A wireless telecommunications facility shall be protected against unauthorized access.

4.     The Director may require that a wireless telecommunications facility be enclosed by a fence, the design of which shall be approved by the Director.

5.     All uses ancillary to the wireless telecommunications facility other than equipment essential for the operation of the facility shall be prohibited on the site.

G.    Radio Frequency Emissions

No SUDP shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that the wireless telecommunications facility, whether considered individually or cumulatively with other sources of radiofrequency emissions, will comply with applicable standards for environmental effects of radiofrequency emissions, including those adopted by the FCC and any other entity with jurisdiction over such matters. As a condition of any permit, whether stated in the permit or not, a wireless telecommunications facility must at all times comply with the applicable individual facility and cumulative standards for environmental effects of radiofrequency emissions and, upon request, must demonstrate compliance with those standards. If at any time the radiofrequency emissions are not in compliance with applicable standards, the applicant shall immediately notify the City and immediately terminate the operation of the wireless telecommunications facility. Before resuming operation of the wireless telecommunications facility, the operator shall explain to the City the cause of the failure to comply with radio frequency emissions standards and demonstrate to the City all measures taken to correct the failure to comply and to prevent such noncompliance in the future.

H.    Collocation and Use of Existing Structures

1.     The applicant shall collocate a wireless telecommunications facility with an existing wireless telecommunications facility unless the applicant submits proof acceptable to the City that reasonable efforts to collocate have been unsuccessful.

2.     The applicant shall locate a wireless telecommunications facility on an existing building or structure unless the applicant submits proof acceptable to the City that no existing building or structure is suitable for the location of the wireless telecommunications facility.

3.     Pursuant to Section 65850.6(b) of the California Government Code, any wireless telecommunication facility that will subsequently include co-located facilities shall comply with City requirements in this chapter for both the underlying wireless telecommunications facility and any facilities collocated therewith. A SUDP issued for an underlying facility may specify modifications and replacements that may occur with notice to the City, but without further application.

4.     Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, a co-located wireless telecommunications facility shall be a permitted use not requiring a SUDP if it satisfies the requirements of Section 65850.6(a) of the California Government Code, and is consistent with all requirements governing the underlying wireless telecommunications facility and any facilities to be collocated therewith.

I.      Design Review and Visual Impact

1.     All wireless telecommunications facilities shall be subject to architectural review pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 16.300.

2.     All wireless telecommunications facilities shall comply with Commercial Antenna/Wireless Telecommunication Facilities Guidelines (Guidelines) contained in Council Resolution No. 2008-70.

3.     A wireless telecommunications facility shall be located, installed, and mounted to have the minimum adverse visual impact on surrounding areas, parks, and roadways.

4.     Antennas and accessory wireless equipment shall be painted in a non-reflective color.

5.     Antennas and accessory wireless equipment, if visible, shall be screened with landscaping to the greatest extent possible. If trees are to be provided as screening, the trees shall be minimum 48-inch box-sized evergreen trees (unless it is determined that better screening can be obtained through smaller sized trees) in a species approved by the City’s Director of Community Development. All landscaped screening shall be required to be maintained and replaced if necessary by the applicant as long as the associated antenna or equipment is in use.

6.     Accessory wireless equipment shall be screened from view by an existing structure to the greatest extent possible, or by constructing screening which blends with adjacent structures in color and form, or by landscaping where construction of a man-made screening is not appropriate. All housing for accessory wireless equipment shall be placed underground if located in a front or street side setback or the public right-of-way.

7.     No wireless telecommunications facility shall adversely impact the integrity or character of any structure listed in the Claremont Register of Sites of Historic or Architectural Merit.

8.     For all building-mounted antennas and antennas requiring construction of ground-mounted support structures which cannot be screened from view, an applicant shall provide an analysis of alternative facilities. The alternative analysis shall evaluate multiple alternatives in terms of the height, design and location of the facility, and shall demonstrate that the proposed height, design and location are necessary and that adverse visual impacts have been minimized to the greatest extent practical. The City may contract with a radio frequency engineering firm to verify technical assertions made in an applicant’s alternative analysis. The cost of the verification shall be borne by the applicant.

9.     No advertising, signs, or lighting shall be incorporated or attached to any antenna or accessory wireless equipment, except as required by the City’s building division or federal regulations.

J.     Notice Requirements

The following notification requirements shall apply to all applications for wireless telecommunications facility permitted by this chapter.

1.     The Director shall provide notification of the proposed project (both land use and design review concurrently) to owners of property within 300 feet of the proposed property on which antennas are to be located.

2.     Notices shall be sent not less than ten days prior to any action taken on the application.

K.     Telecommunication Facilities Located in Rights-of-Way

1.     In addition to requiring an SUDP, a wireless telecommunications facility located in the public right-of-way shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 12.04 of the Claremont Municipal Code and shall require the approval of an encroachment permit by the City Engineer. No such facility shall be permitted or constructed in the right-of-way unless and until the applicant has entered into an agreement with the City specifying the use of the property, required maintenance and repair, reimbursements to the City for costs associated with the proposed use, permitted collocations, modifications, and attachments thereto, and such other terms as the City may require. Applicants shall also agree to indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the City from any liability arising out of its approval of a permit and shall provide the City with a certificate of insurance of general commercial liability insurance for an amount as required by the Director, naming the City as an additional insured. The insurance shall be placed with a company satisfactory to the Director.

2.     A SUDP will be issued with respect to a wireless telecommunications facility that is proposed to be located in the public rights-of-way if the applicant’s proposal satisfies the following criteria, in addition to satisfying the other requirements of this chapter:

a.     The supporting structure and antenna array will be located on a street or public right-of-way where telephone lines are aerial and where new communications lines may be placed above-ground.

b.     All components of the wireless telecommunications facility other than the support structure and accessory equipment must be located at least eight feet above ground level, and be designed to provide adequate roadway clearance.

c.     An installation on an existing support structures will be flush-mounted and will not:

i.      Require an expansion of the footprint of the existing support structure (including any guy wires) of more than 10%;

ii.     Result in an extension in the height of the support structure (including the vertical height of the antenna) of more than six feet;

iii.     Result in expansion of more than 10% in the circumference or width of the existing support structure;

iv.    Intrude upon or create a hazard for any sidewalk, vehicular roadway, or pedestrian walkway;

v.     Require installation of an antennae that individually extend more than twelve inches horizontally, or that cumulatively extend more than twenty-four inches from the existing support structure at the point of attachment; or

vi.    Require installation of other equipment on the existing support structure that exceeds three feet in height, and the greater of three feet in width or three times the width of the existing support structure.

d.     For new support structures, there is no existing support structure that can accommodate the facilities required, and

i.      The new structure is of a design, height, width, circumference, and footprint consistent with existing support structures in the area where the structure will be located. A new structure that is larger than the structure that would be permitted under subsection (c) if the application had been filed for an existing support structure within 500 feet of the proposed new structure is not consistent with existing support structures;

ii.     The new structure will not intrude upon or create a hazard for any sidewalk, vehicular roadway, or pedestrian walkway; and

iii.     The antenna and other equipment installed on the new support structure comply with paragraphs (c)(v) and (vi) of this subsection K.2.

e.     References in this section to the dimensions of an “existing support structure” refer to the dimensions at the time of the initial installation of a wireless facility upon that structure. By way of example and not limitation, if a utility pole were extended vertically four feet to accommodate an antenna, it could later be increased in size an additional two feet and remain in compliance with subsection K.2.c(ii) of this section. A later addition of three feet would not comply with that subsection.

L.     Conditions of Approval

Conditions of approval shall be imposed on any SUDP granted pursuant to this section to ensure compliance with this chapter and to protect the public health, safety, general welfare, and aesthetics. The permit shall not become effective until all applicable conditions of approval have been met. All conditions of approval shall be observed throughout the duration of the permit. Conditions shall include, but shall not be limited to the following:

1.     The applicant shall agree to indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the City, its officers, agents, and employees from any and all liability or claims that may be brought against the City from its approval of a permit.

2.     A copy of the applicant’s lease with the property owner shall be submitted to the City prior to issuance of a building permit for the facility. If the lease is extended or terminated, notice and evidence thereof shall be provided to the Director. Upon termination or expiration of the lease, the use permit for the facility shall become null and void and the facility removed within 90 days.

3.     Certification of continued use of each approved facility shall be submitted on a yearly basis at the time of business license renewal for as long as the facility remains in operation. The certification shall indicate that the facility is operating as approved and that the facility complies with the most current Federal Communication Commission (FCC) safety standards. Facilities which are no longer in operation shall be removed within 90 days after the date of discontinuation. If no annual certification is provided, the use permit for the facility may be revoked by the Director.

4.     Prior to the issuance of a building permit for the facility, applicants may be required to provide a deposit or performance bond with the City for removal of the facility and any accessory wireless equipment if such facility is found to be abandoned or the use permit is revoked by the Director.

5.     Notice of change of ownership of the facility shall be provided to the City.

6.     Within 90 days of commencement of operations, applicants shall provide a preliminary report and field report prepared by a qualified engineer that shows the operation of the facility is in conformance with the standard established by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) for safe human exposure to electromagnetic fields (EMF) and radio frequency radiation (RFR).

7.     All changes and modifications to an approved facility shall require prior approval by the City.

8.     All graffiti and other forms of vandalism shall be promptly removed and/or repaired within 48 hours of notice (either in verbal or written form) given to the wireless telecommunication operator and/or property owner.

M.    Application Procedure

An application for the approval of a wireless telecommunications facility shall include, but is not limited to, the following information:

1.     The name and address of the owner of the wireless telecommunications facility and the name and address of the owner of the property on which such facility is proposed to be located. Additionally, the application shall include the name and address of a person who shall be designated as managing agent for maintenance of the facility.

2.     A report signed by a licensed professional engineer with expertise in radio communication facilities containing:

a.     The number, type, and design of the proposed antenna array;

b.     The make, model, and manufacturer of the proposed antenna array;

c.     A description of the proposed antenna array and all related fixtures, support structures, appurtenances and apparatus, including height above grade, materials, and lighting;

d.     The frequency, modulation, and class of service;

e.     Transmission and maximum effective radiated power;

f.      Direction of maximum lobes and associated radiation; and

g.     A certification that the proposed facility will comply with all applicable standards for radiofrequency emissions, whether considered individually or in conjunction with other sources of radiofrequency emissions whose effects are to be considered in determining compliance with applicable laws and regulations; and a declaration describing the manner in which the radiofrequency emissions for the facility were calculated and the results of those calculations.

3.     A report signed by a licensed professional engineer specializing in structural engineering, containing the following:

a.     In the case of placement of a wireless telecommunications facility on an existing structure or building, documentation of the ability of the building or structure to accept the antenna array, the proposed method of affixing the antenna array to the building or structure, and the precise point at which the antenna array shall be mounted.

b.     In the case of a wireless telecommunications facility with support structure, documentation that the structure is consistent with all applicable building codes, and a description of the support structure’s capacity, including the number of antenna array it can accommodate and the precise point at which the antenna array shall be mounted.

4.     A certification that the applicant will allow collocation on the facility wherever technically and economically feasible and aesthetically desirable.

5.     If the application does not propose to collocate a wireless telecommunications facility on an existing wireless telecommunications facility, a demonstration that reasonable efforts to collocate have been unsuccessful.

6.     If the application does not propose to collocate a wireless telecommunications facility on an existing building or structure, a demonstration that no existing building or structure is suitable for the location of the wireless telecommunications facility.

7.     Scaled drawings of the proposed facility and visual simulations showing the proposed facility superimposed on photographs of the existing site and surroundings.

8.     A description of the measures that the applicant proposes with respect to the wireless telecommunications facility to address its visual impact in accordance with this chapter.

9.     For all building-mounted antennas and antennas requiring construction of ground-mounted support structures that cannot be screened from view, an analysis of alternative facilities evaluating multiple alternatives in terms of the height, design and location of the facility, and demonstrating that the proposed height, design and location are necessary and that adverse visual impacts have been minimized to the greatest extent practical.

10.   For a wireless telecommunications facility in a public right-of-way for which the applicant claims entitlement under California Public Utilities Code Section 7901, evidence that the applicant is a telephone corporation or has written authorization to act as an agent for a telephone corporation.

11.   A demonstration that the wireless telecommunications facility will not adversely impact the integrity or character of any structure listed in the Claremont Register of Sites of Historic or Architectural Merit.

N.    Appeals

Any person may appeal any decision of staff or any condition imposed by staff pertaining to approval of an architectural review and/or special use and development permit pursuant to Chapter 16.321. Appeals shall be based on relevant substantive issues associated with the standards and findings associated with the granting of the special use and development permit and architectural review, and shall not be based on any other matter or issue as to which the City’s authority or discretion has been preempted by federal or state law, including, but not limited to, health effects of wireless facilities and interference from electromagnetic fields.

O.    Abandonment

1.     A wireless telecommunications facility not operated for a continuous period of 12 months or more may be deemed by the City to be abandoned. Upon receipt of notice of a determination of abandonment from the City, an operator shall remove its facility within 90 days.

2.     When an operator has failed to remove a nonoperating wireless telecommunications facility within the time prescribed by this section, the City may remove the facility and obtain reimbursement from the applicant, operator, or owner for all costs and expenses related thereto, including legal fees and costs. (14-04; 12-04; 12-01; 09-02; 08-05)

Chapter 16.103 COMMERCIAL USE OF RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES
16.103.000 INTENT
It is the intent of this chapter to permit the commercial use of existing residential structures, and lots containing such structures, in commercial districts, under certain conditions and limitations as contained herein. Such conditions and limitations are hereby deemed necessary for the protection of property values and the public welfare in view of the potential environmental problems which often result from the uncontrolled commercial use of residential structures. (08-05)

 

16.103.010 APPLICABILITY
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the commercial use of any existing building in any commercial district which was originally designed and constructed for residential use and occupancy, and the lot upon which said building exists. (08-05)

 

16.103.020 SPECIAL USE AND DEVELOPMENT PERMIT REQUIRED
Prior to occupancy of any residential structure for commercial use, and prior to any commercial use of a lot containing a residential structure, a special use and development permit, pursuant to Chapter 16.306, shall be obtained. (A certificate of occupancy, pursuant to Chapter 16.403, is also required.) Commercial uses existing in residential structures as of July 2, 1972 are exempted from this special use and development permit requirement, but no existing commercial uses shall be changed to another commercial use without first obtaining a special use and development permit. (08-05)

 

16.103.030 CRITERIA AND CONDITIONS
The following criteria and conditions, in addition to the general criteria for special use and development permits pursuant to Chapter 16.306, shall be met and continuously maintained in conjunction with any commercial use of an existing residential structure, or lot containing such structure:

A.     There shall be no combination of residential and commercial uses on one lot except in the CV Claremont Village District or except in mixed residential/commercial use developments permitted in an applicable land use district with the approval of a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 16.303.

B.     Except in the CM and CV Districts, no existing residential structure or lot containing such structure, shall be used for commercial use unless said structure and lot fronts on a major or secondary highway as designated on the General Plan.

C.    The off-street parking and setback landscaping standards of this title shall be met.

D.    Any repainting or remodeling done to the existing residential structure, or changes to the site development, shall have the prior approval of the Director. (08-05)

Chapter 16.130 SETBACKS, YARD LANDSCAPING STANDARDS, HEIGHTS OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
16.130.000 INTENT
It is the intent of this chapter to clarify, amplify, and provide for certain exceptions to the district development standards pertaining to setbacks, yard landscaping, and heights of buildings and structures. This chapter also provides for certain general development standards which apply to more than one district. (08-05)

 

16.130.010 SETBACKS
Except as otherwise provided in this title, no building, structure, or portion of any building or structure shall be constructed or extended closer to any street side, interior side, front, or rear property line than the respective front, side or rear setback required in the zoning district in which the property is located.

A.     Property Line Designation

1.     Front – for interior lots, the front property line shall be that property line abutting the street. For corner lots, the front property line shall be the shorter property line abutting the street.

2.     Street side – for corner lots, any property line, other than the front property line, which abuts the street shall be a street side property line.

3.     Rear – the property line opposite and most distant from the front property line.

4.     Interior side – any property line which does not abut a public right-of-way and which is not a rear property line.

In case of uncertainty or where an alternative designation is needed for reasons of aesthetics, community design or neighborhood compatibility, the Director shall determine property line designations.

B.     Future Right-of-Way Lines

If any future right-of-way line has been established by a plan adopted by the City Council, this line shall be considered to be the front or street side property line for purposes of determining setbacks.

C.    Setback From Railroad Line or Freeway for Residential Structures

No main building with a residential occupancy shall be located within 50 feet of the right-of-way of any railroad line or freeway unless the Director of Community Development determines that the residential use will be adequately protected from noise, dirt, and an adverse view by a landscape berm or screening, solid fencing, or another barrier of a similar nature. The property owner shall be responsible for maintaining such barrier, unless the barrier was provided and is maintained by the railroad or State of California Department of Transportation. (08-05)

 

16.130.020 PERMITTED ENCROACHMENTS INTO REQUIRED SETBACKS
The following are allowed to encroach into required setbacks.

A.     Architectural Features

Cornices, eaves, belt courses, cantilevered bay windows, fireplace masonry, and similar architectural features that do not increase interior floor area of a structure may project and/or encroach into the required setback area no more than four inches for each one foot of the required setback. Such architectural features shall encroach a total of no more than two feet into the required setback, except cornices and eaves with no vertical supports or members within the setback.

B.     Minor Structures and Equipment

Trash enclosures, dog houses and other minor structures with less than 120 square feet of floor area, or air conditioners, pool filters and other equipment may be located within any interior side or rear setback area, but not within any front or street-side setback area. Such minor structures shall be screened from view from adjacent properties and no part of such minor structure or equipment shall exceed eight feet in vertical height. All mechanical equipment shall meet the noise limitations of Chapter 16.154.

C.    Accessory Buildings or Structures Exceeding Eight Feet in Height or 120 Square Feet in Area

In residential districts, an accessory building or structure exceeding eight feet in height or 120 square feet in area may be permitted to be located within a required interior side or interior rear setback subject to the issuance of a special use and development permit pursuant to Chapter 16.306, and the following requirements:

1.     The accessory building or structure is located at least 75 feet from any public right-of-way other than an alley, freeway or railroad right-of-way.

2.     The accessory building or structure complies with any applicable standards and requirements of the zoning district in which the property is located and Chapter 16.133.

3.     Any side of an accessory building with a window or door opening shall not be located less than five feet from property line.

4.     All garages and carports shall be subject to the design standards of Chapter 16.136.

D.    Athletic Apparatus and Children’s Play Equipment in Residential Districts

1.     In single-family residential districts, basketball backboards, hoops, and their support structures may be located within required front, street and interior side and rear setbacks subject to the following requirements:

a.     Freestanding basketball support structures shall not be located closer than ten feet from front and street side property lines, or closer than two feet from interior side and rear property lines, however, a freestanding basketball support structure may be located closer than two feet from interior side and rear property lines subject to the issuance of a special use and development permit pursuant to Chapter 16.306.

b.     No part of a basketball backboard, hoop, and their support structure shall exceed a height of 13 feet.

c.     Freestanding basketball support structures shall consist of a single upright pole, with a horizontal dimension of no more than eight inches. The pole may be permanently placed into the ground, or if portable, the pole may be supported by a base or other auxiliary structure that is specifically manufactured to be used as such. If located in the required front or street side setback, no part of the base extending three feet above grade shall have a horizontal surface with a solid dimension of 24 inches or more.

d.     No more than one basketball backboard, hoop, and basketball support structure shall be located within the required front and street side yard setbacks on any single-family residential lot.

e.     Playing surfaces other than driveways shall not be located in required front and street side yard setbacks.

f.      Basketball backboards, hoops, and their support structures shall not obstruct entry into any required covered parking spaces.

g.     Basketball backboards, hoops, and their support structures shall be kept in safe, presentable and good structural condition, and all exposed surfaces shall be kept clean, in good repair, and painted where appropriate pursuant to Chapter 16.154.

2.     In single-family residential districts, athletic apparatus, sports-related accessory structures and children’s play equipment, such as tetherball poles, swings, slides, jungle gyms, etc. (other than basketball backboards, hoops, and their support structures) shall not be located within front yards or side yard areas that are visible from the street, but may be located within required interior side or rear setbacks, if areas are enclosed by a wall, a non-transparent fence, or continuous row of shrubbery, not less than five feet high, subject to the issuance of a special use and development permit pursuant to Chapter 16.303 and the requirements of Chapter 16.133.

E.     Pools

Pools no more than three feet above grade may be located within interior or rear side setback areas provided pools are no less than five feet from any property line.

F.     Fences and Landscape Architectural Features

Fences and landscape architectural features may be located within required setbacks subject to the provisions of Chapter 16.133.

G.    Flags

Flags may be permitted within required front and street side setbacks, provided they are erected and maintained in accordance with the regulations of Title 18.

H.    Signs

Freestanding signs may be permitted within required front and street side setbacks, provided they are erected and maintained in accordance with the sign regulations of Title 18.

I.      Building Additions to Nonconforming Structures

First floor additions to legal nonconforming buildings in the RS, HC, RR, and AV Districts, with setbacks less than currently required, may be constructed with same setbacks as those established by the existing building, or five foot setbacks, whichever is greater. All second floor additions shall meet current required setbacks.

J.     Neighborhoods With Nonconforming Front Setbacks

For in-fill development and additions to existing homes in neighborhoods, where existing development is legal, nonconforming, and no longer meets the required front setback of the District, such in-fill development and additions are allowed a reduced front setback equal to the average minimum front setback on the lots within the same development tract or Residential Unit Development, provided the setback is not reduced to less than 20 feet. (14-04; 12-01; 08-05)

 

16.130.030 YARD LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS
Property owners are responsible to ensure the following standards are continually met:

A.     All yard areas visible from the street, except surfaces of driveways, parking spaces, and pedestrian paths, shall be covered with vegetative material, or permeable materials such as mulch, decomposed granite, similar permeable materials, incorporated into an overall landscaped design. Such materials should allow the ground to absorb rainwater, provide drainage to trees on the site, and reduce runoff. Use of native planting or compatible species of drought-tolerant plants is encouraged as much as possible to reduce water demand. Use of permeable surfaces such as gravel or bricks are also encouraged for paths and walkways to allow absorption of rainwater. Synthetic grass with lifelike individual blades of grass that emulates real grass and has a pile height of 1¾ inch or more may also be used subject to approval of the Director.

B.     In residential districts, at least 50 percent of the front and street side setback areas are required to be covered and maintained with some combination of live trees, shrubs, vines, ground covers, flowers, lawns or other type of vegetation. The calculation of 50 percent may include the area between plants that are spaced in consideration of their mature size, and any area under an existing drip line of a tree that is covered and maintained with a permeable material such as mulch or decomposed granite. Synthetic grass may also be included in this calculation provided that there is some foundation planting consisting of live vegetation, the area of which is equal to least 10 percent of the total yard areas visible from the street. A minimum of one tree per fifty feet of lot width in addition to street trees is encouraged.

C.    For new development, no more than 30 percent of landscape areas shall be covered with turf/lawn grass species, not including synthetic lawn.

D.    Landscaped areas and landscaped materials shall be maintained in a neat, clean, and healthful condition. This shall include proper pruning, mowing of lawns, weeding, and removal of litter. Any damaged, dead, diseased, or decaying plant material shall be replaced in an expeditious manner. Plants shall be maintained free of disease and free of infestations of insects, animals, or other pests. Bare spots in lawns or planters shall be promptly re-vegetated. Pruning and mowing shall conform to the commonly used standards for each species; however, in no case shall landscaped areas be allowed to become overgrown. Turf/lawn grass species shall not exceed 12 inches in height. Plants shall not be allowed to extend over public sidewalks, streets, alleys, or other public property such that they interfere with traffic signs or the passage of pedestrians, bicycles, or vehicles.

E.     Gravel, stones, decomposed granite, mulch, or other hardscape materials shall be compacted or secured in such a way as to avoid spreading over any portion of a sidewalk or street.

F.     No parking is allowed in front or street side setback areas except in private residential driveways leading to paved parking areas located outside setback areas.

G.    All parking spaces, paved areas for vehicle access, and parking area landscaping shall comply with the development standards of the district in which they are located and the design standards of Chapter 16.136, Parking and Loading Space Standards.

H.    All landscaping for new development projects shall be installed prior to issuance the certificate of occupancy for the development, except for single-family dwelling units. For single-family dwelling units, all yard areas visible from the street shall be landscaped prior to the final inspection of the dwelling unit by the City Building Division. Prior to construction and/or installation of landscape improvements, the property owner(s) shall obtain applicable approvals and permits pursuant to City codes.

I.      Yard Landscaping Requirements

When the landscaping of all yard areas visible from the street have not been maintained, such yard areas shall be re-landscaped within 30 days after a notice of non-compliance has been mailed to the property owners of record. Property owners may request an extension at the end of thirty days. The extension request must be approved by the Community Development Director. (08-16; 08-05)

 

16.130.040 BUILDING SEPARATION IN SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
A.     In single-family residential districts, the floor area of any accessory building located less than six feet from a main residential building shall be included in the floor area calculation of the main residential building. The accessory building shall still be subject to all accessory building standards.

B.     Entry facilities, eaves, and minor architectural features which extend into the area between buildings shall not be considered when calculating the distance between buildings, provided a separation of not less than four feet is maintained by such features.

C.    Different buildings on the same lot may be connected by a breezeway. Two buildings attached to each other by only a breezeway shall be considered as two separate buildings. (08-05)

 

16.130.050 INTERSECTION VISIBILITY
On corner lots in all districts, no fence, wall, sign or other structure, shrubbery, mound of earth or other visual obstruction over three feet in height above the nearest street curb elevation shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow within the triangular space formed by the intersection of the property lines and a line joining points along the property lines 20 feet (measured along the property lines) from the point of intersection of the property line extensions. Conditions existing as of July 12, 1972, which do not conform to this chapter, need to be brought into compliance only upon the finding, by resolution of the City Council, that a hazard to public safety exists. (08-05)

 

16.130.060 HEIGHTS OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
Except as otherwise permitted in this title, no building or structure shall exceed the maximum building height or the maximum number of stories listed in the district development standards.

A.     Measurement of Building or Structure Height

1.     Building height shall be the vertical distance to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs; to the deck line of mansard roofs; and to the midpoint between the eaves and the highest ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs, measured from the curb level if the building is within ten feet of the front property line, or from the average elevation of the ground under the building.

If a building has more than one gable, hip, or gambrel roof, the highest gable, hip, or gambrel roof shall be used to determine the height of the building.

The average elevation of the ground shall be determined by adding the elevation of the lowest point of the lot covered by the building to the elevation of the highest point of the part of the lot covered by the building, and dividing by two. Height measurements shall be based on the existing topography of the site before grading. For an addition to an existing building the height measurement shall be based on the average elevation of the existing grade within five feet of the structure.



 

2.     The height of structures other than buildings shall be the vertical distance to the highest point of the structure measured from the average elevation of the existing grade within five feet of the structure. (See Chapter 16.133 for measurement of height for fences and walls.)

B.     Exceptions to Height Limits

1.     Architectural Elements

The Architectural Commission may approve the following elements above the height limits. Before approving, the Architectural Commission shall find that such elements are compatible with surrounding development and will not create a visually offensive view from the street or neighboring properties.

a.     Penthouses or roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the building.

b.     Fire or parapet walls, skylights, towers, church steeples, chimneys, smokestacks, silos, water tanks or similar structures.

All such elements shall be integrated into the architecture of the building and shown on elevation drawings submitted for review by the City.

No penthouse or roof structures, or any space above the height limit shall be allowed for the purpose of providing additional living or floor space.

2.     Antennas and Antenna Support Structures

Antenna and wireless telecommunication facilities may be permitted to exceed height limits subject to the provisions of Chapter 16.100.

C.    Calculation of Number of Stories

1.     Attic or loft space useable for other than storage purposes shall be considered a story.

2.     When a building or part of a building is over parking, such parking shall be considered a full story unless the parking is subterranean. Parking shall be considered subterranean if the top of the parking structure does not exceed four feet above the natural grade measured at the center of the site along any street frontage.

3.     Basement shall count as a story if the finished floor level directly above the basement is more than six feet above grade at any point.

D.    Additional Story on Slopes Downhill From the Street

On property located on slopes downhill from the street having a 25 percent or greater slope (measured in the general direction of the side lot lines), an additional story or ten feet may be constructed on the main building, providing, however, that the ceiling of the lowest story shall be not more than two feet above the curb level measured at the center of the lot frontage. (08-05)

Chapter 16.131 WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
16.131.010 PURPOSE
A.     The State Legislature has found that:

1.     The waters of the State are of limited supply and are subject to ever increasing demands;

2.     The continuation of California’s economic prosperity is dependent on the availability of adequate supplies of water for future uses;

3.     It is the policy of the State to promote the conservation and efficient use of water and to prevent the waste of this valuable resource;

4.     Landscapes are essential to the quality of life in California by providing areas for active and passive recreation and as an enhancement to the environment by cleaning air and water, preventing erosion, offering fire protection, and replacing ecosystems lost to development;

5.     Landscape design, installation, maintenance, and management can and should be water efficient; and

6.     Article X, Section 2 of the California Constitution specifies that the right to use water is limited to the amount reasonably required for the beneficial use to be served, and the right does not and shall not extend to waste or unreasonable method of use of water.

B.     The City hereby finds that:

1.     The City of Claremont has established a water conservation ordinance that prohibits wasteful uses of water throughout the City by all water users;

2.     The wholesale water purveyor and regional water import agency have developed an allocation-based and tiered water rate structure that requires the local retail water provider to document water use for all water meters in the City;

3.     Incentive-based water use efficiency programs have been actively implemented within Claremont for many years;

4.     Current local design practices in new landscapes typically achieve the State Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance water use goals;

5.     All water services within the City are metered;

6.     Landscape plan submittal and review has been a long standing practice in Claremont;

7.     The average rainfall in Claremont is approximately 17.3 inches per year and the annual reference evapotranspiration rate (Annual ETo) is 51.3; and

8.     The local water purveyor has implemented a tiered-rate billing structure and enforcement of water waste prohibitions for all existing properties throughout its service area, which includes the City of Claremont in its entirety.

C.    Consistent with these findings, the purpose of the City’s Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance is to establish an alternative local ordinance that is acceptable under AB 1881 as being at least as effective as the State Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance in the context of conditions in the City in order to:

1.     Promote the values and benefits of landscapes while recognizing the need to invest water and other resources as efficiently as possible;

2.     Establish a set of procedures for planning, designing, installing, and maintaining and managing water efficient landscapes in new construction and rehabilitated projects;

3.     Establish provisions for water management practices and water waste prevention for existing landscapes; and

4.     Use water efficiently without waste by setting a maximum applied water allowance as an upper limit for water use and reduce water use to the lowest practical amount.

[Note: Authority cited: Section 65593, Government Code. Reference: Sections 65591, 64493, 65596, Government Code.] (10-02)

 

16.131.020 APPLICABILITY
A.     New Landscape Installations or Rehabilitation Projects

This chapter shall apply to the following landscape projects:

1.     New landscape installations or landscape rehabilitation projects by public agencies or private nonresidential developers, except for cemeteries, with a landscaped area, including pools or other water features but excluding hardscape, equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet, and which are otherwise subject to a discretionary approval of a landscape plan, or which otherwise require a ministerial permit for a landscape or water feature;

2.     New landscape installations or landscape rehabilitation projects by developers or property managers of single-family and multifamily residential projects or complexes with a landscaped area, including pools or other water features but excluding hardscape, equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet, and which are otherwise subject to a discretionary approval of a landscape plan, or which otherwise require a ministerial permit for a landscape or water feature;

3.     New landscape installation projects by individual homeowners on single-family or multi-family residential lots with a total project landscaped area, including pools or other water features, but excluding hardscape, equal to or greater than 5,000 square feet, and which are otherwise subject to a discretionary approval of a landscape plan, or which otherwise require a ministerial permit for a landscape or water feature;

4.     Recognizing the special landscape management needs of cemeteries, prior to new landscape installations or landscape rehabilitation projects at cemeteries the following shall be prepared: a water efficient landscape worksheet; landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule; and irrigation audit, survey and water use analysis as required in the guidelines.

B.     Existing Landscapes

Section 16.131.040.B of this chapter shall apply to:

1.     All landscaped areas over one acre in size, whether installed prior to or after January 1, 2010; and

2.     All landscaped areas installed after January 1, 2010 to which Section 16.131.020.A is applicable.

C.    This chapter shall not apply to:

1.     Registered local, state, or federal historical sites;

2.     Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system;

3.     Mined-land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; or

4.     Plant collections, as part of botanical gardens and arboretums that are open to the public.

[Note: Authority cited: Section 65595, Government Code. Reference: Section 65596, Government Code.] (10-02)

 

16.131.030 IMPLEMENTATION PROCEDURES
A.     Prior to installation, a landscape documentation package shall be submitted to the City for review and approval of all landscape projects subject to the provisions of this chapter. Any landscape documentation package submitted to the City shall comply with the provisions of the guidelines.

B.     The landscape documentation package shall include a certification by a professional appropriately licensed in the State of California stating that the landscape design and water use calculations have been prepared by or under the supervision of the licensed professional and are certified to be in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the guidelines.

1.     Landscape and irrigation plans shall be submitted to the City for review and approval with appropriate water use calculations.

2.     Water use calculations shall be consistent with calculations contained in the guidelines and shall be provided to the local water purveyor, as appropriate, under procedures determined by the City.

3.     Verification of compliance of the landscape installation with the approved plans shall be obtained through a certification of completion in conjunction with a certificate of use and occupancy or permit final process, as provided in the Guidelines.

[Note: Authority cited: Section 65595, Government Code. Reference: Section 65596, Government Code.] (10-02)

 

16.131.040 LANDSCAPE WATER USE STANDARDS
A.     New and Rehabilitated Landscapes

For landscape installation or rehabilitation projects subject to the applicability requirements of Section 16.131.020.A, the estimated applied water use allowed for the landscaped area shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance (MAWA) calculated using an evapotranspiration adjustment factor (ETAF) of 0.7, except for special landscaped areas where the MAWA is calculated using an ETAF of 1.0; or the design of the landscaped area shall otherwise be shown to be equivalently water-efficient in a manner acceptable to the City; as provided in the guidelines.

B.     Existing Landscapes

Irrigation of all landscaped areas shall be conducted in a manner conforming to the rules and requirements, and shall be subject to penalties and incentives for water conservation and water waste prevention as determined and implemented by the local water purveyor or as mutually agreed by local water purveyor and the City. (10-02)

 

16.131.050 DELEGATION
The City may delegate to, or enter into a contract with, a local agency to implement, administer, and/or enforce any of the provisions of this chapter. (10-02)

 

16.131.060 DEFINITIONS
The following definitions are applicable to this chapter:

“Applied water” means the portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the landscape.

“Budget-based tiered-rate structure” means tiered or block rates for irrigation accounts charged by the retail water agency in which the block definition for each customer is derived from lot size or irrigated area and the evapotranspiration requirements of landscaping.

“Ecological restoration project” means a project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem.

“Estimated applied water use” means the average annual total amount of water estimated to be necessary to keep plants in a healthy state, calculated as provided in the guidelines. It is based on the reference evapotranspiration rate, the size of the landscape area, plant water use factors, and the relative irrigation efficiency of the irrigation system.

“Evapotranspiration” or “ETo” – see “Reference evapotranspiration.”

“Evapotranspiration adjustment factor” or “ETAF” is equal to the plant factor divided by the irrigation efficiency factor for a landscape project, as described in the guidelines.

The ETAF is calculated in the context of local reference evapotranspiration, using site-specific plant factors and irrigation efficiency factors that influence the amount of water that needs to be applied to the specific landscaped area.

A combined plant mix with a site-wide average plant factor of 0.5 (indicating a moderate water need) and average irrigation efficiency of 0.71 produces an ET adjustment factor of (0.7) = (0.5/0.71), which is the standard of water use efficiency generally required by this chapter and the guidelines, except that the ETAF for a special landscape area shall not exceed 1.0.

“Guidelines” refers to the Guidelines for Implementation of the Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance, as adopted by resolution of the City Council, which describes procedures, calculations, and requirements for landscape projects subject to this chapter.

“Hardscapes” means any durable material or feature (pervious and non-pervious) installed in or around a landscaped area, such as pavements or walls. Pools and other water features are considered part of the landscaped area and not considered hardscapes for purposes of this chapter.

“Homeowner installed landscape” means any landscaping either installed by a private individual for a single-family residence or installed by a licensed contractor hired by a homeowner. A homeowner, for purposes of this chapter, is a person who occupies the dwelling he or she owns. This definition excludes speculative homes, which are not owner-occupied dwellings and which are subject under this chapter to the requirements applicable to developer-installed residential landscape projects.

“Irrigation efficiency” means the measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. The minimum average irrigation efficiency for purposes of this chapter is 0.71. Greater irrigation efficiency can be expected from well designed and maintained systems.

“Landscaped area” means all the planting areas, turf areas, and water features in a landscape design plan subject to the maximum applied water allowance and estimated applied water use calculations. The landscaped area does not include footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone walks, other pervious or non-pervious hardscapes, and other non-irrigated areas designated for non-development (e.g., open spaces and existing native vegetation).

“Landscape contractor” means a person licensed by the State of California to construct, maintain, repair, install, or subcontract the development of landscape systems.

“Landscape documentation package” means the documents required to be provided to the City for review and approval of landscape design projects, as described in the Guidelines.

“Landscape project” means total area of landscape in a project, as provided in the definition of “landscaped area,” meeting the applicability requirements under Section 16.131.020 of this chapter.

“Local agency” means a city or county, including a charter city or charter county, that is authorized by the City to implement, administer, and/or enforce any of the provisions of the Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance on behalf of the City. The local agency may be responsible for the enforcement or delegation of enforcement of this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance including, but not limited to, design review, plan check, issuance of permits, and inspection of a landscape project.

“Local water purveyor” means any entity, including a public agency, city, county, or private water company that provides retail water service.

“Maximum applied water allowance” or “MAWA” means the upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscaped area as specified in Section 2.2 of the Guidelines. It is based upon the area’s reference evapotranspiration, the ET adjustment factor, and the size of the landscaped area. The estimated applied water use shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance.

“Mined-land reclamation projects” means any surface mining operation with a reclamation plan approved in accordance with the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975.

“New construction” means, for the purposes of this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance, a new building with a landscape or other new landscape such as a park, playground, or greenbelt without an associated building.

“Non-pervious” means any surface or natural material that does not allow for the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil.

“Pervious” means any surface or material that allows the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil.

“Permit” means an authorizing document issued by local agencies for new construction or rehabilitated landscape.

“Plant factor” or “plant water use factor” is a factor, when multiplied by ETo, that estimates the amount of water needed by plants. For purposes of this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance, the plant factor range for low water use plants is 0 to 0.3; the plant factor range for moderate water use plants is 0.4 to 0.6; and the plant factor range for high water use plants is 0.7 to 1.0. Plant factors cited in this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance are derived from the Department of Water Resources 2000 publication “Water Use Classification of Landscape Species.”

“Recycled water” or “reclaimed water” means treated or recycled waste water of a quality suitable for non-potable uses such as landscape irrigation and water features. This water is not intended for human consumption.

“Reference evapotranspiration” or “ETo” means a standard measurement of environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants. ETo is given expressed in inches per day, month, or year as represented in Appendix A of the Guidelines, and is an estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large field of four-to-seven-inch tall, cool-season grass that is well watered. Reference evapotranspiration is used as the basis of determining the maximum applied water allowances.

“Rehabilitated landscape” means any re-landscaping project that meets the applicability criteria of Section 16.131.020.A, where the modified landscape area is greater than 2,500 square feet, is 50% of the total landscape area, and the modifications are planned to occur within one year.

“Smart automatic irrigation controller” means an automatic timing device used to remotely control valves that operate an irrigation system and which schedules irrigation events using either evapotranspiration (weather-based) or soil moisture data.

“Special landscape area” means an area of the landscape dedicated solely to edible plants such as orchards and vegetable gardens, area irrigated with recycled water, water features using recycled water, and areas dedicated to active play such as parks, sports fields, golf courses, and where turf provides a playing surface.

“Turf” means a ground cover surface of mowed grass. Annual bluegrass, Kentucky bluegrass, Perennial ryegrass, Red fescue, and Tall fescue are cool-season grasses. Bermuda grass, Kikuyu grass, Seashore Paspalum, St. Augustine grass, Zoysia grass, and Buffalo grass are warm-season grasses.

“Valve” means a device used to control the flow of water in an irrigation system.

“Water feature” means a design element where open water performs an aesthetic or recreational function. Water features include ponds, lakes, waterfalls, fountains, artificial streams, spas, and swimming pools (where water is artificially supplied). The surface area of water features is included in the high water use hydrozone of the landscaped area. Constructed wetlands used for on-site wastewater treatment, habitat protection or stormwater best management practices that are not irrigated and used solely for water treatment or stormwater retention are not water features and, therefore, are not subject to the water budget calculation.

[Note: Authority cited: Section 65595, Government Code. Reference: Sections 65592, 65596, Government Code.] (10-02)

Chapter 16.133 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES, FENCES, AND RECREATION COURTS
16.133.000 INTENT
These standards are intended to provide for the construction of fences, recreation courts, and other accessory structures, to control height, size and location of structures, to ensure the compatibility of development and land uses, to provide for privacy and protection against hazardous conditions, to preserve neighborhood character, and to protect access to light and air and privacy of residents. (08-05)

 

16.133.010 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
A.     Required Compliance

No accessory structures shall be erected, and no existing structure shall be moved, altered or enlarged, nor shall any accessory structure be used, designed or intended to be used for any purpose or in any manner, except in accordance with the permitted uses and development standards of the district in which such structure is located and this chapter.

B.     Main Building Required

No accessory structure shall be located on any parcel in a Residential District without a permitted main residential structure.

C.    Required Area

No accessory structure, other than a garage or carport, shall be permitted in a single-family district, unless there is sufficient area on the site for the main residential building, 400 square feet of covered parking, and the accessory structure, and all structures are in compliance with the development standards for the district.

D.    Required Setbacks

No accessory building or structure, including any athletic apparatus and children’s play equipment, or part of thereof, shall be located within the required setbacks of the district in which such building or structure is located except as otherwise permitted in Chapter 16.130 and this chapter.

E.     Maximum Height

The following height limits are in addition to the height limits specified in the development standards of each district:

1.     Accessory Structures on Single-Family Residential Lots

a.     On any single-family residential lot, accessory buildings and structures shall be limited to one story; they shall not exceed 15 feet in height; and they shall not exceed the height of the main residential structure, except if otherwise permitted by this Code. (See Chapter 16.130 for measurement of building height.)

2.     Athletic Apparatus and Children’s Play Equipment on Single-Family Residential Lots

a.     On any single-family residential lot, no athletic apparatus, or other sports related accessory structures, such as basketball backboards, tetherball poles, etc. and no children’s play equipment, such as swings, slides, jungle gyms, etc., shall exceed 13 feet in height, except as otherwise permitted by this chapter.

Fencing for sports related activities shall comply with requirements for recreation courts.

b.     Such apparatus or structure exceeding 13 feet in height, but not more than 15 feet in height, may be allowed only with a special use and development permit pursuant to Chapter 16.306.

F.     Maximum Floor Area

On any single-family residential lot excepting in the RR Rural Residential Districts, accessory buildings shall have a maximum floor area of 300 square feet, excepting that an additional 400 square feet may be included for required parking for the primary dwelling unit on lot, and an additional 700 square feet may be included for an accessory second unit, provided such accessory unit is in compliance with Chapter 16.333, Accessory Second Unit.

In the RR Rural Residential Districts, accessory buildings shall be subject to the maximum floor area standard set forth in Chapter 16.007. (08-05)

 

16.133.020 FENCES AND ARCHITECTURAL LANDSCAPE FEATURES
A.     Measurement of Height of Fences

For the purposes of this chapter, the height of a fence shall be measured from the average elevation of the existing grade within five feet of the fence, or when the fence is located between two properties, the height of the fence shall be measured from the existing grade on the higher side of the fence, provided that no fence shall exceed a height of ten feet measured from grade on the lower side of the fence, unless a higher fence is required as a condition of a conditional use permit or Architectural Commission approval of a project.

The maximum height of a fence may vary by an amount not to exceed six inches to accommodate grade changes, provided, however, that in no event shall the average height of such fence exceed the maximum height specified.

B.     Permitted Fences and Architectural Landscape Features

Fences and architectural landscape features, including but not limited to planters and similar features, may be constructed and maintained in any district subject to the following requirements:

1.     Fences and Architectural Landscape Features in Side and Rear Yards

Fences and architectural landscape features no greater than six feet in height may be constructed in any required interior rear or side setback and along rear and interior side setbacks behind the front or street side setback line.

2.     Fences and Architectural Landscape Features in Front and Street Side Yards

a.     Fences and landscape features no greater than three feet in height may be constructed within front and street side setback areas.

b.     Gates no higher than three feet in height may be constructed within front and street side setbacks, provided that any gate constructed on or over a driveway shall be located no closer than 20 feet to the front or street side property line, or public sidewalk, whichever is closest to the gate.

c.     Architectural landscape features, excepting fences, that exceed three feet in height such as posts and lamp fixtures, fountains and other similar type structures may be located in any front or street side setback, subject to the following requirements:

i.      Such architectural features shall be located no closer than eight feet to the front or street side property line.

ii.     Such structures shall have a height of no more than eight feet.

iii.     Such architectural features are subject to architectural review pursuant to Chapter 16.300.

iv.    No part of the architectural features extending three feet above grade shall have a solid horizontal surface with a dimension of 24 inches or more.

v.     All outdoor lighting shall comply with the outdoor lighting standards in Chapter 16.154.

3.     Permitted Fences Greater Than Six Feet

a.     A fence exceeding six feet in height may be permitted if required as a condition of a conditional use permit or Architectural Commission approval of a project.

b.     A fence greater than six feet but less than eight feet in height may be permitted in required rear or interior side setbacks with a special use and development permit provided the fence is constructed behind the front or street side setback line, and the Director determines that a height of more than six feet is necessary for privacy or safety reasons.

4.     Exempted Fences

Any fence required by any law or statute is exempted from the regulations and standards of this title, provided such fence does not exceed the height required by such law or statute.

5.     Fences for Recreation or Athletic Court and Equipment

All fences for outdoor recreation or athletic courts and equipment shall comply with the standards and restrictions for recreation courts of this chapter.

6.     Metal Fences in the RR District

In the RR District, all fences made of metal shall be a dark matte color.

7.     Barbed Wire Fences

No barbed wire fences are permitted except with a special use and development permit pursuant to Chapter 16.306.

C.    Required Fences

1.     Required Wall Along District Boundary Lines

A solid masonry wall of not less than six feet nor more than eight feet in height (except not over three feet in height within a required front or street side setback) shall be erected along any property line, not abutting the public right-of-way, which is a District Boundary Line separating any Single-Family Residential District from any Multiple Family, Commercial or Industrial District. Such wall shall be constructed in conjunction with the development of any property abutting such district boundary line.

2.     Required Fences or Walls Between Different Uses and Areas

The construction of a solid fence separating or screening one use or area from another may be a condition of a conditional use permit or Architectural Commission approval of any project. The design of such fence shall be per a plan approved by the Architectural Commission. (See Chapter 16.136 for fence requirements in conjunction with the development of parking lots.)

3.     Required Pool Enclosures

All pools shall be enclosed by a structure and/or fence not less than five feet in height measured from the outside ground level at a point 12 inches horizontal from the base of the fence or wall. Openings in the fence shall be no larger than 3-1/2 inches. Any gate or door to the outside shall be equipped with a self-closing device and a self-latching device located not less than four feet six inches above the ground. Such fences and gates shall meet City specifications.

Conditions existing as of July 12, 1972, which do not conform to this section, need to be brought into compliance only upon the finding, by resolution of the City Council, that a hazard to public safety exists. (12-01; 08-05)

 

16.133.030 OUTDOOR RECREATION AND ATHLETIC COURTS
A.     Permitted Recreation and Athletic Courts

In residential districts, the following outdoor recreation and athletic courts are permitted:

1.     Any recreation or athletic court, without lighting, less than 500 square feet, with fencing or other enclosures no more than six feet in height, provided such court is not in required front or street side setbacks. Such a court may be located within interior side and rear setbacks if not sunk below the existing grade level.

2.     Any recreation or athletic court, without lighting, more than 500 square feet, with fencing or other enclosures no more than six feet in height from grade level, provided such court is not in required front or street side setbacks and is no closer than ten feet to interior rear or side property lines. Courts may be sunk below the existing grade to meet these requirements.

B.     Recreation and Athletic Courts Requiring Special Use and Development Permits

In residential districts, outdoor recreation or athletic courts with lights are permitted only with a special use and development permit, pursuant to Chapter 16.306, and subject to the lighting development standards below.

C.    Recreation and Athletic Courts Requiring Conditional Use Permits

In residential districts the following outdoor recreation and athletic courts are permitted only with a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 16.303:

1.     Courts with lights more than 14 feet above grade level.

2.     Courts with fencing more than six feet above grade level.

a.     All fencing above the six feet in height shall be constructed of wire mesh, or similar material, capable of admitting at least 90 percent of light as measured on a reputable light meter.

b.     In the RR Districts, all courts with fencing more than six feet in height shall not be located closer than 35 feet from rear or side property lines; however, any recreation or athletic court located on a lot adjacent to Mills or Padua Avenues shall not be located closer than 45 feet to the property lines adjacent to these streets.

D.    Development Standards for Recreation and Athletic Courts

The following development standards shall apply to all outdoor recreation and athletic courts in residential districts:

1.     No recreation or athletic courts are permitted in any front or street side setback, or in any City easement.

2.     No recreation or athletic courts greater than 500 square feet are permitted within ten feet of any interior rear or side property line, or landscape, equestrian, or pedestrian easement.

3.     All fencing shall be no more than six feet above grade level, and no more than 10 feet above court level, except if approved with a conditional use permit.

4.     All recreation court fences made of metal shall be a dark matte color.

5.     Landscaping is required for all recreation and athletic courts greater than 500 square feet, to screen any fencing, equipment or athletic apparatus from adjacent properties and all rights-of-way. Such landscaping shall achieve its screening effect within three years after planting. Landscaping plans for the area between the sports court and adjacent properties shall be submitted to the Director of Community Development for review and approval prior to the issuance of a building permit.

6.     Any recreation court or athletic court with an impervious surface of greater than 500 square feet requires a French drain or similar percolation system to be constructed in conjunction with such court in order to provide for on-site drainage of run-off into the aquifer. The plan for this system shall be submitted before the issuance of a building permit. Said system shall be maintained so as to be functional.

7.     All lighting, if permitted with a special use and development permit or a conditional use permit, shall comply with the following restrictions:

a.     All lighting shall comply with the environmental protective standards for outdoor lighting in Chapter 16.154.

b.     No more than six light fixtures and six supporting poles are permitted.

c.     Lighting and light fixtures shall not be more than 14 feet above grade level, and no more than 18 feet above the court level for sunken courts, except if otherwise permitted through a conditional use permit.

d.     Light fixtures and supporting poles shall be coated with a dark, low reflective material.

e.     The power rating of the lamp shall not exceed 1,000 watts per light fixture.

f.      No court lighting shall be operated before 7:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. Such lighting shall be installed with either a timing device to turn off the court lights at one-hour intervals, or a motion sensor.

g.     All court lighting is subject to review for a 30-day period after installation by the Director of Community Development to determine compliance with the above and Section 16.154.030.

E.     Replacement Lighting and Fencing for Existing Recreation Courts

For recreation and athletic courts constructed in residential districts prior to January 9, 1992 any existing fencing or lighting which was erected in compliance with all applicable ordinances and codes, but which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter, may be maintained, repaired and may be replaced subject to approval of the replacement materials and design by the Director, provided the height of any replacement fencing does not exceed ten feet in height and does not exceed the height of the previous fencing, and the lighting is no more than 14 feet above grade level, no more than 18 feet above the court level for sunken courts, and does not exceed the height of the previous lighting. A conditional use permit shall be required for replacement of fencing and lighting, which exceeds the above heights. (08-05)

 

16.133.040 TEMPORARY, PORTABLE, AND PERMANENT SHADE STRUCTURES
A.     No portable, collapsible, or permanent shade structure made of canvas, vinyl, aluminum, wood, or similar materials, used to protect vehicles or shelter goods, shall be erected, installed, or maintained in any residential yard area that is not enclosed with a wall, a non-transparent fence, or continuous row of shrubbery, not less than five feet high. This section shall not apply to a garage or carport for which a building permit has been issued.

B.     A portable or collapsible shade structure used to protect vehicles or shelter goods may be placed in an interior yard area that is enclosed with a wall, a non-transparent fence, or continuous row of shrubbery, not less than five feet high.

C.    A portable or collapsible shade structure located within a required interior setback shall have a height of no more than ten feet.

D.    All portable or collapsible shade structures shall be maintained in good condition, and shall be removed or replaced when deteriorated from sun or wind. (08-05)

Chapter 16.136 PARKING, LOADING, AND TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MEASURES
16.136.000 INTENT
It is the intent of this chapter to assure the provision of adequate on-site parking facilities in conjunction with any use or development. These standards should be considered minimum and more extensive parking provisions may be warranted. (08-05)

 

16.136.010 REQUIRED NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES
A.     Calculation of Number Required

1.     At least two spaces shall be provided for any use or development regardless of its size and scope.

2.     When calculations of required parking yield a fractional number, the next larger whole number shall be used.

3.     The total requirement for mixed occupancies shall be the sum of the individual uses computed separately.

4.     For additions to existing development, the increased parking requirement shall be based only on the addition, excepting for an addition to single-family residential property lacking required parking, which shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 16.400.

B.     District Standards and Special Use Standards

The minimum required number of spaces for each use or development shall be provided and continuously maintained. The number required is set forth in the development standards for each district. However, in those districts where there are not specific standards for the uses listed below, the following minimum number of spaces shall be provided:

 

 

1.

Auditoriums, theaters, meeting houses, churches, and similar places of public assembly

One (1) space for each three permanent seats plus one for each 24 square feet of area provided for temporary or movable seats.

2.

Automobile sales

One (1) space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area plus one (1) space for each 2,000 square feet of outside sales area.

3.

Hotels, motels

One (1) space per unit.

4.

Hospitals – Short term general and psychiatric

One and three-quarter (1.75) spaces per bed, based on maximum occupancy.

5.

Skilled nursing, acute care facilities

One (1) space for each three (3) beds, based on maximum occupancy.

6.

Senior housing

 

 

a. Independent living

One (1) space for each studio unit or bedroom, 50 percent of which shall be covered, plus one (1) guest space for every five units.

 

b. Assisted living, congregate care

One (1) space for every two (2) studio units or bedroom plus one guest space for every five units

7.

Restaurants in all commercial districts except CV District

 

a. Inside dining

One (1) space for each 100 square feet of gross floor area.

 

b. Outside dining

One (1) space for each 175 square feet of gross outdoor dining area.

8.

Restaurants in CV District

See minimum parking standards in Chapter 16.060.

9.

Barbers, beauty, skin and nail services, tanning salons in CV District

See minimum parking standards in Chapter 16.060.

10.

Day care facilities

 

 

a. Adult day health center

One (1) space for every seven (7) clients for which the facility is approved plus one space for each employee/staff member.

 

b. Child day care facility (not including large facility day care homes)

One (1) space for every ten (10) children for which the facility is approved plus one space for each employee/staff member.

(08-05)

 

16.136.020 JOINT USE AND COMMON PARKING FACILITIES
The Planning Commission may permit the joint use of parking facilities to meet the standards for certain uses under the following conditions:

A.     Up to one-half of the parking facilities required for a primarily daytime use may be used to meet the requirements of a primarily nighttime use and up to one-half of the parking facilities required for a primarily nighttime use may be used to meet the requirements of a primarily daytime use provided that such reciprocal parking arrangement shall comply with subsection C below.

B.     The parking facilities required for a primarily daytime use may be used to permit up to 80% of the requirements for a church or school auditorium subject to requirements set forth in subsection C below.

C.    The parties concerned shall show that there is no substantial conflict in the principal operating hours of the building or uses for which the joint use is proposed and shall evidence agreement for such use by a proper legal instrument, to which the City is a party. (08-05)

 

16.136.030 STORAGE
No vehicles incapable of movement under their own power (including trailers, boats, camper shells and disabled motor vehicles) and no other materials or objects shall be stored or placed within any parking space; except that trailers and boats may be stored within residential spaces not within the required front or street-side setback areas, provided that the screening requirements of Chapter 16.154 are met, and except for vehicles being serviced in automobile service stations. (08-05)

 

16.136.040 DESIGN STANDARDS FOR DRIVEWAYS AND PARKING SPACES
A.     Required Dimensions and Access Requirements

1.     Each required parking space shall have the minimum dimensions of nine feet in width and 20 feet in length, and shall be independently accessible from street or alley, unless permitted otherwise by this title.

2.     Each required garage or carport parking space shall have minimum, unobstructed interior dimensions of 9 feet in width, 20 feet in length, and 8 feet in height.

3.     When a garage or carport does not have a direct, straight entry from a public or private street or alley (e.g. side entrance garage), the driveway providing access to the entrance of the garage shall have a minimum 24 foot outside turning radius.

4.     When the vehicle entrance into a garage or carport faces directly onto an existing alley, there shall be a minimum distance of 30 feet between the opening of such garage or carport and the property line of the parcel of land that is located directly across the alley from the parcel of land on which the garage or carport is located, except as otherwise permitted by this Code.

5.     When the vehicular entrance into a garage or carport faces directly onto a public street, said garage or carport shall be set back at least 20 feet from the street-side property line, except as otherwise permitted by this Code.

6.     On residential property with existing development where current parking requirements are not met, and it is not feasible or practical to provide required parking spaces that are independently accessible, the required parking may be provided through tandem parking with the approval of the Director. In determining whether it is practical to provide independently accessible parking spaces, the Director shall consider if such required parking will result in an inefficient site plan, a development pattern that is inconsistent with surrounding development, or the loss of the property’s only available private outdoor living area.

B.     No Parking in Front or Street Side Setbacks

No required parking spaces shall be located in required front and street side setbacks, and no vehicular parking is permitted in required front and street side setbacks except on a residential driveway. No vehicles may be parked or stored in violation of neighborhood protection standards in Chapter 16.154.

C.    Standards for Driveways Located in Setbacks

Driveways located within the required front and street side setbacks in single-family residential districts shall be subject to the following standards:

1.     All driveways, except circular driveways, shall provide access to parking spaces located outside the required setbacks.

2.     No driveway or other improvement for vehicular access to garage spaces or to side or rear parking areas shall have a width greater than 35 percent of the lot width or 30 feet, which ever is less, including any turn around areas, except for lots with lot widths less than 46 feet; however, if in the RS 10000, RS 13000, RS 20000, and RR Districts the improvements provide access to three or more covered spaces on the same lot, the access improvements may have a maximum width of up to 40 feet provided the width is no more than 35 percent of the lot width. If two or more driveways are located on a single lot, the widths of the driveways shall be combined, and the combined width of the driveways shall be subject to the same width restrictions as a single driveway.

3.     On any lot with a lot width of less than 46 feet, any driveway providing access to parking spaces located outside the required setbacks may have a maximum width of 16 feet.

4.     No less than two feet of landscaping shall be provided between driveway and any interior side property line.

D.    Driveways in the RR District

1.     The use of water permeable materials for part or all of a residential driveway is encouraged. Such driveways may be constructed with 4 inches of gravel.

2.     Circular Driveways in the RR Districts shall comply with the Rural Claremont Architectural and Landscape Standards.

E.     Driveways in All Other Single-Family Residential Districts

1.     Driveways shall be constructed of a prepared surface, such as asphalt, cement, or crushed rock, approved by the Director.

2.     Circular Driveways shall be permitted only when the Director finds that a circular driveway is necessary to:

a.     Allow vehicles to turn around and head into an arterial street, where lots front on a major or secondary arterial and no other vehicular access is available by way of a local or private street, or an alley; or

b.     Allow for guest parking when no on-street parking is available; or

c.     Provide access for persons with mobility impairments; or

d.     Provide access for emergency or safety purposes.

3.     A circular driveway may also be permitted on a lot that has an area equal to 1-1/2 times the minimum lot area required by the district’s development standards provided there is a front or street side building setback of no less than 30 feet in the yard where the driveway is located.

4.     The following standards shall apply to circular driveways:

a.     A maximum of two curb cuts shall be permitted per lot.

b.     Circular driveways shall have a maximum width of 18 feet. Narrower driveways are encouraged.

c.     The Director shall require landscape screening when feasible.

d.     Use of water permeable materials for part or all of the driveway surface is encouraged.

F.     Multiple Curb Cuts

In single-family residential districts no more than one curb cut shall be permitted per lot, except a second curb cut may be permitted for:

1.     A circular drive when permitted by this section; or

2.     Access to a recreational vehicle (RV) storage area located in a rear or interior side yard when the Director determines that there is no other way the RV storage requirements of Chapter 16.154 can be met.

G.    Maximum Height of Garage Door

In single-family residential districts no garage door or other opening providing access into a garage shall have a height of more than eight feet except with a special use and development permit approved pursuant to Chapter 16.306.

H.    Temporary Lots

Temporary parking lots which do not meet the full standards for permanent lots may be permitted subject to approval of a special use and development permit pursuant to Chapter 16.306. The permit for a temporary parking lot shall be valid for no more than three years after the date of approval. Prior to the special use and development permit becoming effective, the applicant shall provide a performance bond in an amount to be determined by the Director of Community Development. The bond shall guarantee the full development of the lot to the standards of this section if a permanent lot is subsequently approved by the City. If a permanent lot is not approved, the bond may be used to remove the temporary lot improvements, close access to the area, and landscape and irrigate the site, or prepare the site for an alternative use consistent with the planned use of the site. (08-05)

 

16.136.050 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR PARKING AREAS WITH SIX OR MORE SPACES
The following development standards shall apply to all parking areas with six (6) or more spaces:

A.     Location

1.     Required parking facilities shall be on the same lot with the structure they are intended to serve, except if the Architectural Commission approves parking on a separate lot. A reciprocal parking agreement shall be required as determined appropriate by the Architectural Commission.

2.     The required parking spaces may be located in interior-side or rear setbacks. Except in the B/IP District, no parking space either required or otherwise shall be located in any required front or street-side setback area, unless otherwise specifically permitted by this Code.

3.     In the CV District, an applicant may be permitted to pay an in-lieu fee pursuant to Section 16.060.030, in lieu of providing required off-street parking. When parking spaces are provided through the in-lieu fee program such parking spaces shall be located in the CV District or within 500 feet of the CV District.

B.     Access

There shall be a minimum ten (10) foot wide, three (3) inch thick asphaltic or cement concrete paved vehicular accessway from a public street or alley to off-street parking facilities.

C.    Screening

1.     Where a parking area abuts or is across the street from a residential district it shall be separated therefrom by a solid masonry wall not less than five (5) feet in height, provided said wall shall be three (3) feet in height where it is in prolongation of the front setback area of an abutting residential use or district. The Architectural Commission may waive this wall requirement if additional setback and screening planting, or landscaped berms are to be provided.

2.     Where a parking area is across the street from a residential district, there shall be a border of appropriate landscaping not less than ten (10) feet in depth, measured from the street right-of-way line, along the street frontage.

D.    Layout and Paving

1.     Parking spaces and garages shall be laid out according to City specifications published by the Director, and shall provide a 29-foot minimum outside turning radius and an 18-foot minimum inside turning radius into public ways. Each required parking space shall be individually accessible.

2.     Except in residential parking facilities with less than six (6) spaces, parking spaces shall be arranged so that vehicles need not back onto or across any sidewalk.

3.     All parking areas shall be surfaced with three (3) inch minimum thickness asphaltic or cement concrete paving, or with an alternative paving material approved by the City Engineer.

4.     Standard parking stalls shall have minimum dimensions of nine (9) feet by 20 feet. Parking stalls shall be marked with minimum three (3) inch wide lines, and the access lanes shall be clearly defined, including directional arrows to guide internal movement

5.     Up to 40 percent of the required parking spaces may be designed for compact cars. In no case shall the number of compact parking spaces reduce the number of standard parking spaces to less than 60 percent of the total required parking. Compact parking stalls shall have minimum dimensions of 8½ feet by 18 feet.

6.     Parking spaces may include a two (2) foot overhang into landscaped areas. However, the overhang shall not encroach into the required minimum five (5) foot perimeter landscaped planter area and shall not be credited towards the minimum five (5) percent interior landscaping required for parking areas.

7.     A six (6) inch concrete curb shall be installed along the entire edge of all landscaped areas, except where waived by the Director of Community Development and concurred in by the Architectural Commission.

E.     Landscaping

1.     A five (5) foot minimum width landscaped planter bed shall be installed along the entire perimeter except for those areas devoted to perpendicular accessways.

2.     A minimum of five (5) percent of the paved parking area shall be devoted to interior planting areas. Extensive use of trees is encouraged. All planting areas shall have a minimum width of three (3) feet. Perimeter planting shall not be considered part of this required interior planting. Generally, the minimum five (5) percent interior landscaping may be accommodated in a project design by providing one landscape planter island per seven (7) parking spaces.

3.     Where topography and grading permit, parking lots should be depressed and/or screened from view by landscaped berms and hedges. Where this is impossible or impractical, the use of decorative screening walls and hedges should be provided. The five (5) percent interior lot area landscaping included in this section may be reduced when such berms or depressed lots are provided.

4.     Where trees already exist on the property, the design should make the best use of this growth and shade. Such trees shall be protected by a tree well with a diameter sufficient to ensure their continued growth. The five (5) percent interior lot area landscaping standard included in this section may be reduced to compensate for the retention of such trees.

5.     Planting areas should be distributed throughout the lot as evenly as possible, but variations from this pattern may be granted by the staff when a different pattern would result in the overall aesthetic improvement of the project. Innovation in design and materials is encouraged.

6.     Wherever a center divider separates parking stalls facing each other, tree wells shall be established not more than 50 feet apart for large trees, or more than 30 feet for small and medium sized trees.

7.     An automatic, full-coverage, permanent irrigation system shall be installed. Outside faucets (hose bibs) shall be provided at 100-foot minimum intervals, to allow for hose watering reinforcement to the system.

8.     All planting shall be permanently and regularly maintained free of debris and in conformity with plans approved by the City.

F.     Drainage

All drainage from parking areas for six (6) or more cars shall be taken to a public street, alley, storm drain, or natural drainage course and shall not pass over any public sidewalk.

G.    Lighting

1.     All parking lots shall be illuminated with a lighting system designed to provide an average horizontal illumination of greater than one footcandle of light and a minimum horizontal illumination of not less than 0.25 footcandle of light on the parking surface. Applicants are encouraged to meet these illumination levels with light fixtures mounted on light standards placed in close proximity to each other rather than with light fixtures on buildings, and with less powerful lamps than what would otherwise be required if light standards were placed farther apart.

2.     Metal halide lighting or other high intensity discharge lighting may be used in parking areas only if lamps have a color temperature of less than 3,400 degrees Kelvin (K), except in commercial automobile sales areas where lamps may have a higher color temperature. No new mercury vapor lighting shall be permitted in parking areas. All lamps shall be covered with prismatic diffusing lenses.

3.     Light fixtures shall not be placed higher than 15 feet above grade as measured from the bottom of the base of the light standard or the adjacent grade of the building on which the light is mounted, to the highest point of the light fixture, unless the Architectural Commission approves a height of more than 15 feet, up to a maximum of 25 feet, for safety reasons and determines that the height of the lights will not adversely impact the surrounding development.

4.     All light fixtures shall be arranged and controlled so as not to cause a nuisance either to street traffic or to the living environment. All light fixtures for parking areas including those placed on buildings shall be designed, installed, and maintained so that lamps are fully shielded and light rays emitted by the fixtures are projected below a horizontal plane at a point below the lamp source (fully cut-off fixture). Except, however, the Architectural Commission may allow an alternative light fixture if the Commission makes all the following findings:

a.     The alternative fixture is more compatible with the historic character of a specific area or the unique architecture of the surrounding development, than is a fully cut-off fixture; and

b.     The alternative light fixture will not create unwanted or excessive glare or illumination; and

c.     The alternative light fixture will not adversely impact neighboring development or abutting residential areas.

5.     All lenses for standard shoe-box light fixtures shall not extend below the bottom of the light fixture (i.e., no drop-down lenses).

6.     The Director of Community Development and the Architectural Commission shall be notified upon the energizing of a lighting system, commencing a 30-day review period during which time illumination levels shall be evaluated and adjusted where necessary to meet the intent of this subsection. No person shall fail to comply with a modification order for parking lot illumination issued by the Architectural Commission.

H.    Permissible Alternatives in I Districts

Where the shape, size, and location of any parking lot used primarily for employee parking in the Business/Industrial Park district make the above regulations impractical, the following alternate set of standards may be substituted for the standards established in this section.

1.     The landscaping requirements in subsection E may be reduced by 50 percent, or

2.     Perimeter landscaping only may be required where any parking lot is less than two (2) acres in area with an average depth of not more than 120 feet and is not adjacent to or visible from a street or thoroughfare or residential premises. Perimeter landscaping shall meet the following requirements:

a.     All perimeter planters shall have a minimum depth of five (5) feet with a solid decorative masonry wall of five (5) feet in height constructed adjacent to the parking lot. Trees and suitable groundcover shall be planted therein.

b.     Planters with a minimum depth of 20 feet may be substituted for the masonry wall required in this section. (12-01; 08-05)

 

16.136.060 APPROPRIATE IDENTIFICATION FOR PARKING STALLS FOR DISABLED PERSONS
A.     All properties required by state law to provide parking spaces accessible to those persons with mobility impairment shall both mark the pavement and provide freestanding or wall-mounted signs. The signs and markings shall meet the standards of Title 24 of the California Administrative Code. Any project approved before the effective date of this ordinance which was required to provide parking spaces accessible to persons with mobility impairment, shall provide such signs and markings no later than December 31, 1984.

B.     The obligation to provide such signs and pavement markings shall be continuing, and failure to maintain such signs and pavement markings shall be deemed a violation of this title. (08-05)

 

16.136.070 LOADING
The following off-street loading spaces shall be provided and continuously maintained for all hospitals, institutions, commercial (not including office buildings), and industrial uses. The loading spaces shall be not less than 10 feet in width, 20 feet in length, and with 14 feet in vertical clearance.

A.     Total Square Feet of Building Space

 

 

Gross Floor Area

Loading Space Required

Commercial Buildings

 

 

 

3,000—15,000

1

 

15,001—45,000

2

 

45,001—75,000

3

 

75,001—105,000

4

 

105,001 and over

5

Business/Industrial Park Buildings

 

 

 

3,500—40,000

1

 

40,001—80,000

2

 

80,001—120,000

3

 

120,001—160,000

4

 

160,001 and over

5

Hospitals and Institutions

 

 

 

3,000—20,000

1

 

20,001—50,000

2

 

50,001—80,000

3

 

80,001—110,000

4

 

110,001 and over

5

 

B.     When the lot upon which the loading spaces are located abuts upon an alley, such loading spaces shall adjoin or have access from said alley. The length of the loading space may be measured perpendicular to or parallel with the alley. Where such loading area is parallel with the alley and said lot is 50 feet or less in width, the loading area shall extend across the full width of the lot. The length of a loading area need not exceed 50 feet for any two (2) spaces.

C.    Loading space required by this title may occupy a required rear or interior side setback, but not a required front or street-side setback. Where the loading is permitted in a setback, said setback may be used in calculating the area required for loading provided that there be no more than one entry or exit to 60 feet of lot frontage or fraction thereof.

D.    All loading spaces shall be separate, striped spaces in addition to the required parking spaces, and not within any required parking lot drive, back-out space or aisle; except that for commercial buildings with a gross floor area of less than 15,000 square feet or for industrial sites, the loading space may be within a parking lot drive, back-out space, or aisle. (08-05)

 

16.136.080 TRANSPORTATION DEMAND AND TRIP REDUCTION MEASURES
A.     Intent

The purpose of this section is to promote alternative transportation methods, such as carpools, vanpools, transit, bicycles, walking and park-and-ride lots, parking management programs, and other strategies as necessary to meet congestion and air quality goals.

B.     Applicability of Requirements

1.     Prior to issuance of a building permit for any proposed nonresidential construction project meeting certain size thresholds specified below, the project applicant shall, as a minimum, make provisions for all of the applicable transportation demand management and trip reduction measures of this section.

2.     The requirements of this section are based on gross floor area of new nonresidential construction only. The requirements shall not apply to buildings which existed prior to May 13, 1993 except when new square footage is added. For new additions to existing buildings, the requirements shall be based upon the gross floor area of the additions. The new gross floor area shall not be added cumulatively with existing floor area. The existing gross floor area of a building shall remain exempt from these requirements.

C.    Development Standards

1.     Nonresidential Projects of 25,000 Square Feet or More

For nonresidential projects of 25,000 square feet or more, the following shall be provided to the satisfaction of the Director of Community Development:

A bulletin board, display case, or kiosk displaying transportation information located where the greatest number of employees are likely to see it. The information displayed shall include, but is not limited to, the following:

a.     Current maps, routes, and schedules for public transit routes serving the site;

b.     Telephone numbers for referrals on transportation information including numbers for the regional ridesharing agency and local transit operators;

c.     Ridesharing promotional material supplied by commuter-oriented organizations;

d.     Bicycle route and facility information, including regional/local bicycle maps and bicycle safety information; and

e.     A listing of facilities available for carpoolers, vanpoolers, bicyclists, transit riders, and pedestrians at the site.

2.     Nonresidential Projects of 50,000 Square Feet or More

For nonresidential projects of 50,000 square feet or more, the following shall be provided to the satisfaction of the Director of Community Development:

a.     A bulletin board, display case or kiosk for transportation information as described in subsection C.1 above.

b.     A preferential parking area reserved for use by potential carpool/vanpool vehicles, equal to not less than 10 percent of the employee parking area and located as close as is practical to the employee entrance(s) without displacing handicapped and customer parking needs. Upon application for a building permit, this preferential carpool/vanpool parking area shall be identified on the project’s site plan to the satisfaction of the Director. Employee parking area shall be calculated as follows:

Type of Use

Percent of Total Required Parking Devoted to Employees

Retail/Commercial

30%

Office/Commercial

85%

Industrial

90%

Institutional

Percentage shall be based on the number of employee spaces required by Chapter 16.069 of this title.

 

Spaces shall be signed/striped for carpool/vanpool vehicles as demand warrants; provided that at all times at least one space for projects of 50,000 square feet to 100,000 square feet, and two spaces for projects over 100,000 square feet are signed/striped for carpool/vanpool vehicles. A statement that preferential carpool/vanpool spaces for employees are available, and a description of the method for obtaining such spaces, must be included on the transportation information board, case or kiosk required in paragraph 2.a of this subsection.

The preferential parking spaces reserved for vanpools must be accessible to vanpools vehicles. When vanpool spaces are located within a parking structure, a minimum vertical interior clearance of seven feet two inches shall be provided for those spaces and for the accessways to be used by vanpool vehicles.

c.     Bicycle racks or other secure bicycle parking to accommodate four bicycles per the first 50,000 square feet and one bicycle per each additional 50,000 square feet. A bicycle parking facility may also be a fully enclosed space or locker accessible only to the owner or operator of the bicycle, which protects the bike from inclement weather. Specific facilities and location shall be subject to approval of the Director of Community Development.

d.     Safe and convenient access from the external circulation system to bicycle parking facilities onsite.

3.     Nonresidential Projects of 100,000 Square Feet or More

For nonresidential projects of 100,000 square feet or more, the following shall be provided to the satisfaction of the Director of Community Development:

a.     A bulletin board, display case or kiosk for transportation information as described in subsection C.1 above.

b.     A preferential parking area reserved for use by potential carpool/vanpool vehicles as described in subsection C.2.b above.

c.     A safe and convenient zone in which vanpool and carpool vehicles may deliver or board their passengers.

d.     Bicycle racks or other secure bicycle parking as described in subsection C.2.c above.

e.     Safe and convenient access from the external circulation system to bicycle parking facilities onsite.

f.      Sidewalks or other designated pathways following direct and safe routes from the external pedestrian circulation system to each building in the development project.

g.     Bus stop improvements if determined appropriate by the Director of Community Development. The Director shall consult with local bus service providers in determining the appropriate improvements. When locating bus stops and/or planning building entrances, entrances must be designed to provide safe and efficient access to nearby transit stations/stops.

D.    Exceptions to Requirements

1.     Residential Institutions

For purposes of this section, group residence halls, student dormitories, or resident dining facilities for residents of a educational institution, retirement complex or other residential institution shall be considered residential development and not subject to the provisions of this section, provided that the Planning Commission or Architectural Commission find that such development is designed and located so as to minimize the use of single occupant vehicles by residents.

2.     Other Individual Projects

The Planning Commission or Architectural Commission may modify all or part of the transportation demand and trip reduction measures of this section for individual projects if both of the following findings can be made:

a.     One or more of the measures required by this section are not applicable due to special circumstances relating to the project, including, but not limited to, the location or configuration of the project, the availability of existing transportation demand management strategies, or other specific factors which make infeasible or reduce the effectiveness of such measure(s); and

b.     An alternative transportation demand management strategy is proposed commensurate with the nature and trip generating characteristics of the proposed project.

Implementation of the alternative strategy shall be a condition of approval for the project.

E.     Credit for Existing Transportation Management Facilities

Existing transportation management facilities in a development complex may satisfy all or part of the requirements of this section for new construction within the complex, subject to the approval of the Director. The amount of credit given shall be determined by assessing how the existing facilities would meet the requirements of this section if based on the gross floor area of the entire complex.

F.     Monitoring

Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any new building or addition to an existing building, all facilities and improvements required by this section shall be constructed or otherwise provided.

G.    Required Maintenance

All facilities and improvements constructed or otherwise required by this section shall be maintained in a state of good repair.

H.    Enforcement

1.     It shall be the duty and authority of the Director of Community Development, the Director’s designees, and the code enforcement officers of the Community Development Department to enforce the provisions of this section.

2.     No person, firm, or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee, or otherwise, shall violate, or otherwise, shall fail to comply with any of the provisions of this section. Every act prohibited or declared unlawful and every failure to perform an act made mandatory by this section shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 16.206 of this title. (08-05)

Chapter 16.139 DEDICATION AND OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS
16.139.000 INTENT
It is the intent of this chapter to assure dedication of street rights-of-way and the provision of all off-site improvements, which are necessary and lacking along the street frontage of any lot, at the time of any construction done on the lot. Such dedication and off-site improvements are hereby deemed necessary to assure public safety in access to and use of the facilities being constructed. (08-05)

 

16.139.010 APPLICABILITY
The necessary dedications and off-site improvements as described herein shall be dedicated and/or provided (or their provision guaranteed by bond, cash deposit or other security acceptable to the Director) by the property owner prior to issuance of a building permit for any new building, or addition to an existing building which results in one or more additions, that increase the gross square footage of a building by 25 percent or more within any consecutive three-year period. Additions to any existing buildings on a single-family residential lot that total no more than 1,500 square feet within any consecutive three-year period are exempted. The provisions of off-site improvements may also be a condition of a conditional use permit or variance, regardless of whether construction requiring a building permit is involved. (08-05)

 

16.139.020 REQUIRED DEDICATION
Dedication of street rights-of-way shall be required wherever the existing right-of-way is less than that indicated on the Master Plan of Streets and Highways or less than the City standard for the street classification. Such dedication shall be as necessary to provide for a continuous right-of-way line at the location necessary for the full width right-of-way, as determined by the City Engineer. (08-05)

 

16.139.030 REQUIRED OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS
The following off-site improvements shall be provided, or their provision guaranteed, unless such improvements exist in an acceptable condition as determined by the City Engineer:

A.     Street and/or alley paving or repaving, not to exceed the area from the centerline to the curb or edge of pavement for the length of lot frontage(s).

B.     Sidewalks, curbs, gutters, driveway approaches, landscaped parkways, rock swales, trails, and/or similar improvements required per City standards for the length of the lot frontage(s).

C.    Street trees, 24-inch box minimum size (unless a different size is specified by the City to provide a better planting) at the spacing standards of the City.

D.    Streetlights, per the type and spacing designated for the particular street by the City Engineer.

E.     Sewer and drainage facilities as required by the City Engineer.

F.     Improvements to support local transit operations, such as bus turnouts, benches, shelters, landing pads and similar items, may be required as determined by the City Engineer.

All of the off-site improvements shall be per City standards and specifications as filed with the City Engineer, unless an alternative plan for non-standard off-site improvements is approved by the City Engineer, or unless the Planning Commission finds that standard off-site improvements should not be required for a particular street or area (such as area where preservation of a rural character is desirable). (14-04; 12-01; 08-05)

Chapter 16.142 VISUAL SCREENING
16.142.000 INTENT
It is the intent of this chapter to assure that, in conjunction with new developments, certain areas and types of equipment are screened from public view. The provisions of this chapter are hereby deemed necessary for the protection of property values and the general welfare. (08-05)

 

16.142.010 TRASH RECEPTACLE ENCLOSURES
A trash receptacle enclosure shall be provided with all new developments except for single-family residential developments. Where City trash receptacles are to be used, such enclosure shall be built to City specifications as filed with the Director of Community Services, and shall be a size capable of holding the number of trash receptacles required to adequately serve the development, as estimated by the Director of Community Services. (14-07)

 

16.142.020 SCREENING OF MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT, STORAGE AREAS AND LOADING DOCKS
In new developments, all mechanical equipment, such as air conditioners, heaters, and exposed ducting and plumbing, and all outside storage areas and loading docks, shall be screened from view of public areas. The design of proposed screening devices shall be approved by the Director of Community Development. For any addition to an existing building which adds at least 25 percent to the building’s gross floor area, all existing storage areas and loading docks shall be so screened. Additions to single-family residential buildings are exempted. Such screening shall be accomplished prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any building or addition. The Director may approve an alternative method of reducing the visual impact in lieu of providing screening. In all multiple-family developments (two or more units) and multiple-family structures in residential unit developments, no unconcealed television antennae shall be allowed. (08-05)

Chapter 16.145 SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
16.145.000 INTENT
The City of Claremont has adopted a policy of encouraging the use of solar energy for space heating and cooling, for water heating, and for electricity. It is the intent of this chapter to make possible the successful use of solar energy by permitting the use of solar energy systems in all zones as a matter of right and by protecting solar access to such systems. (08-05)

 

16.145.010 PERMITTED USES
Solar energy systems are a permitted use within all zones, whether as part of a structure or incidental to one or more structures. The use of solar energy systems is subject to the restraints imposed by the zoning limitations of this title, by existing vegetation, buildings, walls, fences, and other structures, and by diversity of topography. (08-05)

 

16.145.020 SOLAR ACCESS PROTECTION
No building permit shall be issued if the proposed building, wall, fence, or other structure shall shade more than 10 percent of the absorption area of an existing solar energy system located on any other property between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. Pacific Standard Time on December 21, unless one or more of the following conditions exist:

A.     The building, wall, fence, or other structure is located more than 45 degrees off true south of the property on which the solar energy system is located.

B.     The property owner would be prevented from constructing a single story building not exceeding 10 feet in building height on the property for which the building permit is sought, if such building cannot be designed or located to avoid casting a shadow of more than 10 percent of the absorption area of an existing solar energy system located on any other property between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. Pacific Standard Time on December 21. (08-05)

Chapter 16.148 PUBLIC ART PROGRAM
16.148.000 PURPOSE
The purpose of Claremont’s Public Art Program is to enhance the aesthetic and cultural quality throughout the community, provide opportunities for the public to be exposed to a broad range of quality visual art, acknowledge our local artistic community, inspire pride, identity, and a sense of place among the residents of the community and enhance the general welfare of people living and working in the City of Claremont. (14-06)

 

16.148.010 DEFINITIONS
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

“Artist” shall mean an individual generally recognized by critics and peers as a professional practitioner of the visual arts as judged by the quality of the professional practitioner’s body of work, educational background and experience, past public commissions, sale of works, exhibition record, publications, and production of artwork.

“Artwork” shall mean works in any style, expression, genre and media created by an artist as defined herein that may be permanent, temporary, and functional. Artwork may be stand-alone and integrated into the architecture, landscaping, or other site development if such are designed by an artist as defined herein.

“Arts professionals” shall mean visual artists, curators, educators, and others who engage in specialized practices pertaining to the visual arts.

“Building permit valuation” shall mean the combined total valuation of all new structures, including tenant improvements within those new structures, within the premises, using the latest building valuation data as set forth by the International Code Council and utilized by the City of Claremont in determining valuation.

“Capital project” shall mean any construction project of any new City building or facility and renovation of any existing City building or facility financed wholly or in part by funds appropriated by the City Council. For the purposes of this chapter, street and right-of-way improvements, sewer and drainage projects, and public landscape maintenance projects are not considered facilities.

“Conservation” shall mean the activities required to repair, restore, and conserve a damaged or malfunctioning artwork, including treatment that returns the artwork to its original condition.

“Deaccession” shall mean the removal of artwork from the City’s collection and care.

“Design professionals” shall mean architects, civil, structural, mechanical, electrical engineers; landscape architects; urban planners; graphic, interior, industrial, fashion designers; and others whose services require licensing or registration by the state or otherwise require the knowledge and application of design principles appropriate to the Public Art Program.

“Maintenance” shall mean all activities required to conserve, repair, or preserve the integrity of the artwork and setting within which the artwork is located. Routine maintenance is limited to the basic day-to-day care of the artwork.

“Public art” as defined herein shall be artwork located in a public place on private property or on land or in a building owned by the City of Claremont. Public art shall encompass the broadest possible range of expression, media, and materials.

“Public place” shall mean an area on public or private property that is freely accessible to and available for use by the general public during normal hours of business operation consistent with the operation and use of the premises including public rights-of-way, landscape areas, entry plazas, building façades, interior lobbies, meeting spaces, and rooftop gardens. (14-06)

 

16.148.020 APPLICABILITY
Except as otherwise provided in Section 16.148.030 of this chapter, the requirements of this chapter shall apply to all new subdivisions, development projects, and remodeling and modifications to existing development projects. (14-06)

 

16.148.030 EXEMPTIONS
The following projects are exempt from the requirements of this chapter:

A.     Reconstruction of a building built prior to September 23, 1997, if destroyed by fire, earthquake, and flood and rebuilt to the same size and height.

B.     Rehabilitation of a building or structure listed on a local, state, or national historic register.

C.    New construction or modifications to existing development for an educational institution or other organization that is exempt from federal income tax under Internal Revenue Code Section IRC 501(c)(3), including residential development.

D.    Any project which is not included in one of the categories listed in the table contained in Section 16.148.060, Minimum Allocation for Artwork. (14-06)

 

16.148.040 REQUIREMENT TO PROVIDE ARTWORK ALLOCATION OR IN-LIEU FEE
A.     The applicant of a development project subject to the requirements of this chapter shall select, purchase and install permanent outdoor artwork at the development site, accessible and visible to the general public from public streets or other public property in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The minimum allocation for the artwork shall be that amount set forth in Section 16.148.060 of this chapter; provided, however, that if the minimum allocation for the development project is $20,000.00 or greater, then an amount equal to 10% of the minimum allocation shall be deposited into the Public Art Fund as more particularly described in Section 16.148.130 of this chapter, and the balance of the allocation shall be used for the artwork.

B.     In lieu of installing artwork as set forth in subsection A, the project applicant may pay, as a public art fee, an amount equal to the minimum allocation for the artwork as set forth in Section 16.148.060 of this chapter into the Public Art Fund.

C.    Subject to the approval of the City Manager or designee (hereinafter, the “City Manager”), the project applicant may satisfy the minimum allocation by a combination of both artwork at the development site and a deposit of funds into the Public Art Fund. (14-06)

 

16.148.050 ARTWORK EXPENDITURES
A.     The minimum art allocation may be used for the following expenditures:

1.     Acquisition of public art through direct purchase or through the design, fabrication, transportation, and installation of public art;

2.     Artist fees and expenses;

3.     Supplies and materials;

4.     Costs for insurance, identification plaques, project management by an independent public art consultant, and other reasonable expenses associated with the planning, development and completion of public art; and

5.     Other related expenses approved by the Public Art Committee.

B.     The minimum art allocation may not be used for the following expenditures:

1.     Reproductions, by mechanical or other means of original artwork, except in cases of film, video, photography, printmaking, and other media arts;

2.     Objects that are mass produced, ordered from a catalog, or of a standard design, such as playground equipment and fountains;

3.     Directional and other functional graphic elements such as signage, supergraphics, color coding, and maps;

4.     Services, utilities, and other on-going operating expenses for maintenance of the artwork. (14-06)

 

16.148.060 MINIMUM ALLOCATION FOR ARTWORK
The minimum allocation for artwork shall be based on a percentage of the project’s total building permit valuation as computed using Claremont’s current building valuation data. In determining the minimum allocation for the acquisition of artwork, the percentages are as shown in the following table:

 

PROJECT TYPE

PERCENTAGE

Public capital improvement projects, except street, right-of-way, sewer, and drainage projects, with a building permit valuation of $150,000.00 or greater

1%

Commercial and industrial development projects that have a building permit valuation of $250,000.00 or greater

1%

Residential development projects with a building permit valuation of $250,000.00 or greater, except individually built single-family homes

1/2%

New single-family tract construction on 5 or more lots or a new subdivision of 5 or more lots. For a project consisting of vacant single-family lots to be sold for future development, the minimum allocation shall be based on the estimated building permit valuation assuming maximum permitted density and dwelling unit sizes

1/2%

(14-06)

 

16.148.070 GREEN PRINCIPLES
Private and municipal public art shall utilize whenever possible:

A.     Sustainable design principles including alternative energy sources, recycled materials, low polluting and energy conserving production techniques, and renewable resources.

B.     Public art that incorporates sustainable strategies, demonstrates green processes, and utilizes green design, materials, theories, and techniques. (14-06)

 

16.148.080 GIFTS AND LOANS OF ARTWORK
A.     The City Council shall review all proposed gifts and loans of artwork pursuant to the City Council policy on gifts and loans of artwork.

B.     Gifts of state by foreign governments or by other political jurisdictions of the United States are not considered artwork. (14-06)

 

16.148.090 DEACCESSION OF ARTWORK
The City shall retain the right to deaccession any artwork in the public art collection. The City Council shall review all artwork being considered for deaccession by deliberate, standardized procedures independent of political pressures, fluctuations in artistic taste, and public opinion pursuant to the City Council policy on the deaccession of artwork. (14-06)

 

16.148.100 PUBLIC ART COMMITTEE (PAC)
A.     There hereby is established a Public Art Committee subject to the Ralph M. Brown Act that shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the City Council, each of who has considerable knowledge and experience in the visual arts.

B.     Public Art Committee members may include professional artists, arts professionals, and design professionals as defined herein.

1.     At least two (2) of the seven (7) voting members shall be professional artists.

2.     At least one (1) of the seven (7) voting members shall be a member of the Architectural Commission, serving as liaison to the Architectural Commission.

3.     Up to three (3) of the seven (7) voting members may live and/or work within one-quarter mile outside of Claremont City boundaries.

4.     The members of the Public Art Committee shall elect a chairperson and a vice chair at its first meeting after August 31st of each calendar year. The chairperson shall be a resident of Claremont.

5.     Except for a replacement term as described below, voting members of the Public Art Committee shall be appointed by the City Council for a term of four (4) years, and no member may serve more than two (2) consecutive terms. Should a member serve a partial term to complete the non-expired term of a prior member, such partial term shall not be included for purposes of the maximum service of two (2) consecutive terms.

a.     A member’s term shall commence on the date the member is appointed or reappointed to the Public Art Committee.

b.     Should a vacancy occur prior to the end of the member’s scheduled term, the City Council shall recommend a replacement for the non-expired term.

6.     The Public Art Committee shall provide expert advice regarding the following:

a.     Public Art Program policies and procedures;

b.     Artist selection, review panels, and processes for municipal and private development projects;

c.     Artwork review and selection for municipal and private development projects;

d.     Maintenance and conservation of artwork;

e.     Proposed deaccession of artwork;

f.      Proposed gifts and loans of artwork;

g.     Advocacy, community outreach, and strategic planning in support of the Public Art Program.

7.     Public Art Committee members are subject to the City’s Conflict of Interest Code, which is required under the California Political Reform Act. The Code requires members to avoid participating in discussing or taking action on items for which conflicts of interest may exist. Actions that members may be required to take to comply with this Code include, but are not limited to:

a.     Withdrawal from participating in PAC discussions or voting on any recommendation involving a competition, commission, project or program for which any monetary gain or for which any business or familial relationship would make it difficult to render an objective and impartial decision or create the perception that an objective and impartial decision would be difficult;

b.     Be ineligible for any City-related public art competition, commission, project, or program during their tenure; and

c.     Disclose any real or perceived conflicts of interest. (14-06)

 

16.148.110 ARCHITECTURAL COMMISSION
A.     For private and municipal development projects, the Architectural Commission shall review and approve the proposed site and scale for public art within the development prior to review by the Public Art Committee and concurrent with final site plan review.

B.     For private and municipal development projects, the Architectural Commission shall provide advisory comments to the PAC regarding materials, form, and contextual relationship of the artwork to the surrounding development.

C.    Review of the proposed artwork site and scale shall be consistent with all applicable review criteria of Section 16.300.060. (14-06)

 

16.148.120 CITY MANAGER
A.     The City Manager shall be responsible for the following, based on advice provided by the Public Art Committee and Architectural Commission:

1.     Administration and implementation of the Public Art Program;

2.     Selection of artists and artwork;

3.     Ongoing care, maintenance, and conservation of artwork;

4.     Deaccession of artwork;

5.     Gifts and loans of artwork;

6.     Upon recommendation from the Public Art Committee and if necessary, authorization by the City Council, negotiation and execution of contracts with artists for the purchase or commission of artwork for the City. (14-06)

 

16.148.130 APPLICATION AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES FOR PUBLIC ART
A.     Private Development

1.     Upon submission of a proposed development project, the City Manager shall advise the project applicant of the requirements of this chapter including the option to pay the fee in-lieu of providing artwork on-site.

2.     If the project applicant chooses to purchase and install on-site artwork to satisfy all or a portion of the minimum allocation for artwork, the project applicant shall submit to the City Manager a Public Art Project Concept Plan for the artwork. The Concept Plan shall, at a minimum, identify the selected artist and include the proposed site for the artwork, the approximate size of the artwork, and the estimated artwork budget.

 

3.     Upon a determination by the City Manager that the Concept Plan is complete, it shall be submitted to the Architectural Commission for review and approval of the proposed site and scale of the artwork concurrent with final site plan review.

4.     Following review of the Concept Plan by the Architectural Commission, the Concept Plan shall be submitted to the Public Art Committee for approval of the proposed artist.

5.     Upon approval of the Concept Plan by the Public Art Committee, the project applicant shall prepare and submit to the City Manager a Schematic Plan for the artwork. The Schematic Plan shall include the following:

a.     Narrative description of the proposed artwork;

b.     Schematic designs, drawings, and if determined by City Manager, a scale model;

c.     Site plans and elevations;

d.     Proposed color and materials sample board;

e.     Implementation timeline;

f.      Budget overview; and

g.     Maintenance requirements.

6.     Upon a determination by the City Manager that the Schematic Plan is complete, the Schematic Plan and the Concept Plan, together with a report and recommendation from City staff, shall be submitted to the Public Art Committee for review and approval.

7.     The Public Art Committee shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the Concept Plan and Schematic Plan pursuant to this chapter. Review of the proposed artwork shall be consistent with all applicable review criteria contained in Section 16.148.150.

B.     Municipal Development

1.     Appropriations for purposes of acquiring public art in order to carry out the provisions of this chapter shall be made in accordance with law and the budgeting procedures of the City.

2.     If the source of funding or other applicable law or regulation with respect to any particular project prohibits or restricts the use of funds for public art, the amount of funds so prohibited or restricted shall be excluded in determining the percentage.

3.     The Public Art Committee shall be responsible for approval of the location of public art, selection of artists, commissioning of public art, and purchase of artwork in compliance with this chapter. Review of artists and selection of artwork for commission or purchase shall be consistent with all applicable review criteria contained in Section 16.148.150.

4.     Management of the procurement of public art for municipal development including selection of an artist, contract negotiation, and contract administration shall be by the City Manager or by contracting the services of a professional public art consultant. Costs for administration of public art are allowable Public Art Fund expenditures. (14-06)

 

16.148.140 COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER FOR PRIVATE DEVELOPMENT
A.     Except as provided in subsection B, compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be required prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the development project. Compliance shall be demonstrated by the project applicant as follows:

1.     Payment of the public art in-lieu contribution; or

2.     Installation of the public art and the submission of final documentation thereof, which documentation shall consist of: (a) a narrative statement detailing the artwork maintenance requirements, including evidence of the recorded maintenance covenant required pursuant to Section 16.148.160 of this chapter; (b) photo documentation of the installed artwork; and (c) the final budget for the artwork.

B.     If installation prior to the date of occupancy is impractical, as determined by the City Manager, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be approved for the building or portion thereof if: (a) the project applicant has received approval of the Concept and Schematic Plans by the Public Art Committee; (b) the project applicant has executed a written agreement with the City to install the artwork; (c) the applicant has filed security in an amount and form acceptable to the City Attorney to guarantee installation of the public art; and (d) the project applicant has executed and recorded a maintenance covenant as required pursuant to Section 16.148.150 of this chapter. (14-06)

 

16.148.150 PUBLIC ART REVIEW CRITERIA
The Public Art Committee may recommend artists and Concept and Schematic Plans for artwork for projects that are subject to the minimum allocation for artwork requirement only if all of the following criteria can be met:

A.     Criteria for the Artist Selection

1.     The artist meets the definition of artist, as defined in Section 16.148.010.

2.     Demonstrates artistic excellence, innovation and originality as represented in past work and supporting materials.

3.     Demonstrates capacity for working in the selected media and with concepts that are appropriate to the project goals and site.

4.     Demonstrates interest and capability in creating public art in collaboration with the City, Public Art Program, the design team (if applicable) and other project partners.

5.     Demonstrates experience in successfully completing artwork of similar scope, scale, budget and complexity, or ability to articulate how he or she would be able to bring the necessary artistic and technical skills to this project.

6.     Demonstrates interest in and understanding of the project.

7.     Is available to perform the scope of the work in a timely and professional manner.

8.     Contributes to the diversity of the City’s public art collection.

9.     Demonstrates a cohesive team (if applicable).

B.     Criteria for Evaluating Concept and Schematic Plans for Artwork

1.     Clearly responds to the project goals.

2.     Meets the definition of artwork as defined in Section 16.148.010.

3.     Demonstrates excellence in aesthetic quality, workmanship, innovation, and creativity.

4.     Demonstrates appropriateness in scale and form and is of materials and media suitable for the site.

5.     Demonstrates feasibility in terms of budget, timeline, safety, durability, operation, maintenance, conservation, legal and ethical issues related to possession and use of proposed artwork, security, storage, and siting.

6.     Builds the diversity of the City’s public art collection or adds depth to an existing art form or heritage already contained in the City’s public art collection. (14-06)

 

16.148.160 MAINTENANCE AND REPLACEMENT OF PUBLIC ART ON PRIVATE DEVELOPMENT
A.     Private Development

1.     The project applicant shall maintain, or cause to be maintained, in good condition the artwork continuously after its installation and shall perform necessary repairs and maintenance to the satisfaction of the City.

2.     The maintenance obligations of the project applicant shall be contained in a covenant and recorded against the property by the applicant.

3.     Should the project applicant, or its successor in interest, wish to remove the artwork, the City must be notified in advance. The project applicant, or its successor in interest, shall replace the artwork with artwork of equal or greater value and in compliance with the California Preservation of Works of Art Act and the Federal Visual Artists’ Rights Act and any other relevant law.

B.     Municipal Development

Routine maintenance of public art and the costs of such maintenance shall be performed by the City department under whose jurisdiction the artwork is located, consistent with the specifications of the artist. (14-06)

 

16.148.170 PUBLIC ART FUND
A.     Fees collected pursuant to this chapter from developers electing not to provide art shall be deposited into an account known as the “Public Art Fund.” The Fund may also receive contributions, as approved by the City Council.

B.     The revenues in such Fund shall be used solely for:

1.     The acquisition, commission, design, fabrication, installation, presentation, and insurance of public art identified herein.

2.     The acquisition or improvement of real property for the purpose of displaying public art.

3.     Services of a professional conservator to conduct condition surveys and provide professional art conservation services and repairs of City-owned artwork.

4.     Other expenses associated with implementation of the Public Art Master Plan as approved in the annual Public Art Workplan. These expenses may include program administration; artist selection processes including artist fees for proposal development, materials, and travel; community outreach and publicity; and project documentation.

C.    The Public Art Fund shall be distributed as follows:

1.     No more than 20% of the annual Public Art Fund shall be used for all necessary and reasonable program administrative costs, excluding City employee salaries, incurred in connection with City staff supervision and control of the expenditure of all funds appropriated for public art.

2.     The balance of the Public Art Fund shall be used to support public art throughout Claremont that may take the form of site-specific artwork commissions, purchase of artwork, public art events, and other special public art initiatives as determined by the Public Art Committee in compliance with this chapter.

3.     The Public Art Fund shall be authorized to accept gifts, grants and donations made to the City of Claremont in addition to in-lieu contributions from private development projects.

D.    The Public Art Fund shall be self-perpetuating from year to year to the extent permitted by law and funding source restrictions.

E.     The City Manager or designee shall present annually to City Council for approval a Public Art Workplan that recommends the use of Public Art Fund monies consistent with the purpose of this chapter. (14-06)

 

16.148.180 PUBLIC ART WORKPLAN
A.     Annually, the Public Art Committee shall develop a Public Art Workplan, detailing the proposed Public Art Program projects to be implemented in the next fiscal year, a status report on current projects, and a report on projects completed in the last year.

B.     The Public Art Committee shall submit this plan to the City Manager or designee for review and recommendation to the City Council for approval.

C.    The Public Art Workplan shall be administered by the City Manager or designee. (14-06)

 

16.148.190 PUBLIC ART POLICY GUIDELINES
A.     Guidelines for the implementation and administration of the Public Art Program shall be adopted by the City Council, upon recommendation from the Public Art Committee.

B.     Any changes to the Guidelines after adoption shall be submitted by the Public Art Committee to the City Council for approval.

C.    The Guidelines shall include standards for reviewing a Public Art Concept Plan and Schematic Plan. (14-06)

 

16.148.200 APPEALS
Any decision made by City staff, the Architectural Commission and the Public Art Committee pursuant to this chapter may be appealed pursuant to Chapter 16.321, Appeals and Council Review. (14-06)

Chapter 16.151 UNDERGROUNDING UTILITIES
16.151.000 INTENT
Overhead utility lines have an undesirable impact on the character and quality of the neighborhoods in the City. As a prominent part of the streetscape, overhead utility lines detract from the visual quality of the neighborhoods, and increase the threat of fire due to downed utility lines.

New development within the City makes necessary the construction of additional utility lines, and will thereby contribute to the negative effects of urbanization by impairing views and increasing the risk of fire due to downed utility lines.

The intent of this chapter is to assure that, in conjunction with all new development, all on-site utility service lines are placed underground. It is also the intent of this chapter to assure that new development within the Rural Residential Districts and parts of the Hillside Districts which create new negative urban effects mitigate those impacts to some extent through the payment of a fee to underground utilities along the City’s arterial and collector streets in those districts.

The provisions of this chapter are hereby deemed necessary for the protection of property, property values and the general welfare. (08-05)

 

16.151.010 UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
A.     City-Wide Undergrounding Requirements

Persons constructing any building or adding at least 25% to an existing building’s gross floor area, shall place underground all on-site utility lines and all utility lines between (i.e., connected to and serving) the building and the first point of connection to existing utility lines having the capacity to serve the project. If upgraded lines are required, the upgraded portion, including pre-existing lines, shall be placed underground. Provided, if there are existing on-site utility lines of less than 300 feet in length or located in a utility easement, the person constructing the improvement shall pay a fee in-lieu of undergrounding these lines, as provided in Section 16.151.010.D.

B.     Institutional Educational District, Senior Citizen Housing, and Conditional Use Permits

Persons constructing any building or adding 25% to any existing building’s gross floor area as part of a development that is:

1.     Located in the Institutional Educational District;

 

2.     A senior (citizen) housing project;

3.     A use, (other than a residential unit development), subject to a conditional use permit;

shall place new on-site utilities underground, and shall place existing, on-site utility lines underground, or pay a fee in-lieu thereof, according to the following formula:

The number of feet of existing overhead lines to be placed underground shall be the square root of the “assumed lot size.”

The “assumed lot size” shall be the gross floor area of the new construction multiplied by four.

If the amount of line to be placed underground is less than 300 feet, the in-lieu fee described in Section 16.151.010.D shall be paid. If the amount of line is 300 feet or more, the property owner shall underground that number of feet of existing utility lines, or to the first point of connection, whichever is shorter.

C.    Planning Commission Determination of Impracticality

The Planning Commission may find that placing utility lines underground is impractical and that fees should be paid instead, when any of the following conditions, or similar conditions, are found to exist:

1.     The length of utility lines to be placed underground will be less than 300 feet and said utility lines have not been placed underground on any property abutting the applicant’s property.

2.     The existing on-site utility lines to be placed underground serve property held under separate ownership.

3.     Utility lines cannot be placed underground without severely disrupting existing improvements.

4.     The physical or legal character of existing utility easements will not allow utility lines to be placed underground and the affected adjoining property owner will not consent to modification of such easements or other technical or engineering difficulties preclude such action.

5.     When upgrading an existing service would not impose a significant visual impact on the area immediately surrounding the property or on the City.

D.    Payment of Fees In-Lieu of Undergrounding Lines

When the Planning Commission determines that undergrounding is impractical, an in-lieu fee shall be paid. An in-lieu fee shall be based on the number and type of utility lines and shall be paid prior to the recordation of a final tract or parcel map for the tract, or the issuance of any building permit for which they are required. Payment shall be made according to the cost schedule as set forth in separate ordinance and as amended from time to time.

E.     Property Owner Responsibility

The person constructing the improvement, and not the City, shall be responsible for placing utility lines underground and shall have the necessary arrangements with the serving utility companies. (08-05)

 

16.151.020 HILLSIDE AND RURAL RESIDENTIAL UTILITY IMPROVEMENT FEES
Applicants for development approvals or permits shall pay a utility improvement fee.

A.     Area of Benefit

The utility improvement fee shall apply only to property in the RR Districts and in the Hillside District, as shown on Figure 16.151.020.1, hereinafter referred to as the “area of benefit.”



FIGURE 16.151.020.1

B.     Time for Payment of Fee

1.     Parcel and Tract Maps

The applicant shall pay a utility improvement fee prior to the recordation of a parcel or tract map within the area of benefit if both the following are true:

a.     The fee is collected either (1) for improvements or facilities for which the City has an account, appropriated funds and adopted a proposed construction schedule or (2) to reimburse the City for expenditures previously made; and

b.     The Planning Commission has not deferred collection of the fee to the time of issuance of building permits for the applicant’s property, in which case the fee shall be due prior to the issuance of building permits for the applicant’s property.

If neither of the conditions in Section 16.151.020.B.1.a is satisfied, the fee shall be due prior to the date of final inspection or the date of issuance of the certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first.

2.     Building Permits, Conditional Use Permits, and Specific Plans

If no utility improvement fee, as provided in this part, has been previously paid for the property, the applicant shall pay a utility improvement fee prior to the issuance of a building permit for any single-family residential structure.

C.    Amount of Fee

The utility improvement fee shall be as set forth in separate ordinance and as amended from time to time. (08-05)

 

16.151.030 ACCOUNTING AND DISBURSEMENT OF FEES
A.     Fees collected pursuant to this section shall be used solely to (a) pay for City undergrounding of existing overhead utility lines; or (b) to reimburse other developers who have contributed to undergrounding programs, where those facilities were beyond those needed to mitigate the impacts of the developer’s project(s).

B.     The fees collected pursuant to this section for properties in the area of benefit as shown on Figure 16.151.020.1 shall be placed in a separate and special account along with any interest earnings on that account. Fees collected from properties not shown in Figure 16.151.020.1 may be placed in another separate and special account along with any interest earnings on that account. (08-05)

 

16.151.040 EXEMPTIONS
A.     All additions to existing single-family residential structures and accessory buildings, including the addition of a second unit on a residential parcel, shall be exempt from the provisions of this section.

B.     Projects of a temporary nature (one year or less) may be exempted by the Director of Community Development from the provisions of this section.

C.    The utility improvement fee shall not be required for any senior citizen housing project with at least 25 percent of the project’s dwelling units permanently set aside and affordable for low and moderate income households.

D.    The utility improvement fee may be waived or reduced by the City Council for any senior citizen housing project with at least 25 percent of the project’s dwelling units permanently set aside and affordable for moderate income households, if doing so will further the implementation of the City’s General Plan.

E.     The utility improvement fee may be waived or reduced by the City Council for low and moderate income housing projects with at least 25 percent of the dwelling units permanently set aside and affordable for low and moderate income households, and for senior housing projects with less than 25 percent of the project’s dwelling units set aside for low and moderate income households, if doing so will further the implementation of the City’s General Plan.

F.     The utility improvement fee may be waived or reduced by the City Council for public agencies, if doing so will further the implementation of the City’s General Plan.

G.    Existing major utility transmission lines of 66KV or greater shall not be required to be placed underground, except as provided in Section 16.151.050. (08-05)

 

16.151.050 UTILITY SERVICE PROVIDER TRANSMISSION LINES
New utility lines installed to provide service to new developments or provide upgraded service to a single existing development shall be placed underground, except as provided by the utility service provider’s franchise agreement or if the new or upgraded utility lines will be larger than 66KV. The property owner and/or developer installing, requesting or requiring the installation of the lines, shall be responsible for placing utility lines underground and shall make the necessary arrangements with the serving utility(ies). (08-05)

 

16.151.060 ANNEXATION
As property within the area of benefit, but not currently within the City, is annexed to the City, such property shall be immediately subject to the provisions of Sections 16.309.010 and 17.016.060, except that no fee shall be required from property developed for residential purposes until 60 days after such annexation. (08-05)

Chapter 16.154 ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTIVE STANDARDS
16.154.000 INTENT
It is the intent of this chapter to protect properties and persons from environmental nuisances and hazards, and to set maximum tolerability limits on adverse environmental effects created by any use or development of land. (08-05)

 

16.154.010 APPLICABILITY
These standards shall apply to all uses and development of privately-owned land. (08-05)

 

16.154.020 NOISE AND VIBRATION STANDARDS
A.     Declaration of Policy

In order to control unnecessary, excessive, and annoying noise and vibration in the City of Claremont, it is hereby declared to be the policy of the City to prohibit such noise and vibration generated from or by all sources as specified in this section.

B.     Decibel Measurement Criteria

Any decibel measurement made pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be based on a reference sound pressure of 20 micro-pascals as measured with a sound level meter using the “A” weighted network (scale) at slow response.

C.    Designated Noise Zones

The properties hereafter described are hereby assigned the following noise zones:

NOISE ZONE I: All single, double and multiple family residential properties.

NOISE ZONE II: All commercial properties.

NOISE ZONE III: All manufacturing or industrial properties.

D.    Exterior Noise Standards

1.     The Base Noise Level is the ambient noise level or the Ambient Base Noise Level, whichever is higher. The Ambient Base Noise Levels are as follows:

 

 

Noise Zone

Maximum Allowable Type of Land Use

Time Interval

Exterior Noise Level

I

Single, double or multiple family residential (RS, HC, RR, AV, H or RM)

10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.

55

 

 

7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.

60

II

Commercial (CP, CN, CL, CH, CV & CF)

10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.

60

 

 

7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.

65

III

Industrial (B/IP)

Anytime

70

 

Each of the noise limits above shall be reduced 5 dBA for noise consisting of impulse or simple tone noise.

2.     It shall be unlawful for any person at any location within the incorporated area of the City to create any noise or allow the creation of any noise on the property owned, leased, occupied, or otherwise controlled by such person, which causes the noise level when measured on the property line of any other property to exceed the basic noise level as adjusted below:

Basic Noise Level for a cumulative period of more than 15 minutes in any one hour; or

Basic Noise Level plus 5 dBA for a cumulative period of more than 10 minutes in any one hour; or

Basic Noise Level plus 14 dBA for a cumulative period of more than 5 minutes in any one hour; or

Basic Noise Level plus 15 dBA at any time.

3.     If the measurement location is a boundary between two different noise zones, the lower noise level standard shall apply.

4.     If the intruding noise source is continuous and cannot reasonably be discontinued or stopped for a time period whereby the ambient noise level can be determined, the measured noise level obtained while the noise is in operation shall be compared directly to the allowable noise level standards as specified respective to the measurement location’s designated land use and for the time of day the noise level is measured.

The reasonableness of temporarily discontinuing the noise generation by an intruding noise source shall be determined by the Director or his/her duly authorized deputy for the purpose of establishing the existing ambient noise level at the measurement location.

E.     Interior Noise Standards

1.     The interior Ambient Noise Level or the Ambient Base Noise Level is defined as:

 

 

Noise Zone

Type of Land Use

Time Interval

Allowable Interior Noise Level

All

Residential

10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.

37 dBA

 

 

7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.

47 dBA

 

Each of the noise limits specified above shall be reduced by 5 dBA for impulse or simple tone noise.

2.     It shall be unlawful for any person at any location within the incorporated area of the City to create any noise or to allow the creation of any noise on property owned, leased, occupied or otherwise controlled by such person which causes the noise level when measured within any other residential dwelling unit in any noise zone to exceed the Interior Basic Noise Standard in the manner described in Section 16.154.020.D.2.

3.     If the intruding noise source is continuous and cannot reasonably be discontinued or stopped for a time period whereby the ambient noise level can be determined, the same procedures specified in Section 16.154.020.D.2 shall be deemed proper to enforce the provisions of this section.

F.     Exemptions

The following activities shall be exempted from the provisions of this chapter:

1.     City approved and/or sponsored activities conducted at public parks, facilities, and/or playgrounds, and on public or private school or college grounds including, but not limited to, athletic and school entertainment events between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.

2.     Occasional outdoor gatherings, dances, shows, and sporting and entertainment events provided said events are conducted pursuant to a permit or license issued by the City relative to the staging of said events.

3.     Any mechanical device, apparatus, or equipment used, related to or connected with emergency machinery, vehicle, work, or warning alarm or bell provided the sounding of any bell or alarm on any building or motor vehicle shall terminate its operation within 30 minutes in any hour of its being activated.

4.     Noise sources associated with or vibration created by construction, repair, remodeling or grading of any real property, or during authorized seismic surveys, provided:

a.     Activities take place between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. weekdays and Saturdays, excluding national holidays; and

b.     Noise levels, as measured on residential properties, do not exceed 65 dBA for a cumulative period of more than 15 minutes in any one hour, 70 dBA for a cumulative period of more than 10 minutes in any one hour, 79 dBA for a cumulative period of more than 5 minutes in any one hour or 80 dBA at any time; and

c.     Any vibration created does not endanger the public health, welfare, and safety.

Only that construction, repair, remodeling and grading activity that does not exceed the noise levels set by Section 16.154.020.D may occur on Sundays and national holidays.

5.     All mechanical devices, apparatus or equipment associated with agricultural operations provided:

a.     Operations take place between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. weekdays and Saturdays, excluding national holidays, and operations do not take place on Sundays or national holidays, or

b.     Such operations and equipment are utilized for protection or salvage of agricultural crops during periods of potential or actual frost damage or other adverse weather conditions, or

c.     Such operations and equipment are associated with agricultural pest control through pesticide application provided the application is made in accordance with permits issued by or regulations enforced by the California Department of Agriculture.

6.     Noise sources associated with the maintenance of real property provided said activities are approved by the Director and take place between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on any day except Sunday, or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on Sunday. Lawn mowers, edgers, and similar lawn and garden maintenance equipment shall be exempted only until January 1, 1980.

7.     Any activity to the extent regulation thereof has been preempted by state or federal law.

G.    Schools, Churches, Libraries, Health Care Facilities—Special Provisions

It shall be unlawful for any person to create any noise which causes the noise level at any school, hospital or similar health care institution, church, or library while the same is in use, to exceed the noise standard specified in Section 16.154.020.D prescribed for the assigned noise zone in which the school, hospital, church or library is located without the written consent of the affected institution.

H.    Special Provisions

1.     Air Conditioning and Refrigeration

Until January 1, 1980, the noise standards enumerated in Sections 16.154.020.D and 16.154.020.E shall be increased 5 dBA where the alleged intruding noise source is an air conditioning or refrigeration system or associated equipment which was installed prior to the effective date of the ordinance.

2.     Solicitors—Use of Loud Noise, etc., to Advertise Goods, etc.

No solicitor or any person on his or her behalf shall shout, cry out or use any device or instrument to make sounds for the purpose of advertising.

3.     Animal Noises

See Section 6.12.190 of the Claremont Municipal Code.

4.     Radios, Television Sets, Musical Instruments and Similar Devices

No person shall operate or permit the operation or playing of any device which reproduces, produces or amplifies sound, such as a radio, musical instrument, drum, phonograph, or sound amplifier, in such a manner as to create a noise disturbance:

a.     Across any real property boundary or within Noise Zone I, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on the following day (except for activities for which a permit has been issued by the City).

b.     At 50 feet (15 meters) from any such device, if operated on or over any public right-of-way.

5.     Loading and Unloading for Nonresidential Uses

No person shall cause the loading, unloading, opening, closing, or other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials, garbage cans, or similar objects between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary or within Noise Zone I.

6.     Vehicle Repairs and Testing

No person shall cause or permit the repairing, rebuilding, modifying, or testing of any motor vehicle, motorcycle, or motorboat in such a manner as to create a noise disturbance between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the following day across a residential real property boundary or within Noise Zone I.

7.     Airport and Aircraft Operations

a.     The Director shall consult the nearby airport proprietors to recommend changes in airport operations to minimize any noise disturbance which the airport owner may have authority to control in his or her capacity as proprietor.

b.     Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit, restrict, penalize, enjoin, or in any manner regulate the movement of aircraft which are in all respects conducted in accordance with, or pursuant to, applicable federal laws or regulations.

8.     Railroads

The City does hereby adopt all provisions of the Railroad Noise Emission Standards (CFR, Chapter 1, Part 20, 41FR2184, January 14, 1976) and shall enforce them as indicated therein.

9.     Motor Vehicles

(See Section 10.52.010 of the Claremont Municipal Code for special routing of vehicles in excess of 10,000 gvw.)

(See Section 10.48.010 of the Claremont Municipal Code for sections on speed control.)

The City does hereby adopt all provisions of the State Motor Vehicle Code pertaining to noise emissions including, not but limited to: Sections 23130, 23130.5, 27150.1, 27150.7, 27151, 27160, 27502, 27503, 38275, and 38280 and shall enforce them as indicated therein.

10.   Tampering

The following acts or the causing thereof are prohibited:

The removal or rendering inoperative by any person other than for the purposes of maintenance, repair, or replacement, of any noise control device or element of design or noise label of any product identified under Section 4.3.6.* The Director may, by regulation, list those acts which constitute violation of this provision.

*      U. S. Environmental Protective Agency Model Comm. Noise Control Ordinance, 9/1975 Document EPA 550/9-76-003.

 

11.   Administration

The preceding list of provisions are individually exclusive and inclusive. Any act creating or permitting the creation of a noise disturbance as defined by this title, not otherwise excluded by the preceding section of this title, shall constitute a violation of this title and shall be abated as such.

I.      Noise Level Management

For enforcement of applicable provisions herein decibel values are a basis of violation, the City will establish a procedure for measurement including equipment, technique, calibration and other items that may be appropriate.

J.     Vibration

Notwithstanding other sections of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to create, maintain or cause any ground vibration which is perceptible without instruments at any point on any affected property adjoining the property on which the vibration source is located. For the purpose of this chapter, the perception threshold shall be presumed to be more than 0.05 inches per second RMS vertical velocity.

K.     Proposed Developments

Each department whose duty it is to review and approve new projects or changes to existing projects that result or may result in the creation of noise shall consult with the Director prior to any such approval. If at any time the Director has reason to believe that a standard, regulation or action, or proposed standard, regulation or action of any department respecting noise does not conform to the provisions as specified in this chapter, the Director may request such department to consult with him or her on the advisability of revising such standard or regulation to obtain conformity.

L.     Noise Variance Procedure

The owner or operator of a noise or vibration source which violates any of the provisions of this chapter may file an application with the Director for a variance from the provisions thereof wherein said owner or operator shall set forth all actions taken to comply with said provisions, the reasons why immediate compliance cannot be achieved, a proposed method of achieving compliance, and a proposed time schedule for its accomplishment. The application shall be accompanied by a fee as established, and amended from time to time, by the City Council. A separate application shall be filed for each noise source; provided, however, that several mobile sources under common ownership, or several fixed sources on a single property, may be combined into one application. Upon receipt of a complete application and fee, the Director shall refer it with his/her recommendations thereof to the Planning Commission at their next available meeting for action thereon in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

M.    Planning Commission Responsibility

The Planning Commission shall evaluate all applications for variance from the requirements of this chapter and may grant said variances with respect to time for compliance, subject to such terms, conditions and requirements as it may deem reasonable to achieve maximum compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Said terms, conditions, and requirements may include, but shall not be limited to limitation on noise levels and operating hours. Each such variance shall set forth in detail the approved method of achieving maximum compliance and a time schedule for its accomplishment. In its determinations said commission shall consider the following:

1.     Magnitude of nuisance caused by the offensive noise.

2.     The uses or property within the area of impingement by the noise.

3.     The time factors related to study, design, financing and construction of remedial work.

4.     The economic factors related to age and useful life of the equipment.

5.     The general public interest, welfare and safety.

Any variance granted by the Commission shall be by resolution and shall be transmitted to the Director for enforcement. Any violation of the terms of said variance shall be abated as provided for in Chapter 16.026 of this title.

N.    Appeals

Appeals may be filed in accordance with existing provisions of City ordinances governing zoning variances.

O.    Prima Facie Violation

Any noise exceeding the noise level standards for a designated noise zone as specified in Sections 16.154.020.D and 16.154.020.E or vibration exceeding the standards as specified in Section 16.154.020.J of this chapter, shall be deemed to be prima facie evidence of a violation of the provisions of this chapter.

P.     Delay in Implementation—Fixed Noise Source

None of the provisions of this chapter shall apply to a fixed sound source during the period commencing the effective date of this chapter and terminating 90 days thereafter.

Q.    Vibration and Climatic Influences

No operation or activity shall create any of the following effects to the extent they are detectable without the use of instruments at any location outside of the lot upon which said operation or activity is conducted.

1.     Vibration of the ground.

2.     Change of air temperature or humidity.

3.     Wind.

4.     Dust or other airborne particulate matter.

5.     Toxic or noxious matter. (08-05)

 

16.154.030 OUTDOOR LIGHTING AND GLARE
Excessive light and glare shall be limited by the use of appropriate light fixtures, shielding devices and directional lighting methods.

A.     General Requirements

1.     Outdoor light fixtures shall be designed, installed, and maintained so as to direct light only onto the property on which the light source is located. All outdoor lighting fixtures shall have prismatic diffusing lenses and/or appropriate shielding so the light source is not directly visible from the public right-of-way or abutting residential properties.

In residential areas, no mercury vapor utility yard lights or other light fixtures with high intensity discharge lamps or bulbs, which are not designed to limit or control where light is directed and/or which do not shield the light source from direct view from neighboring residential properties or public rights-of-way, shall be permitted.

2.     No industrial or commercial operation, activity or lighting shall be permitted which results in the direct illumination of residential properties or uses.

3.     Any indirect illumination of neighboring residential properties or uses shall not exceed 0.5 footcandles at the property line as measured horizontally and vertically from adjacent grade to a height of 14 feet.

B.     New Development and Remodeling

Plans for such development or remodeling as is subject to Architectural Commission review per Chapter 16.300, shall show outdoor lighting.

C.    Single-Family Residential Development

1.     No outdoor lighting fixtures for a single-family home or in any Single-Family Residential Districts shall be mounted more than 14 feet above adjacent grade on any wall or structure except when used to illuminate a second-story entryway, balcony, or outside stairway, in which case the fixture shall not be higher than eight feet above the floor of the second story.

2.     No outdoor lighting fixture in any single-family residential development shall be mounted more than eight feet above adjacent grade on any pole.

3.     Outdoor lighting for properties located within the RR (Rural Residential) Districts shall conform to the lighting requirements set forth in Chapter 16.007 of this title and in the Rural Claremont Architectural and Landscape Standards.

4.     No building permit shall be issued for outdoor lighting for a single-family home or in a Single-Family Residential District until a lighting proposal, submitted by the applicant, has been reviewed by the Director of Community Development for compliance with the standards of this section. The lighting proposal shall include the following information:

a.     Site plan with proposed location of exterior lights.

b.     Type, design, and size of light fixture.

c.     Height of light fixture.

d.     Type and total wattage of lamps.

e.     Any additional information the Director deems necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of this section.

D.    Multiple Family Development

Outdoor lighting for properties located within the RM (Medium Density Residential) Districts shall be designed, installed, and maintained so that direct rays of light are directed downward into the interior of the lot.

E.     Parking Areas

Lighting for parking areas newly constructed with six or more spaces shall be subject to the lighting standards set forth in Chapter 16.136.

F.     Sign Illumination

All illumination of signs shall be reviewed and approved per the provisions of Title 18.

G.    Automobile Service Station Lighting

All outdoor lighting for automobile service stations shall be subject to the lighting requirements set forth in Chapter 16.087.

H.    Exemptions

1.     The following outdoor light fixtures shall be exempt from the provisions of subsections 16.154.030.A.1, 16.154.030.C.1 and 16.154.030.D:

a.     Light fixtures with incandescent lamps or bulbs of 100 watts or less, provided that there are no more than two lamps or bulbs, or 200 watts per light fixture. (Quartz or tungsten halogen lamps shall not be considered incandescent lamps for purposes of this title.)

b.     Light fixtures with fluorescent lamps, bulbs or tubes of 20 watts or less, provided that there are no more than two lamps, bulbs or tubes, or 40 watts per light fixture.

c.     All light fixtures producing light directly by the combustion of fossil fuels, such as kerosene lanterns or gas lamps.

2.     All existing outdoor lighting that was approved by the Architectural Commission prior to May 25, 1989, shall be exempt from the provisions of this section.

I.      Nonconforming Lighting

All existing outdoor lighting which does not conform to the provisions of this section shall be removed or made to conform with the standards of this section by July 1, 1991. (08-05)

 

16.154.040 ENVIRONMENTAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
A.     Air Contaminants

The emission of any air contaminants shall not exceed the requirements of the South Coast Air Quality Management District or the requirements of any Air Quality Plan adopted by the City of Claremont.

B.     Electrical or Electronic Interference

No operation or activity shall create any electrical or electronic interference or otherwise adversely affect the operation of any electrical equipment on any other lot. The regulations of the Federal Communications Commission shall apply.

C.    Fire and Explosive Hazards

The storage, manufacture or utilization of materials or products which constitute an active fuel and which burn with great intensity shall be carried on within buildings or structures which are completely enclosed by incombustible exterior walls and shall be reviewed and approved by the Los Angeles County Fire Department. The storage of materials or products which constitute an active fuel may be permitted in small containers outside of a structure subject to review and approval by the Los Angeles County Fire Department.

D.    Radiation Hazards

The use of unsealed radioactive materials is prohibited with the exception of minor amounts of radioactive waste materials which must be stored in fireproof containers at or below ground level and approved by the Los Angeles County Fire Department and the Los Angeles County Health Department.

E.     Utility Usage

No industry requiring excessive amounts of electricity, gas, or water will be permitted.

F.     Industrial Wastes

Any industry requiring disposal of chemicals or industrial waste into the sanitary sewer system will be required to obtain approval from the County Sanitation District.

G.    Hazardous Materials

1.     All land use decisions as defined by the Health and Safety Code, Section 25199.1, shall be consistent with the Los Angeles County Hazardous Waste Management Plan, including those portions of the plan which identify general areas or siting criteria for off-site hazardous waste management facilities.

2.     Any proposed “specified hazardous waste facility” projects as defined by the Health and Safety Code, Section 25199.1, shall require approval of a conditional use permit pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 16.303 of this title. All applications for such a facility shall be reviewed pursuant to the State Guidelines for Specified Hazardous Waste Facilities and processed as required by the Tanner Act (Article 8.7 of the Health and Safety Code). The Director of Community Development shall have the authority to levy fees, commensurate with the costs of expenses which may be necessary for the processing of such applications.

3.     All businesses that handle hazardous materials shall comply with the hazardous materials reporting requirements of the local administering agency (the Los Angeles County Fire Department Hazardous Materials Section) pursuant to Health and Safety Code Sections 25505, 25533 and 25534 (adopted in the Los Angeles County Code, Title 2, Chapter 2.20.) Such requirements may include, but shall not be limited to, a Hazardous Materials Intended Handler Registration Form, a Risk Management and Prevention Program, and a Business Plan for emergency response. (08-05)

 

16.154.050 OUTSIDE STORAGE
All outside storage shall be located at the interior sides or the rear of buildings, and appropriately screened by a solid fence/wall, and/or landscaping. No such outside storage shall be located in the front or street side setback areas, or in a location visible to the street, unless otherwise permitted by this Code. (12-01)

 

16.154.060 DETRIMENTAL AND UNSIGHTLY CONDITIONS
All buildings, structures, yards, and other improvements shall be maintained in a manner which is compatible with and which does not have a detrimental effect on adjacent or nearby property. As examples of such conditions, and not by way of limitation, the existence of any of the following shall be deemed to be a detrimental and/or unsightly condition:

A.     Dilapidated or deteriorating or unrepaired structures, such as fences, roofs, screen doors, doors, garage doors, walls, children’s swing sets and play structures, storage sheds, shade structures, and other improvements.

B.     Lumber, junk, trash, or debris.

C.    Objects or equipment such as automobile parts, furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans, containers or similar items which are abandoned, discarded, unused, or stored outdoors.

D.    Excavations over 18 inches deep.

E.     Any vehicle parked or stored either in the street, or in a location on private property which is visible from the street or visible from neighboring properties, and which lacks an engine, transmission, wheels, tires, doors, windshields or any other part necessary for legal or safe operation on public streets.

F.     Any vehicle parked or stored either in the street, or in a location on private property which is visible from the street or visible from neighboring properties, and which is not currently licensed or registered.

G.    Swimming pools, or any other accumulation of water, which contains stagnant water, visible algae growth, or which provides a breeding ground for insects or vermin.

H.    Any of the following vegetation:

1.     Vegetation that is diseased, dead, or presents a danger to the public.

2.     Turf/lawn or weeds that are one foot or higher in height.

3.     Vegetation that presents a fire hazard by reason of its dry condition.

I.      Any accessory structure that is placed in a yard area visible from the street, which is over three feet in height, and which has not been authorized by a building permit, variance, conditional use permit, or which is not otherwise specifically permitted by this title. (08-05)

 

16.154.070 NEIGHBORHOOD PROTECTION
A.     No trailers, boats, camper shells, disabled vehicles, or other vehicles incapable of movement under their own power or not currently licensed for use on public streets, no motor homes that have a total height of more than nine feet, a width of more than eight feet, and/or a total length of more than 19 feet, and no trucks or pick-up trucks with slide-in campers that have a total height in excess of nine feet, width of more than eight feet, and/or a total length of more than 22 feet, shall be parked, stored or allowed to remain for a period of more than 24 hours on any residential property except if parked or stored within a garage or in a side or rear yard area that is enclosed with a non-transparent fence, a wall, or continuous row of shrubbery, not less than five feet high. No such vehicles shall be parked in any yard area between a house and the street, when such yard area is not enclosed with a non-transparent fence, a wall, or continuous row of shrubbery, not less than five feet high. The Director of Community Development may grant a temporary recreational vehicle parking permit to allow the temporary parking of such vehicle on residential property for a maximum of 14 days per dwelling unit per calendar year. The 14 days may be consecutive or spread throughout the calendar year.

B.     No commercial vehicles having a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or more, or which are incapable of movement under their own power shall be parked or stored in any residential district, except as otherwise permitted pursuant to Section 10.32.180 of the Municipal Code.

C.    No building materials, machinery, or other materials or equipment used in or for a business shall be stored outdoors on any lot in any residential district, except during construction on the lot.

D.    No person shall park any vehicle on any landscaped or unpaved area that is not enclosed with a non-transparent fence, a wall, or continuous row of shrubbery, not less than five feet high.

E.     No person shall place any cargo container or “sea container” in any residential district without the prior approval of the Director. The placement of a cargo container or “sea container” shall be subject to the following criteria.

1.     A container shall not be more than eight feet high, eight feet wide, and 20 feet long.

2.     A container shall not be placed within the public right-of-way, unless the applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Director that it is infeasible to locate the container on-site because of site constraints such as existing mature landscaping, on-going construction activities, and/or topographical features, and an encroachment permit is issued by the City Engineer.

3.     All containers shall be located in such a manner as to avoid any impacts to the visibility of motorists, to not block public access and any access to another property, and to minimize impacts to City street-sweeping activities. If the Director determines necessary, reflectors shall be required on the container.

4.     Any placement of a container in the public right-of-way, a driveway, or yard area that is not enclosed with a non-transparent fence, wall or continuous row of shrubbery, not less than five feet high, shall be for a maximum period of 90 days. The Director may choose to provide a courtesy notice to adjacent residents of an approval of the placement of a container in a visible area.

5.     The applicant shall keep the area surrounding the container free of weeds and debris, and promptly remove any graffiti on the container.

6.     Any long term placement of a container shall be located in an interior yard area that is enclosed with a non-transparent fence, wall, or continuous row of shrubbery, not less than five feet high. The placement of a container shall comply with all applicable standards of the district in which it is located and Chapter 16.133.

F.     No person shall make repairs to or perform work on motor vehicles in the street, on a residential driveway, or in any residential yard area visible to the street except as follows:

1.     For the purpose of making repairs, for a period not to exceed five hours, when the need for the repairs arises suddenly and unexpectedly due to a mechanical breakdown.

2.     For minor routine maintenance such as washing and waxing cars, changing oil or tires, or the installation of minor accessories, for a period not to exceed eight hours, provided the motor vehicles are owned by the residents at the property where such maintenance is being performed, and such maintenance takes place on a paved surface. (08-05)

Chapter 16.157 GARAGE SALES OR OCCASIONAL SALES
16.157.000 INTENT
It is the intent of this chapter to protect properties and persons and general public from nuisance activities related to the use of private property in the conduct of an “occasional sale” (garage sale). (08-05)

 

16.157.010 APPLICABILITY
These requirements shall apply to the use of privately owned land for the purpose of conducting an “occasional sale”; included in the definition of such sale are: garage sales, patio sales, rummage sales, or any similar sales. (08-05)

 

16.157.020 REQUIREMENTS
A.     During any one calendar year, two (2) occasional sales shall be permitted each for a period not to exceed three (3) consecutive days.

B.     Signing activities or advertisement of the occasional sales shall be subject to Title 18 of this Code. (08-05)

 

16.157.030 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY
The requirements of this chapter shall be enforced by the Director of Community Development, the Director’s designees, and the Code Enforcement Officers of the Community Development Department. Any violation of any section of this chapter shall be punishable as delineated in Section 16.406.010 of this title. (08-05)

Chapter 16.200 TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEES
16.200.000 PURPOSE
The purpose of this chapter is to establish transportation impact fees in accordance with the provisions of the California Government Code. New development generates additional traffic in the City that incrementally impacts the City’s existing transportation facilities, endangers the safety of pedestrians and bicyclists, and threatens the quality of life of Claremont residents. The transportation impact fees are necessary in order to fund needed improvements to the City’s circulation and transportation systems to reduce the cumulative transportation impacts caused by new development, and are apportioned to new development based on new development’s fair share of the estimated costs of the improvements. (08-05)

 

16.200.010 ESTABLISHMENT ON FEE REQUIREMENT
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the developer of any new development project shall pay a transportation impact fee.

A.     Transportation impact fee amounts for new development shall be established by separate resolution of the City Council. Such resolution shall list the specific transportation improvements to be financed and the estimated costs of the transportation improvements, and describe the reasonable relationship between the transportation impact fees and the various types of new development.

B.     For each specific new development project, the Director of Community Development shall determine the type of development and the corresponding fee to be charged in accordance with the resolution enacted pursuant to this chapter.

C.    City staff shall from time to time review the transportation impact fees, prepare reports to the City Council regarding the continued need for the improvements and their relationship to new development, and schedule, notice and conduct public hearings. Considering the reports from staff, the City Council may adjust the fee amounts. (08-05)

 

16.200.020 APPLICABILITY
For purposes of this chapter, new development shall mean the subdivision of land for new residential dwelling units, the construction of new dwelling units, the construction of residential group quarters, the expansion of group quarters, the construction of commercial, office, industrial, educational and other nonresidential buildings, the addition of floor space to existing commercial, office, industrial, educational, or other nonresidential buildings, new student enrollment or increase in student enrollment at a educational institution, or a change in land use. (08-05)

 

16.200.030 TIME FOR PAYMENT OF FEE
A.     Residential Parcel and Tract Maps

The subdivider shall pay transportation impact fees prior to the recordation of a residential parcel or tract map.

B.     Building Permit for Residential Construction

If no transportation impact fee has been previously paid for a dwelling unit or group quarters, as provided above, the applicant shall pay a transportation impact fee prior to the issuance of a building permit for the dwelling unit or group quarters.

C.    Nonresidential Development

The applicant shall pay a transportation impact fee prior to issuance of a building permit for any nonresidential development, except as otherwise specified in a separate agreement executed by the applicant and the City Manager on behalf of the City of Claremont.

D.    New or Increased Student Enrollment at Educational Institutions

Existing educational institutions shall pay a transportation impact when an increase in a student enrollment cap is approved by the City and an institution with no enrollment cap shall pay a transportation impact fee when a net increase occurs in actual student enrollment, except as otherwise specified in a separate agreement executed by the applicant and the City Manager on behalf of the City of Claremont.

E.     Change of Use

The applicant shall pay a transportation impact fee prior to issuance of a building permit for a new use which has an applicable trip generation rate of 20 percent or greater than the existing or previous use at the site. If the change of use requires no building permit, the applicant shall pay a transportation impact prior to issuance of a occupancy permit or business permit. (08-05)

 

16.200.040 LIMITED USE OF TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEES
Fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited, invested, accounted for and expended pursuant to California Government Code Section 66006. The revenue raised by payment of the fees shall be placed in a separate and special account, and such revenues, along with any interest earnings on the account, shall be expended solely to:

A.     Pay for the City’s future design and construction of transportation improvements listed in the City Council resolution enacted pursuant to this chapter;

B.     Reimburse the City for transportation improvements listed in the City Council resolution enacted pursuant to this chapter and constructed with funds advanced by the City from other sources; or

C.    Reimburse developers who have been required to construct transportation improvements subject to the provisions in the following section. (08-05)

 

16.200.050 DEVELOPER CREDIT
A developer, who is required to construct a transportation improvement as a condition of approval of a development permit, may receive a credit against the transportation impact fee that would otherwise be charged on the development project pursuant to this chapter, subject to the following:

A.     The improvement is part of the transportation improvements listed in the resolution adopted pursuant to this chapter and is otherwise a component of improvements to be financed by the fee to be paid pursuant to this chapter.

B.     The credit does not include the cost of any portion of an improvement needed to provide adequate circulation to the proposed development or mitigate a direct impact created by the development.

C.    The credit does not include the costs of off-site improvements otherwise required along the street frontage of new development pursuant to Chapter 16.139, Dedication and Off-Site Improvements.

D.    The credit does not exceed the fee amount that would otherwise be charged on a development project pursuant to this chapter. (08-05)

 

16.200.060 FEE EXEMPTIONS, WAIVERS, REDUCTIONS, AND REFUNDS
A.     Fee Exemptions

Traffic transportation impact fees shall not be required as a condition for the issuance of a building permit for:

1.     Alterations which will result in no additional floor area, and which will not expand or change the use at the site to one that will generate 20 percent or more vehicle trips than the previous or existing use;

2.     Reconstruction when permits are issued within two years of the destruction of a structure due to fire, vandalism, wind, earthquakes or other natural or manmade disasters and the reconstruction is substantially equivalent to the damaged or destroyed property. (Any reconstruction or portion thereof, which is not substantially equivalent to the damaged or destroyed property shall be deemed to be new construction and shall be subject to the applicable fee.);

3.     Additions to single-family or multiple-family residential units, or construction of or additions to residential accessory structures. (Note: Transportation impact fees shall be required for new additions or conversions of existing space which result in new dwelling units.);

4.     Projects of a temporary nature (one year or less) as determined by the Director of Community Development; and

5.     New public facility improvements constructed by public agencies if doing so will further the implementation of the General Plan as determined by the Director of Community Development.

B.     Fee Waivers or Reductions for Certain New Housing

The transportation impact fees may be waived or reduced by the City Council for the following types of development if doing so will further the implementation of the City’s General Plan:

1.     Housing projects with at least 20 percent of the dwelling units restricted and affordable to lower income households for a minimum of 30 years.

2.     Senior housing projects.

C.    Fee Refunds

1.     When a fee is paid for a development project and that project is subsequently reduced so that it is entitled to a lower fee, the fee shall be re-computed and a partial refund of the fee shall be issued.

2.     When a fee is paid for a development project and the project is subsequently abandoned without any further action beyond the obtaining of a building permit, the fee paid shall be refunded upon the Building Official’s written confirmation that the building permit has been canceled. (08-05)

Chapter 16.203 FIRE PROTECTION FACILITIES AND SERVICES
16.203.000 PURPOSE
The purpose of this chapter is to require that new development mitigate its impact on fire protection facilities and services in the City. New development creates additional demands for fire protection services and creates a need for additional fire protection facilities.

On the basis of its “Fire Protection Facilities Impact Fee Analysis,” the City has determined that developer fees are necessary to finance new fire protection facilities required to meet the fire protection service needs of new development and to maintain adequate fire service levels within the City. The fee will pay for new development’s fair share of the costs of constructing and equipping new fire protection facilities. (08-05)

 

16.203.010 IMPOSITION AND PAYMENT OF A FIRE FACILITIES IMPACT FEE
As a condition to the issuance of a building permit for any improvement on a lot or parcel of property within the City, the applicant shall pay a fire facilities impact fee as set forth in a separate ordinance and as amended from time to time to fund the cost of constructing and equipping fire protection facilities as identified in the “Fire Facilities Impact Fee Analysis.” (08-05)

 

16.203.020 FEE REVIEW
Staff shall from time to time review the estimated costs of the facilities funded by this chapter, the continued need for those facilities, and the reasonable relationship between such need and the impact of new development, pending or anticipated, for which the fee is charged. Staff shall report its findings to the City Council at a noticed public hearing, and the City Council may adjust the fee based on staff’s recommendation. (08-05)

 

16.203.030 ACCOUNTING AND DISBURSEMENT OF FEES
Fees paid pursuant to this chapter shall be placed in a separate and special account. These funds, and interest earned thereon, shall be expended solely for the design, construction and equipping, or reimbursement for construction and equipping, of the fire protection facilities identified in the “Fire Protection Facilities Impact Fee Analysis.” (08-05)

 

16.203.040 EXEMPTIONS
A.     Projects of a temporary nature (one year or less) may be exempted by the City Council from the provisions of this chapter.

B.     The fire facilities impact fee may be waived or reduced by the City Council for low and moderate income housing projects with at least 25 percent of the dwelling units set aside and affordable for low and moderate income households, and for senior housing projects with less than 25 percent of the project’s dwelling units set aside for low and moderate income households, if doing so will further the implementation of the City’s General Plan.

C.    New public facility improvements constructed by public agencies may be exempted by the City Council from the provisions of this chapter, if doing so will further the implementation of the General Plan. (08-05)

Chapter 16.206 OTHER PUBLIC FACILITY IMPACT FEES
16.206.000 UTILITY IMPROVEMENT FEES
The developer of any new subdivision or development project shall pay all utility improvement fees and/or undergrounding in-lieu fees as required by Chapter 16.151, Undergrounding Utilities. (08-05)

 

16.206.010 SCHOOL FACILITIES FEES
The developer of any new subdivision or development project shall pay all school facilities fees as required by Chapter 17.156, School Sites and Fees, of Title 17. (08-05)

 

16.206.020 PARK FEES
The developer of any subdivision or new development project shall pay all park fees as required by Chapter 17.159, Park Requirements, of Title 17. (08-05)

 

16.206.030 STORM DRAIN FEES
The developer of any new subdivision or new development project shall pay all drainage fees as required by Chapter 17.162, Storm Drainage Fees, of Title 17. (08-05)

Chapter 16.209 FEE ADJUSTMENTS AND APPEALS
16.209.000 FEE ADJUSTMENTS
A developer of any development project subject to an impact fee described in this title may submit a request to the Director of Community Development for an adjustment to the fee when the applicant can demonstrate that there are special characteristics of the development project that will result in less impact than that assumed in the fee calculations. The burden shall be on the applicant to demonstrate that the adjustment is necessary.

A.     Written Request

The fee adjustment request shall be made in writing and filed with the Department of Community Development prior to the public hearing on the development project, or if no public hearing is required, prior to issuance of the building permit for the project. The applicant shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of adjustment.

The filing of a request for a fee adjustment shall not stay the imposition or the collection of any fee calculated by the City to be due unless sufficient and acceptable surety has been provided. No final tract or parcel map shall be recorded, or building permit issued, for any development project for which a fee is required unless the fee adjustment application is accompanied by a cash deposit, letter of credit, bond or other surety acceptable to the City Attorney in any amount equal to the fee calculated to be due.

B.     Decision

The Director shall act expeditiously on all requests for fee adjustments. If an adjustment of fees is granted, any change in use of the subject development project property or any increase in the square footage of the development project shall invalidate the adjustment. (08-05)

 

16.209.010 APPEALS
A developer of any development project subject to impact fees, or any other person, may appeal any decision of the Director of Community Development pertaining to the applicability of a fee, the fee rate assigned to a proposed development, the amount of the fee, the applicability of an exemption, or the eligibility for or amount of credit or refund of a fee, pursuant to Chapter 16.321. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant to establish that the decision of the Director is erroneous pursuant to the express terms or intent of this Code and applicable state law. (08-05)

Chapter 16.300 ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW
16.300.000 INTENT
The City Council hereby finds that excessive similarity or dissimilarity, inappropriateness or poor quality of design in the exterior appearance of buildings erected in any neighborhood or in the development and maintenance of structures, landscaping, signs, poor passive solar design resulting in excessive energy consumption, and general appearance affect the desirability of the immediate area and neighboring areas for residential and business purposes or other uses, and by so doing impair the benefits of occupancy of existing property in such areas, prevent the most appropriate development of such areas, produce degeneration of property in such areas with attendant deterioration of conditions affecting the health, safety, comfort and general welfare of the inhabitants of the City of Claremont, and destroy the proper relationship between the taxable value of real property in such areas and the cost of municipal services provided therefor.

At the same time, a high level of quality in the design and redesign of the City’s physical environment can protect and enhance the livability and investment potentials of the City. New development, properly designed, that does not detract from the quality and character of nearby established development because of architectural style, scale or location, can be a positive addition to the City’s environment; historic and architecturally significant sites, properly preserved and restored as physical representations of Claremont’s character, can enhance Claremont’s historic and cultural heritage; and development with proper consideration for energy conservation can contribute to the City’s overall efficiency.

It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to support the community design policies of the General Plan; to guide the design and redesign of the City’s physical environment to encourage excellence in architectural design; to protect and enhance the community’s character, sense of place, and the identities of Claremont’s unique neighborhoods; and to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the community. (08-05)

 

16.300.010 APPLICABILITY
A.     Any new construction, exterior modifications to existing structures (not including painting), building relocations, and changes in site features including, but not limited to, parking areas, landscaping, walls, outside lighting (including increasing the level of illumination) and signs shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter, unless specifically exempted from this chapter.

B.     The reviewing person or body shall determine if the proposed new development, alteration or change conforms to the provisions of this chapter and shall approve, approve subject to conditions, or deny the proposed project according to the procedures, of this chapter.

C.    Unless plans for buildings and structures, and all signs, luminaires, landscaping, irrigation and other features of the site for said building or structure have been approved pursuant to the review procedures of this chapter, no building permit shall be issued for any building, structure or other development of property or appurtenance thereto. (08-05)

 

16.300.020 ARCHITECTURAL COMMISSION
A.     Composition

An Architectural Commission is hereby established, which commission shall consist of seven members as follows:

One shall be an architect, licensed under the Business and Professions Code of the State of California; two shall be members of the design professions; four may be appointed from the community at large.

B.     Rules

The Architectural Commission shall adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of its business. Four voting members shall constitute a quorum. Approval, conditional approval, or denial of an application shall be by a simple majority vote. A tie vote on a motion to approve shall constitute a failure of the motion and a denial of the application.

C.    The Director of Community Development shall serve as the official secretary to the Architectural Commission. The records of all proceedings and the basis for all findings shall be available to the Council and to the public.

D.    The Architectural Commission shall meet at intervals, at least once each month, on regularly scheduled dates.

E.     Civic Center and Other Governmental Buildings

The Architectural Commission shall advise the City Council on all matters related to the development of the Civic Center and the architectural suitability of all governmental buildings and site developments.

F.     Register of Structures of Historical and Architectural Merit of the City of Claremont

The Register of Structures of Historical and Architectural Merit of the City of Claremont (Register) is a comprehensive historic resource inventory of sites and structures in various areas of the City. Information in the Register provides a valuable tool to City staff and commissions in conducting project reviews and to the public for community education. Pursuant to the Historic Preservation Element of the City’s General Plan, the Register shall be updated and expanded periodically to include appropriate resources which meet adopted criteria. The Architectural Commission is responsible for adopting additions to the Register pursuant to the procedures set forth by resolution of the City Council. (08-05)

 

16.300.030 REVIEW RESPONSIBILITIES
A.     In all districts, new construction, modifications to existing development, and site changes shall be reviewed as specified in this section, except for signs and antennas, and as otherwise specified in this title. All signs shall be reviewed as set forth in Title 18. Antennas shall be reviewed as set forth in Chapter 16.100.

B.     The following require review and approval by the Architectural Commission:

1.     New buildings and structures in all districts except in the RS (Residential Single-Family), RR (Rural Residential), and H (Hillside) districts.

2.     New non-single-family residential development and single-family dwellings on five or more lots in the RS (Residential Single-Family), RR (Rural Residential) and H (Hillside) districts, and new Residential Unit Developments.

3.     Parking lots for non-single-family residential projects.

The review of new parking lots shall include perimeter landscaping and similar site features.

4.     Exterior modifications (excluding painting) to all existing non-single-family residential development, all existing residential development in the HC (Historical Claremont) and AV (Arbol Verde Single-Family Residential) districts, when the Director of Community Development determines that the modifications could have a substantial adverse visual impact as viewed from the public right-of-way or adjacent properties, impinge on the privacy of developments in the immediate area, and/or result in development incompatible with the architectural character of the developments in the surrounding area.

5.     Relocations of non-single-family residential buildings within and into the City.

6.     Any development otherwise requiring review and approval by the Architectural Commission pursuant to this Code.

7.     Any project subject to review by City staff and referred by the Director of Community Development to the Architectural Commission for review and approval.

C.    All development not required to be reviewed and approved by the Architectural Commission shall require review and approval by City staff including, but not limited to, the following:

1.     Exterior modifications (not including painting) to existing single-family developments in the RS (Single-Family Residential), RM (Medium Density Residential), RR (Rural Residential), and H (Hillside) districts.

2.     New construction of and modifications to accessory buildings and structures, including, but not limited to, detached garages, patio structures, and new accessory second units.

3.     Modifications to existing site features including changes to grading, fencing, walls, pools, hardscape, but not including changes to plant material on single-family residential property.

4.     Exterior modifications (excluding painting) to existing non-single-family residential development, and existing residential development in the HC (Historical Claremont) and AV (Arbol Verde Single-Family Residential) districts, when the Director of Community Development determines that the modifications will not have a substantial adverse visual impact as viewed from the public right-of-way or adjacent properties, impinge on the privacy of developments in the immediate area, and/or result in development incompatible with the architectural character of the developments in the surrounding area.

5.     Minor additions to existing development that will not significantly alter the appearance of the commercial development, such as automatic teller machines, storefront awnings, and outdoor lighting fixtures.

6.     Modifications to interior character-defining features on properties subject to a Historical Property (Mills Act) Agreement, which do not otherwise require review and approval by the Architectural Commission.

7.     Relocation of single-family residential buildings within the City and into the City. (12-01; 09-11)

 

16.300.040 PROCEDURE FOR COMMISSION REVIEW
A.     Application Filing

1.     Applications for Architectural Commission review shall be made on forms provided by the Department of Community Development together with any applicable fees. The application shall be accompanied by plans and exhibits as required by the department staff.

2.     For new single-family residential development in which the proposed size of the main residential structure is equal to or greater than 85 percent of the maximum square footage allowed by this title, a 3-D image of the proposed construction shall be required. The Director of Community Development may waive the requirement for a 3-D image for minor building additions that the Director determines will not have a significant visual impact as viewed from the public right-of-way or adjacent properties.

B.     Reapplication

A person may not file and the Department of Community Development shall not accept an application which is the same as or substantially the same as an application upon which final action has been taken by the City of Claremont within 12 months prior to the date of said application, unless accepted by a motion of the Architectural Commission or City Council.

C.    Architectural Review Fees

Fees shall be established by resolution of the City Council.

D.    Application Screening

Upon receipt of an application for Architectural Commission review, staff shall review the application and inform the applicant as to the completeness of the submittal and of additional materials required, if any. Department staff shall also determine whether the proposed development is in accordance with the review responsibilities of the Commission specified in this chapter.

E.     Notice Requirements

Upon receipt of a complete application, if the Director determines that proposed development could have an adverse impact on existing development or result in development incompatible with the architectural character of development in the immediate area, notice of the development shall be mailed to all owners of properties that could be affected. The notice shall state that the application will be reviewed by the Architectural Commission. Notices shall be sent not less than ten days prior to any action taken on the application by the Architectural Commission.

F.     Commission Review and Decision

All those development proposals requiring Architectural Commission approval shall be forwarded to the Architectural Commission for their consideration at their next available meeting, considering any required environmental review and public notice requirements. The hearing may be set for a later date with consent of the applicant.

The Architectural Commission shall act expeditiously on all applications. The Commission shall determine if the proposed development conforms to the provisions of this chapter and shall accordingly grant approval of the application, grant approval subject to conditions, or deny the application.

In reviewing and making decisions on proposed development, the Architectural Commission shall consider the economic, social, and environmental sustainability of the community. The Commission shall balance community goals of building a strong local economy that provides employment and generates revenue to support City services, preserving and enhancing the City’s heritage, unique character and quality of life, and promoting sustainable design practices in homes and neighborhoods environment.

G.    Conditions of Approval

1.     Conditions of approval may be applied when the proposed design does not comply completely with the required review criteria and shall be directed towards bringing said design into conformity with the criteria.

2.     Any noncompliance with any condition on an approval by the Architectural Commission shall constitute a violation of this title.

H.    Application Denial

When a proposed application does not meet the required review criteria, and cannot be conditioned to comply with said criteria, the application shall be denied. The applicant shall be notified of the criteria which are deemed not to be met. (09-11; 08-05)

 

16.300.050 REVIEW OF PLANS
A.     Optional Preliminary Review of Schematic Plans

The applicant may submit to staff or the Architectural Commission a preliminary site plan, elevations, sketches, or other schematic plans for preliminary review, comments, and general direction before submitting plans for approval.

B.     Review of Plans for Approval

The applicant shall submit for approval all plans determined necessary by staff or the Architectural Commission to assure that the proposed project meets the applicable review criteria of this chapter. The applicant may also choose to submit the final detailed plans at this time.

If final detailed plans are not submitted at the time of approval of the proposed project, the approval of such project shall be conditioned on the approval of the final detailed plans.

C.    Final Detailed Plans

Final detailed plans shall include all plans reviewed and required by the Architectural Commission, and other plans and specifications staff may determine to be reasonably necessary for a complete review and understanding of the proposed development.

1.     Final detailed plans not included in the review per subsection B of this section shall require formal action by staff or the Architectural Commission.

2.     For projects approved by the Architectural Commission, the final detailed plans shall be reviewed by staff to determine consistency with the approved plans, excepting, however, staff shall refer to the Architectural Commission any final detailed plans that, as a condition of approval, were required to be referred back to the Commission for review.

3.     Any decision on final detailed plans may be appealed pursuant to the procedures of this chapter for appeals.

D.    Changes to Approved Plans

Any changes or revisions to approved plans shall be subject to approval by staff. Whenever staff determines that changes and alterations to plans approved by the Architectural Commission are significant or could materially change the quality and character of the proposed project, such changes and alterations shall be referred to the Architectural Commission for review. (08-05)

 

16.300.055 PROCEDURE FOR STAFF REVIEW
A.     Staff Review and Notice of Development in All Districts

1.     Prior to issuance of a building permit for a development proposal requiring staff review, staff shall review such proposal to determine compliance with the intent of this chapter and conformity with the standards of this title and other applicable ordinances, regulations and policies.

2.     Staff shall require such plans and specifications it determines necessary for a complete review and understanding of the proposed development.

3.     If the Director determines proposed development could have an adverse impact on existing development or result in development incompatible with the architectural character of development in the immediate area, notice of the development shall be mailed to all owners of properties that could be affected. The notice shall state that staff is reviewing the development proposal. Such notices shall be sent not less than ten days prior to any action taken on the proposed development by staff.

B.     Staff Conditions

Staff may apply any conditions on a development proposal that it determines necessary to ensure compliance with the required review criteria, the intent of this chapter, or conformity with any applicable ordinances and regulations.

C.    Staff Referral

The Director may refer any development proposal that staff is authorized to review to the Architectural Commission for architectural review. (09-11)

 

16.300.060 REVIEW CRITERIA
A.     General Review Criteria

1.     Conformity with Development Standards

The proposed development is in conformity with the development standards of this title and other applicable ordinances and regulations, except where deviations have been approved pursuant to other sections of this title.

2.     General Plan Consistency

The proposed development is consistent with the goals and policies of the City’s General Plan, and any adopted specific plans, approved master plans, and/or approved development plans.

3.     Compatibility of Form with Surrounding Development

The design of the proposed development will not unduly interfere with or visually dominate the established development pattern of the surrounding area and is compatible with existing development in terms of scale, height, and massing.

4.     Compatibility of Quality with Surrounding Development

The proposed development’s exterior design and appearance including exterior materials, ornamentation and trim are of a quality and architectural character that is compatible with or an enhancement to the surrounding development.

5.     Internal Consistency of Design

All building elevations of the proposed development are architecturally treated in a consistent manner, including the incorporation within the side and rear building elevations of some or all of the design elements used for the primary facades.

6.     Privacy

The proposed development is designed to respect the privacy of adjacent residential properties to the greatest extent possible.

7.     Internal Circulation

The site plan and design of the proposed development provide for adequate and safe vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle circulation.

8.     Sustainability

The proposed building and site development are energy and water efficient, meet applicable sustainability codes and guidelines adopted by the City, and will help the City achieve its sustainability targets.

9.     Tree Preservation

The proposed development is designed to preserve and/or retain on-site significant mature trees to the greatest extent possible. Removal of significant trees shall be avoided, except where such trees have been determined to be of poor health or where retention is economically infeasible.

10.   Light and Air

The proposed development will not unreasonably impinge on neighbors’ existing access to light or use of prevailing winds for natural ventilation, or cast a shadow over an existing solar energy system (active or passive).

11.   Environmental Protections

The proposed development has been reviewed pursuant to the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), and meets the environmental protective standards in Chapter 16.154 of this title.

12.   Health and Safety

The visual effect of the development from view from the public streets will not be detrimental to the public interest, health, safety, convenience, or welfare.

B.     Additional Criteria for Development in CV District

New development and modifications to existing structures and sites in the CV District shall also be subject to the finding that the proposed project is in conformance with the Claremont Village Design Plan in addition to the criteria in subsection A of this section.

C.    Additional Criteria for Sites Listed on Local Register in AV Districts

For sites in the AV Districts that are listed on the Claremont Register of Sites of Historic or Architectural Merit (Local Register), all modifications to structures and site shall be subject to the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings.

D.    Development in RR Districts

New development and modifications in the RR Districts shall also be subject to the Rural Claremont Architectural and Landscape Standards. (14-04; 09-11)

 

16.300.080 APPEAL OF ACTION
Any decision by staff or the Architectural Commission, or any condition imposed by the staff or the Architectural Commission, may be appealed in accordance with the procedures in Chapter 16.321, Appeals and Council Review. Filing of an appeal shall suspend the issuance of a building permit pursuant to the decision until action is taken on the appeal. (08-05)

 

16.300.090 EXPIRATION
A.     General Project Approval Timeframes

Any approval (excepting master architectural reviews) granted under the provisions of this chapter, including approvals granted pursuant to the Rural Claremont Landscape and Architectural Standards, shall be valid for two years. If necessary building permits have been issued and construction work is commenced on an approved development project prior to the expiration of the approval, the approval will remain valid provided construction continues at a commercially reasonable pace, in light of all relevant circumstances, as determined by the Director of Community Development.

B.     Extension of Time

An extension of time beyond the two year time limit may be granted by the reviewing person or body who issued the original approval, upon written request from the applicant, when a finding can be made that the applicant could not avoid the delay.

C.    Development Projects Approved Prior to November 30, 1989

1.     All development approvals granted prior to November 30, 1989, under the provisions of this chapter, will expire January 1, 1991 or two years from the date the approval was granted, whichever occurs later, unless the development approval was for a shorter time period by conditions of approval. If necessary permits have been issued and construction work is commenced on an approved project prior to the expiration of the approval, the approval will remain valid provided construction continues at a commercially reasonable pace, light of all relevant circumstances, as determined by the Director of Community Development.

2.     All development approvals in the RR Districts granted under the provisions of the Rural Claremont Architectural and Landscape Standards prior to January 9, 1992 will expire January 9, 1992 or two years from the date the approval was granted, whichever occurs later, unless the development approval was for a shorter time period by conditions of approval. If necessary permits have been issued and construction work is commenced on an approved project prior to the expiration of the approval, the approval will remain valid provided construction continues at a commercially reasonable pace, in light of all relevant circumstances, as determined by the Director. (08-05)

Chapter 16.301 BUILDING CONSERVATION/DEMOLITION
16.301.010 PURPOSE
The purpose of this chapter is to foster the retention and maintenance of existing buildings and structures, discourage demolitions without permits and approvals, and make substantial alterations and additions to existing buildings and structures subject to current development standards and other requirements applicable to the construction of a new building or structure. (09-12)

 

16.301.020 DEFINITIONS
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:

“Demolition” means for the purpose of this chapter, any act or intentional failure to act that destroys, removes, or relocates, in whole or in part, the structural components of any facility, structure, or building in the City. Structural components shall include exterior walls, building foundations, roofs, ceilings, floors, and structural supports.

“Historic resource” means improvements, buildings, structures, objects, signs, features, sites, cultural landscapes, places, or other improvements of historical and architectural value located on properties included in the Claremont Register of Sites of Historic or Architectural Merit.

“Local Register” means the Claremont Register of Sites of Historic or Architectural Merit. (09-12)

 

16.301.030 ORDINARY MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in or on any property that does not involve a change in design, material, or external appearance thereof. (09-12)

 

16.301.040 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR DEMOLITION
A.     Permit for Demolition

No person shall commence demolition or removal of a building without a permit for demolition issued by the City of Claremont Building Official pursuant to Title 15 of the Claremont Municipal Code. The Building Official may require completion of any preparatory work determined necessary by the Building Official for public health, safety, and/or welfare prior to issuing the permit.

B.     Historic Resources Listed on the Local Register

Any development project involving an historic resource listed on the Local Register shall be subject to provisions of Chapter 15.04.

C.    Requirements of Demolition Permits

Property owners are required to take appropriate actions to prevent the creation of a public nuisance, and to minimize any physical, aesthetic, safety, or economic burden that the demolition may have on surrounding development. Such required actions may include, but are not limited to, the following:

1.     Compliance with all applicable air quality and dust control regulations of the City and the South Coast Air Quality Management District.

2.     Removal of all exposed foundations, footings, concrete slabs, or flooring systems without structures.

3.     Fill-in of excavations.

4.     Removal of all visible construction-related materials and equipment upon completion of demolition activities.

5.     Clearance of any appliances, equipment, vehicles, and similar objects that have been abandoned or discarded, and/or which are inoperable and/or are being stored in violation of Chapter 16.154.

6.     Providing and maintaining minimal landscaping and/or fencing in such a manner that the site does not have a detrimental effect on adjacent or nearby properties.

7.     Providing irrigation as needed to maintain the health of existing, mature, on-site trees.

8.     Keeping property clear of weeds and debris, and removal of overgrown, dead, or diseased vegetation.

9.     Removal of any condition determined to be a public nuisance pursuant to Chapter 8.16.

10.   Compliance with all other applicable City codes.

D.    Moving of Buildings

For moving/removing an existing building located in the City, the requirement for a demolition permit shall be in addition to the requirement for a permit to move a building pursuant to Chapter 15.28 and any other permits or approvals required by City codes. (09-12)

 

16.301.050 ILLEGAL DEMOLITION
A.     Any person that causes the demolition of any building or portion of a building without the required permit shall be in violation of the provisions of this Code, and shall be subject to general and administrative penalties pursuant to Chapters 1.12 and 1.14.

B.     In addition, the demolition of any building or portion of a building without the required permit shall result in a stay in the issuance of a building permit for new construction at the site previously occupied by the building. The length of the stay shall be a minimum of 36 months from the date the City becomes aware of the demolition or alteration in violation of this chapter. The length of stay may be reduced at a public hearing by the City Council. The City Council in making its decision on whether to reduce the length of stay shall consider the extent of the demolition, the benefits received, and the time needed for the City to study and determine appropriate mitigation measures for the removal or alteration. (09-12)

 

16.301.060 SUBSTANTIAL REMODEL
A.     Alteration of or an addition to an existing building or structure shall constitute a substantial remodel if any of the following occurs at any time over a three-year period:

1.     Demolition, removal, and/or relocation of more than 50 percent of the exterior walls, based on a horizontal measurement of the perimeter walls. Elements of exterior walls include columns, studs, cripple walls, or similar vertical load-bearing elements and associated footings; or

2.     Destruction or reconstruction of more than 50 percent of the footprint; or

3.     Demolition affecting more than 50 percent of the replacement value of such structure as determined by the Building Official; or

4.     One or more additions to an existing building or structure that increases the square footage of the existing building or structure by 25 percent or more, but not including additions to existing buildings on a residential lot that total no more than 1,500 square feet within any consecutive three-year period.

Alterations to existing structural components to address seismic safety as determined appropriate by the Building Official shall not be included in the above calculations.

B.     Whenever modifications to an existing building or structure constitute a substantial remodel, the replacement construction shall constitute a new building or structure subject to current development standards of the subject zoning district, and all other requirements applicable to the construction of a new building or structure including utility undergrounding requirements, required dedication of on and off-site improvements, payment of parkland fees, and other applicable development fees.

C.    If concealed structural damage is discovered during the course of construction, the removal and replacement of the damaged elements shall not be included in the above calculations for determining substantial remodel provided all the following criteria are met:

1.     It is certified that the damaged elements must be removed and replaced in order to maintain a safe structure by a licensed structural engineer, or other licensed civil engineer or architect authorized to perform structural calculations and designs as specified in the California Business and Professions Code.

2.     The Building Official, or designee, is notified of the structural damage and verifies the damage while the damage elements are still in place.

3.     Alterations of structural elements are only undertaken to the minimum extent necessary to maintain a safe structure as determined by the licensed structural engineer, civil engineer, or architect and confirmed by the Building Official. (09-12)

Chapter 16.303 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
16.303.000 INTENT
The conditional use permit procedure is intended to provide for uses that are:

A.     Necessary or desirable for the development of the community of region but cannot readily be classified as permitted uses in individual districts by reason of uniqueness of size, scope, or possible effect on public facilities or surrounding uses, or

B.     Appropriate as accessories to the development of neighborhoods or the community, or

C.    Appropriate uses in the districts in which they are listed as permitted subject to a conditional use permit, but requiring specific consideration of the proposed use or development. (08-05)

 

16.303.010 CONDITIONAL USES
A.     Conditional Uses in Specific Districts

Uses specified in this title as requiring the approval of a conditional use permit may be permitted in said districts subject to the provisions of this chapter.

B.     Conditional Uses in All Land Use Districts

The following uses may be permitted in any land use district, except if otherwise noted, subject to the provisions of this chapter:

1.     Government offices;

2.     Public utility structures;

3.     Public parks.

C.    Conditional Uses in Residential Districts

The following uses may be permitted in Residential Districts (RS, RR, H, RM, HC, EQ, and AV Districts), except if otherwise noted, subject to the provisions of this chapter.

1.     Churches and religious facilities;

2.     Cemeteries and mausoleums;

3.     Private, non-collegiate, educational uses including nursery schools, pre-school, and after school care;

4.     Adult day care;

5.     Assisted living, congregate care, group care, rehabilitation, community care, and other similar residential and health care facilities intended for the care of persons in need of medical or nursing care, personal care, developmental and supportive services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living, except in the HC and AV Districts where such uses shall not be permitted. (However, the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to care facilities that serve a limited number of persons and which the State Health and Safety Code and the Welfare and Institutions Code state shall be permitted in all residential zones without a conditional use permit.) (08-05)

 

16.303.020 APPLICATION AND FILING FEE
A.     Filing

Application for a conditional use permit shall be made on forms provided by the Department of Community Development together with any applicable fees. The application shall include such plans as may reasonably be required for a complete understanding of the proposal.

B.     Reapplication

A person may not file and the Department of Community Development shall not accept an application which is the same or substantially the same as an application upon which final action has been taken by the City of Claremont within 12 months prior to the date of said application, unless accepted by a motion of the Planning Commission or City Council.

C.    Filing Fee

The filing fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council.

D.    Multiple Requirements for Conditional Use Permits

For any given development or proposed use where a conditional use permit is required by different sections of this title, only one conditional use permit application need by filed and acted upon. (08-05)

 

16.303.030 PROCEDURE
A.     Application Screening

Upon receipt of an application for a conditional use permit, staff shall review the application and inform the applicant as to the completeness of the submittal and of additional materials required, if any.

Staff shall investigate the facts for each conditional use permit application to ensure that the requested action set forth on each application is consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter. In cases where staff determines that the requested use is not within the scope of the conditional use permit, the applicant shall be so informed, whereupon, if the application is filed, it shall be signed by the applicant to the effect that he or she was so informed. Filing of an application does not constitute an indication of approval.

B.     Notice of Public Hearing

When an application is deemed complete for a conditional use permit, the matter shall be set for a public hearing to be held by the Planning Commission. The Director shall give notice of a hearing pursuant to Government Code Section 65091. Notices shall include the date, time and place of the public hearing to be held by the Planning Commission, and a general explanation of the matter to be considered and a general description of the location of the subject property as specified in Government Code Section 65094. Notices shall be sent not less than ten days prior to any action taken on the application.

Signs, at least eight inches by ten inches, shall be posted on the subject property setting forth substantially the same information included in the mailed notice. There shall be a minimum of two such signs on the subject property. Said signs shall be posted at least ten days prior to the public hearing.

C.    Review and Decision

The Planning Commission shall act expeditiously on all applications. The Planning Commission shall investigate the facts bearing on each case to determine if the requested action is consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter and shall accordingly approve the application with conditions, or deny the application. The Commission shall make findings based on substantial evidence in view of the whole record to justify its decision. The Planning Commission shall announce its findings by formal resolution. Said resolution shall recite the findings of the Commission and set forth the conditions of approval. The Planning Commission’s decisions shall be filed with the Council and a copy shall be mailed to the applicant. (08-05)

 

16.303.040 FINDINGS AND CONDITIONS
A.     Required Findings

The Planning Commission, in granting a conditional use permit, shall find as follows:

1.     That the site for the intended use is adequate in size and shape to accommodate said use and all of the yards, setbacks, walls or fences, landscaping and other features required by this Code or by conditions imposed under this chapter; and

2.     That the site for the proposed use relates to streets and highways properly designed to carry the type and quantity of traffic generated by the subject use; and

3.     That the proposed use will not impair the integrity and character of the zone in which it is located or otherwise have an adverse effect on adjacent property or the permitted use thereof; and

4.     That the proposed use is not contrary to the General Plan; and

5.     That the proposed use will not endanger or otherwise constitute a menace to the public health, safety or general welfare.

B.     Conditions of Approval

The Planning Commission, in approving a conditional use permit, shall impose such conditions as are deemed necessary to insure that the requested use will be in accord with the findings required by this section. Conditions imposed by the Commission may involve any pertinent factors affecting the establishment, operation and maintenance of the requested use, including, but not limited to:

1.     Special setbacks, open space, and buffer areas.

2.     Fences and/or walls.

3.     Lighting.

4.     Parking facilities, including vehicular ingress and egress, the surfacing of parking areas and driveways, and pedestrian circulation.

5.     On-site or off-site street, sidewalk, or utility improvements.

6.     Dedication of right-of-way or easements or access rights.

7.     Regulation of nuisance factors such as noise, vibration, odors, dust, dirt, gases, etc.

8.     Landscaping and maintenance thereof.

9.     Maintenance of the grounds and/or signs.

10.   Modification or limitation to activities, including times and types of operation, and use of area on the site.

11.   Such other conditions that may be necessary to address unusual site conditions and/or to insure that the requested use is developed in an orderly and efficient manner and in general accord with the elements of the General Plan and the intent and purposes of this chapter.

When deemed desirable, the Planning Commission may add conditions requiring review and/or updating of maintenance, development plans, and activities.

C.    Applicable Zone Regulations

All regulations of the district in which such conditional use permit is located shall apply, except, conditions of approval to insure the health, safety and general welfare shall take precedence over the requirements of the district.

D.    Multiple-Use Developments With Special Uses

For multiple-use developments under a conditional use permit where the uses permitted are specified in the conditional use permit resolution, the uses permitted in the zoning district shall not apply unless such uses are among those permitted by the conditional use permit. (08-05)

 

16.303.050 APPEALS
The petitioner or any other person may appeal any decision of the Planning Commission or any condition imposed by the Planning Commission pertaining to a conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 16.321. (08-05)

 

16.303.060 EXPIRATION OF APPROVALS
A.     Initiation of Use

Before any conditional use permit is approved by the Commission, said commission shall establish a time limit within which the proposed use shall be initiated. The time limit set by the Commission shall be a reasonable time based on the size and nature of the proposed project. Said time may be subject to extension by the Commission for good cause when the applicant presents proof of an unusual hardship not of his or her own making. If no date is specified such conditional use permit shall expire within one year from the date approval is granted. Extensions may be approved with new or modified conditions upon a finding that the circumstances under which the use permit was originally approved have changed.

B.     Specific Time Limit of Operation

The Planning Commission may impose a condition requiring a specified time limit of operation to assure continued compliance with the provisions of this chapter. To allow for continued operation, extensions may be approved subject to the regular procedures, public hearing and fee for a conditional use permit.

C.    Change of Ownership

A conditional use permit that is valid and in effect, and was granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall “run with the land” and continue to be valid upon change of ownership of the land or any lawfully existing building or structure on the land. (08-05)

 

16.303.070 DISCONTINUED USE
When a use for which a conditional use permit was granted is discontinued for a period of 12 months or more, such use shall not be re-established unless a new conditional use permit for the use is granted. Notice shall be sent to the applicant and owner of the property, at their last known address, whenever the staff determines that a permit has expired under this section. Said notice shall inform the applicant and owner of the property, of their right to appeal said determination in accordance with Chapter 16.321. (08-05)

 

16.303.080 MODIFICATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT
A.     Any change which substantially intensifies occupancy or land coverage on the site or which may result in an adverse effect on the surrounding environment shall require an amendment to the conditional use permit with the same procedures, public hearing and fee as required for the original permit. If a modification is of such minor or incidental nature that the intent of this chapter can be met without further review or conditions, the Director may determine that additional conditional use permit approval is not necessary.

B.     Compliance With Conditions

Any condition established pursuant to this chapter shall be met before the use is established, except that the Planning Commission may establish a schedule for certain conditions to be met after establishment of the use. Continuance of the use shall then be contingent on complying with the schedule for meeting deferred conditions.

C.    Failure to Comply

Operation of a use in non-compliance with any conditions of a conditional use permit or continuing a use after the permit for such expires shall constitute a violation of the Zoning Ordinance and shall be punishable as provided for in Chapter 16.406 of this title.

D.    Revocation

1.     A conditional use permit may be revoked if the Planning Commission finds that one or more of the following conditions exist:

a.     One or more of the conditions of the conditional use permit have not been substantially complied with.

b.     The conditional use permit was obtained in a fraudulent manner.

c.     Circumstances have changed to such a degree that one or more of the required findings of this chapter can no longer be made and the use or related development constitutes or is creating a nuisance.

2.     When considering revoking an existing conditional use permit, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing and give notice in the same manner as that required for granting a conditional use permit.

E.     Existing Uses Without Conditional Use Permits

All existing uses which are now listed as requiring a conditional use permit, but which at the time of their initiation did not require a conditional use permit and were in compliance with all the applicable codes, shall be deemed nonconforming. Such uses shall be permitted to continue subject to the provisions of Chapter 16.400. (08-05)

Chapter 16.306 SPECIAL USE AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITS
16.306.000 INTENT
It is the intent of this chapter to provide for minor or temporary special uses and developments which may, unless special consideration is given and conditions applied, result in an adverse effect on the environment. Such special consideration and the application of conditions as provided herein is hereby deemed necessary for the protection of property values and the public welfare. (08-05)

 

16.306.010 USES AND DEVELOPMENTS PERMITTED WITH SPECIAL USE AND DEVELOPMENT PERMITS
The following uses and developments shall not be initiated or constructed unless a special use and development permit for said use or development has been issued by the Director:

A.     The commercial use of existing residential structures, or lots containing residential structures, in commercial districts, per Chapter 16.103.

B.     Temporary uses of and/or erection of temporary structures, such as fences, booths, tents, or parking of trailers, for such activities as carnivals, circuses, fairs, and religious meetings.

C.    The sale of fruit, trees, and crops grown as an accessory use on the premises of a dwelling in the RR District.

D.    An accessory building or structure, including athletic apparatus or children’s play equipment, located within required interior side or rear setbacks in a single-family residential district pursuant to Chapter 16.130, excepting minor structures and equipment which are no more than eight feet in height and screened from view may be permitted in interior setbacks without a special use and development permit pursuant to Chapter 16.130.

E.     An accessory building or structure exceeding 15 feet in height, but not more than 18 feet in height, on any lot with single-family residential development pursuant to Chapter 16.133.

F.     An athletic apparatus, sport accessory structure or children’s play equipment exceeding 13 feet in height, but not more than 15 feet in height on single-family residential lots, pursuant to Chapter 16.133.

G.    Fences greater than six feet in height, but less than eight feet in height, constructed on any part of the lot behind the front or street side setback line, pursuant to Chapter 16.133.

H.    Recreation and athletic courts with lights subject to the standards for such courts in Chapter 16.133.

I.      Antennas, other than vertical or whip antennas, and support structures up to 45 feet in overall height from the ground level, subject to the standards and findings in Chapter 16.100 in addition to the findings of this chapter.

J.     Garage or other opening providing access into a garage in a single-family district, that has a height of more than eight feet.

K.     Barbed wire fences subject to the requirements of Chapter 16.133.

L.     The installation and use of mobile recycling units for the collection of recyclable materials. The facilities are subject to the review and approval of the Architectural Commission. Architectural Commission applications will be reviewed per the criteria contained in Section 16.300.040 and the following standards. A SUDP for a mobile recycling unit shall not be effective until the Architectural Commission has approved the plans for the facility and the applicant has submitted plans complying with the Commission’s conditions of approval and the following standards:

1.     The facility shall be established in conjunction with an existing commercial use or community service facility which is in compliance with the zoning, building and fire codes of the City of Claremont.

2.     The design, colors, and materials shall be architecturally compatible with the host use and surrounding development.

3.     The facility shall be screened by landscaping or other type of material from the public rights-of-way.

4.     The facility shall accept only glass, metals, plastic container, and papers.

5.     The facility shall use containers that are constructed and maintained with durable, waterproof and rustproof materials.

6.     The facility shall store all recyclable material in containers or in the mobile unit vehicle, and shall not leave materials outside of containers.

7.     The facility shall be maintained free of litter and any other undesirable material. Mobile facility sites, at which trucks or containers are removed at the end of each collection day, shall be swept at the end of each collection day.

8.     The facility shall not exceed noise levels of 60 dBA as measured at the property line of residentially zoned or occupied property, or 65 dBA in a Commercial District, or 70 dBA in an Industrial District.

9.     Facilities located within 100 feet of a property zoned or occupied for residential use shall operate only during the hours between 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.

10.   Containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material which may be deposited; the facility shall be clearly marked to identify the name and telephone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation, and shall display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling enclosure or container.

11.   Signs

a.     Signs shall be approved by the Architectural Commission prior to installation of the facility.

b.     The facility’s signing shall be limited to minor identification signs and shall be visible only from the surrounding parking lot.

12.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, the facility may not reduce available parking spaces below the minimum number required for the primary host use. If all the following conditions exist a reduction of up to three spaces may be granted.

13.   The facility shall be located so as not to eliminate any of the existing required landscaping.

M.    The installation and use of reverse vending machines for the collection of recyclable materials. The facilities are subject to the review of the Architectural Commission. Architectural Commission applications will be reviewed per the criteria contained in Section 16.300.060 and the following standards. A SUDP for a reverse vending machine shall not be effective until the Architectural Commission has approved the plans for the facility and the applicant has submitted plans complying with the Commission’s conditions of approval and the following standards:

1.     The facility shall be established in conjunction with a commercial use or community service facility which is in compliance with the zoning, building and fire codes of the City of Claremont.

2.     The facility shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation.

3.     The facility shall not occupy parking spaces required by the primary use.

4.     The facility shall occupy no more than 50 square feet of floor space per installation, including any protective enclosure, and shall be no more than eight feet in height.

5.     The facility shall be constructed and maintained with durable waterproof and rustproof material.

6.     The colors and materials of the facility shall be compatible with those of the host use.

7.     The facility shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material to be deposited, operating instructions, and the identity and phone number of the operator or responsible person to call if the machine is inoperative.

8.     The total sign area shall be a maximum of four square feet per facility exclusive of operating instructions. (Facilities shall be defined as the total number of machines required in order for the collection of the different types of recyclable beverage containers.)

9.     The sign illumination shall be restricted to the sign copy. No other surfaces of the facility shall be illuminated.

10.   The facility shall be maintained in a clean, litter-free condition on a daily basis.

11.   Operating hours shall be at least the operating hours of the host use.

12.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, the facility may not reduce available parking spaces below the minimum number required for the primary host use. If all of the following conditions exist a reduction of up to three spaces may be granted.

a.     The facility is located in a convenience zone or a potential convenience zone as designated by the California Department of Conservation.

b.     The applicant submits a parking study finding that existing parking capacity is not already fully utilized during the time the recycling facility will be on the site.

c.     Alternate locations for the facility have been examined and the proposed location has been found to be the best.

d.     The permit will be reconsidered at the end of one year.

13.   The facility shall be located so as not to eliminate any of the existing required landscaping.

N.    Temporary parking lot pursuant to Chapter 16.136.

O.    Temporary outdoor Christmas tree sales, and other seasonable product sales, such as pumpkins. Such uses may be approved on vacant property or in parking lots.

P.     Temporary outdoor displays, sales, and storage of merchandise, temporary services, and similar activities conducted for a temporary period outdoors or within temporary structures, except as otherwise permitted as incidental outdoor uses in Chapter 16.090. Uses permitted by this subsection shall not be located within the public right-of-way.

Q.    The use of temporary structures, trailers and facilities related to established uses otherwise permitted by this title. Permits for such uses shall be valid for no more than three years.

R.    Large family day care homes in a single-family residential dwelling unit subject to the standards, restrictions, and requirements as specified below. Large family day care home shall mean that as set forth in the Health and Safety Code Section 1597. All applications for a large family day care home shall be processed and reviewed in accordance with the provisions in the Health and Safety Code for large family day homes. In approving a special use and development permit for a large family day care home, staff shall impose such conditions as are deemed necessary to insure the proposed large family day care home will be in accord with the provisions of this section and the Health and Safety Code.

1.     No large family day care home shall be located within 1,000 feet of an existing or proposed large family day care home.

2.     All large family day care homes shall have adequate on-street parking located along the home’s street frontage, or shall provide off-street parking for the drop-off and pick-up of children.

3.     No off-street parking provided for the drop-off and pick-up of children at a large family day care home shall require that motor vehicles back-up directly into a travel lane of a designated major arterial street.

4.     All large family day care homes shall comply with the City’s noise standards for residential land uses in Chapter 16.154, Environmental Protective Standards.

5.     All large family day care homes shall comply with all regulations adopted by the State Fire Marshal for large family day care homes in Title 24 of the California Administrative Code.

6.     Except as noted above, all large family day care homes shall comply with the development standards of the districts in which they are located and with other standards and regulations in this title which are applicable to single-family residential development.

S.     Other special or temporary uses listed as permitted uses subject to a special use and development permit pursuant to District Development Standards of this title. (08-05)

 

16.306.020 APPLICATION AND FILING FEE
A.     Filing

Application for a special use and development permit shall be made on forms provided by the Department of Community Development together with any applicable fees. The application shall include such plans as may be required for a complete understanding of the proposal.

B.     Reapplication

A person may not file and the Department of Community Development shall not accept an application which is the same or substantially the same as an application upon which final action has been taken by the City of Claremont within 12 months prior to the date of said application, unless accepted by a motion of the Planning Commission or City Council.

C.    Filing Fee

The filing fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council.

D.    Multiple Requirements of Special Use and Development Permits

For any given development or proposed use where a special use and development permit is required by different sections of this title, only one special use and development permit application need be filed and acted upon. If a development or proposed use requires a special use and development permit in addition to a conditional use permit, only the conditional use permit shall be required. (08-05)

 

16.306.030 PROCEDURE
A.     Application Screening

Upon receipt of an application for a special use and development permit, staff shall review the application and inform the applicant as to the completeness of the submittal and of additional materials required if any.

B.     Notice

When an application for a special use and development permit is deemed complete, the Director shall notify the Planning Commission and owners of property within 300 feet of the proposed use and/or development by letter. The City Council shall also be notified upon application for a trailer to be used for longer than 60 days.

C.    Action by Staff

Staff shall act expeditiously on all applications. Staff shall investigate the facts bearing on each case to determine if the requested action is consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter. Not sooner than ten days after owners of surrounding properties are notified, staff shall either grant, grant with conditions, or deny the special use and development permit, based on the required findings of this chapter. (08-05)

 

16.306.040 FINDINGS AND CONDITIONS
A.     Required Findings

Before approving a special use and development permit, staff shall make the following findings:

1.     That the proposed site is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the proposed use or development.

2.     That the proposed site is adequately served by streets or highways having sufficient width and improvements to accommodate the kind and quantity of traffic that the proposed use or development will or could reasonably generate.

3.     That the proposed use and development is compatible with other land uses on property adjacent to, or in the vicinity of, the proposed site, and will not negatively affect, or be injurious or detrimental to such uses or properties.

4.     That the proposed use and development will not impinge on the privacy of others or have a negative visual effect from the street.

5.     That the proposed use or development will not endanger or otherwise constitute a menace to the public health, safety or general welfare.

B.     Conditions of Approval

Staff, in approving a special use and development permit shall impose such conditions as are deemed necessary to insure that the requested use or development will be accord with the findings required by this section.

C.    Notice of Decision

Notice of staff’s decision shall be sent to the Planning Commission and owners of property within 300 feet of the proposed use and/or development. (08-05)

 

16.306.050 APPEALS
The petitioner or any other person may appeal any decision of staff or any condition imposed by staff pertaining to a special use and development permit pursuant to Chapter 16.321. (08-05)

 

16.306.060 EXPIRATION OF APPROVALS
A.     Initiation of Use

Before any special use and development permit is approved by staff, staff shall establish a time limit within which the proposed use shall be initiated or the development constructed. The time limit shall be a reasonable time based on the size and nature of the proposed project. If no date is specified such special use and development permit shall expire within three months from the date of issuance and become null and void.

B.     Time Limit

At time of approval of a use or development requiring a special use and development permit, staff shall establish a time limit for the operation or duration of the use or development.

C.    Temporary, or Seasonal, Uses or Developments

1.     All temporary structures or facilities permitted in connection with a special use and development permit shall be removed within the time period prescribed in the permit and the property on which whey were located shall be restored to the same condition it was prior to said use or development.

2.     A temporary, or seasonal, use or development shall require a separate permit whenever the use is discontinued or the development is removed for a period of more than 60 consecutive days. A use or development shall be considered temporary or seasonal if it is proposed to be conducted for a period of not more than 365 consecutive days. (08-05)

 

16.306.070 MODIFICATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT
A.     Modifications

Any change which substantially changes the use or development or which may result in an adverse effect on the surrounding environment shall require an amendment to the special use and development permit with the same procedures, notice and fee as required for the original permit. If a modification is of such minor or incidental nature that the intent of this chapter can be met without further review or conditions, staff may determine that notice and review procedure are not necessary.

B.     Compliance With Conditions

Any condition established pursuant to this chapter shall be met before the use or development is initiated.

C.    Failure to Comply

Operation of a use or construction of a development in non-compliance with any conditions of the special use and development permit or after such permit expires shall constitute a violation of the Zoning Ordinance and shall be punishable as provided for in Chapter 16.406 of this title.

D.    Revocation

A special use and development permit may be revoked if staff determines that one or more of the following conditions exist:

1.     One or more of the conditions of the special use and development permit has not been substantially complied with.

2.     The use for which the special use and development permit was issued has ceased or was suspended for at least 12 consecutive months, or 60 consecutive days if temporary or seasonal.

3.     Circumstances have changed to such a degree that one or more of the required findings of this chapter can no longer be made and the use or related development constitutes or is creating a nuisance.

Before revoking a special use and development permit, staff shall give notice of its determinations to the applicant and owner of the property where such use or development is located. Such notice shall inform the applicant, and owner of the property, of their right to appeal said determination in accordance with Chapter 16.321.

E.     Existing Uses and Developments Without Special Use and Development Permits

All existing uses and development which are now listed as requiring a special use and development permit, but which at the time of their initiation did not require a special use and development permit and were in compliance all applicable codes, shall be deemed nonconforming. Such uses shall be permitted to continue subject to the provisions of Chapter 16.400. (08-05)

Chapter 16.309 VARIANCES
16.309.000 INTENT
Where practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships or results inconsistent with the general intent and purpose of this title occur by reason of the strict interpretation of any of its provisions, the Planning Commission, upon its own motion, may, or upon the verified application of any interested persons, shall initiate proceedings for consideration of a variance from the provisions of this title. The Planning Commission in granting said variance may establish such conditions as may be deemed necessary to assure that the intent and purpose of this title and the public health, safety and welfare will be promoted.

A variance shall not be construed as an amendment to this Code or cause the maps which are part of this title to be changed. (08-05)

 

16.309.010 JUSTIFICATION
The applicant shall set forth in detail on forms provided by the Director of Community Development, the reasons for the requested variance and shall show thereon how the conditions set forth in this section are satisfied, and all other information as may be required by the Planning Commission.

The Planning Commission, before granting a variance, must make a finding in writing that in the evidence presented all of the first four, or the last subsection E if it applies, of the following conditions exist in reference to the property being considered.

A.     That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applicable to the property involved, or to the intended use of the property, which do not apply generally to other property in the same zoning district.

B.     That such variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant, which right is possessed by other property owners under like conditions in the same zoning district.

C.    That the granting of the variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property and improvements in the area in which the property is located.

D.    That the granting of such a variance will not be contrary to the objectives of the General Plan.

E.     Appeals

That a variance may be considered where it is alleged by the appellant that there is error in any order, requirement, permit, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the administration or enforcement of this title or any ordinance adopted pursuant to it. In this case, the City may waive the filing fees required. (08-05)

 

16.309.020 PROCEDURE
A.     Applications for variances shall be made to the Planning Commission on forms provided by the Director. The applicant shall set forth complete data required to satisfy all the requirements of subsections A, B, C, D, and/or E of Section 16.309.010.

B.     The Planning Commission shall investigate the facts bearing on each case to provide information necessary to assure action consistent with the intent and purpose of this title.

C.    In cases where the Director considers the conditions set forth on the application not within the scope of the variance procedure, the applicant shall be so informed, whereupon, if the application is filed, it shall be signed by the applicant to the effect that he or she was so informed. Filing of an application does not constitute an indication of approval.

D.    A person may not file and the Director shall not accept an application which is the same as or substantially the same as an application upon which final action has been taken by the City of Claremont within twelve (12) months prior to the date of said application, unless accepted by a motion of the Planning Commission or City Council. (08-05)

 

16.309.030 FILING FEE
Fees shall be established by resolution of the City Council. (08-05)

 

16.309.040 PUBLIC HEARING
A.     Notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the community not less than ten (10) nor more than fifteen (15) days before the date set for the Commission hearing. The notice shall contain all data pertinent to the hearing.

B.     Written notices shall be mailed not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing to owners of property within a radius of three hundred (300) feet of the external boundaries of the property described in the application, using for this purpose the last known name and address of such owners as are shown on the tax roll of the County. Such notice shall contain all pertinent data contained in the application.

C.    Signs, at least eight inches by ten inches, shall be posted on the subject property setting forth substantially the same information included in any mailed notice. There shall be a minimum of two (2) such signs on the subject property. Said signs shall be posted at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing.

D.    Not more than forty (40) days following the filing of the application, the Commission shall hold a public hearing on the variance application. Within forty (40) days after the conclusion of the hearing, the Commission shall at a regular meeting or scheduled special meeting, render a decision in writing. Said decision shall be filed with the Council and a copy thereof shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application. (08-05)

 

16.309.050 APPEAL
The petitioner or any other interested person may appeal any decision of the Planning Commission or any condition imposed by the Planning Commission by filing a written request, on forms provided by the Director, together with an appeal fee established by resolution of the City Council, with the City Clerk. The appeal shall be filed within ten (10) calendar days of the decision of the Planning Commission. The period shall commence on the first day after the action of the Planning Commission and shall terminate at the end of the tenth day, including therein the first day. If such an appeal is made, a copy of the Planning Commission finding shall be transmitted to the Council together with the appeal and the Council shall confirm or deny said appeal. If the Council so desires, it may conduct public hearings subject to the same procedures and notification as required for Planning Commission hearings. (08-05)

 

16.309.060 CONDITIONS
The Commission in granting a variance, may set forth reasonable conditions which shall assure the intent and purpose of this title. (08-05)

 

16.309.070 FAILURE TO COMPLY
A.     Non-compliance with any condition on a variance shall constitute a violation of the Zoning Ordinance.

B.     Each variance granted under the provisions of this Article shall become null and void unless:

1.     The construction authorized by said variance or permit shall have been commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days after the granting of said variance or for such other period as the Commission may have established, and pursued diligently to its completion, or

2.     The occupancy of land or buildings authorized by such variance has taken place within one hundred eighty (180) days, or such other period as the Commission may have established, after the granting of said variance.

C.    Where circumstances beyond the control of the applicant causes delays which do not permit compliance within the time limits established herein, the Commission may grant an extension of time for a period not to exceed an additional ninety (90) days. (08-05)

Chapter 16.312 MINOR EXCEPTION PERMITS
16.312.000 INTENT
It is the intent of this chapter to provide for the granting of minor exceptions to the development standards of this title by staff in those cases where such minor exceptions are warranted by practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships, or results, that without the minor exception, may be inconsistent with the general intent of this title. (08-05)

 

16.312.010 SCOPE
Staff may grant a minor exception permit for only the following minor exceptions to the development standards of this title:

A.     A maximum 20 percent reduction in lot area and dimensions, setbacks, required parking, and outdoor living area requirements, upon the finding that such reduction is consistent with the intent of this chapter.

B.     A maximum 20 percent increase in the height of fences above three feet located within the front or street side setback areas, upon the finding that such increase is consistent with the intent of this chapter.

C.    A maximum 20 percent increase in the percent of a lot permitted to be covered with structures, and the permitted floor area of a main residential structure, upon the finding that such increase is consistent with the intent of this chapter. (08-05)

 

16.312.020 APPLICATION AND FILING FEE
A.     Filing

Application for a minor exception permit shall be made on forms provided by the Department of Community Development together with any applicable fees. The application shall include complete information needed for staff’s determination of the findings required by this chapter and any such plans as may be required for a complete understanding of the proposal.

B.     Reapplication

A person may not file and the Department of Community Development shall not accept an application which is the same or substantially the same as an application upon which final action has been taken by the City of Claremont within 12 months prior to the date of said application, unless accepted by a motion of the Planning Commission or City Council.

C.    Filing Fee

The filing fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council. (08-05)

 

16.312.030 PROCEDURE
A.     Application Screening

Upon receipt of an application for a minor exception permit, staff shall review the application and inform the applicant as to the completeness of the submittal and of additional materials required if any.

B.     Notice

When an application for a minor exception permit is deemed complete, the Director shall notify the Planning Commission and owners of property within 300 feet of the proposed development by letter.

C.    Action by Staff

Staff shall act expeditiously on all applications. Staff shall investigate the facts bearing on each case to determine if the requested action is consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter. Not sooner than ten days after owners of surrounding properties are notified, staff shall either grant, grant with conditions, or deny the minor exception permit, based on the required findings of this chapter. (08-05)

 

16.312.040 REQUIRED FINDINGS AND CONDITIONS
A.     Staff, before granting a minor exception permit, shall make all of the following findings:

1.     There are special circumstances applicable to the property including size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings which cause the strict application of this title to deprive such property owner of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and under identical zoning classification.

2.     That the minor exception authorized shall not constitute a granting of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone in which such property is located.

3.     That the minor exception will not create a negative impact on other nearby properties.

4.     That the minor exception is consistent with the intent of this chapter and is not contrary to the goals and objectives of the General Plan.

B.     Conditions of Approval

Staff, in approving a minor exception permit, shall impose such conditions as are deemed necessary to insure that the proposed development will be in accord with the findings required by this section and the intent of this chapter.

C.    Notice of Decision

Notice of staff’s decision shall be sent to the Planning Commission and owners of property within 300 feet of the proposed development. (08-05)

 

16.312.050 APPEALS
The petitioner or any other person may appeal any decision of staff or any condition imposed by staff pertaining to a minor exception permit pursuant to Chapter 16.321. (08-05)

 

16.312.060 EXPIRATION OF PERMITS
Before any minor exception is approved by staff, staff shall establish a time limit within which construction work on the proposed development shall commence. If no date is specified, such minor exception permit shall expire 12 months from the date of issuance and become null and void. Said time may be subject to extension for good cause when the applicant presents proof of an unusual hardship not of his or her own making. Extensions may be approved with new or modified conditions upon a finding that the circumstances under which the permit was originally approved have changed. (08-05)

 

16.312.070 ENFORCEMENT
A.     Compliance With Conditions

Any condition established pursuant to this chapter shall be met before construction of the proposed development is commenced.

B.     Failure to Comply

Noncompliance with any conditions of the minor exception permit shall constitute a violation of the Zoning Ordinance and shall be punishable as provided for in Chapter 16.406 of this title. (08-05)

Chapter 16.315 ZONE CHANGES AND CODE AMENDMENTS
16.315.000 INTENT
It is the intent of this chapter to provide for changes of the zoning designation on properties where such change is in conformity with the General Plan and where such zone change is warranted by considerations of access, surrounding development, and timing of development. It is also the intent of this chapter to provide for amendments to this title, as the City may deem necessary or desirable. (08-05)

 

16.315.010 ADOPTION PROCEDURE
An amendment to any part of this title pertaining to the development or a change of zone of any property within the City shall be adopted pursuant to this chapter. All other amendments to this title may be adopted as other ordinances are adopted. (08-05)

 

16.315.020 CODE AMENDMENT
The City may initiate an amendment to this title, or any person may request an amendment to this title by filing an application on forms provided by the Department of Community Development together with applicable fees. (12-01)

 

16.315.030 ZONE CHANGE
The City may initiate a change of zone for any land within the City, and a property owner or person having an interest in land may request a change of zone for such land by filing an application on forms provided by the Department of Community Development together with applicable fees. The application for a zone change shall be signed by at least one property owner within the area for which the zone change is proposed. (12-01)

 

16.315.040 APPLICATION
Applications for a zone change or Code amendment shall be submitted on forms provided by the Director of Community Development together with the applicable filing fee. Filing fees shall be as established by resolution of the City Council. An application for a Code amendment or zone change shall include a justification statement and any other additional information determined necessary by the Director of Community Development for a complete understanding of the specific request. Upon receipt of an application, staff shall review the application and inform the applicant as to the completeness of the submittal and of additional materials required, if any. (12-01)

 

16.315.050 STAFF REVIEW OF PROPOSAL
When an application has been determined complete, or when a zone change or Code amendment is initiated by the City, staff shall investigate the facts of the request, review the request pursuant to the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), and set the matter for a public hearing by the Planning Commission. (12-01)

 

16.315.060 PUBLIC HEARING BY PLANNING COMMISSION
The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed Code amendment or change of zone. After the hearing, the Planning Commission shall render a written recommendation on the proposal to the City Council. Such recommendation shall include the reasons for the recommendations, and the relationship of the proposal to the City’s General Plan and any applicable specific plans. A positive recommendation shall require the affirmative vote of at least five (5) members of the Commission when six (6) or more are present and eligible to vote on the proposal. In the event that less than six members are present or eligible to vote on the proposal, four (4) affirmative votes are required for a positive recommendation. Any vote by the Commission, which is less than the required number set forth in this section, shall be considered a negative recommendation of the Planning Commission. If the recommendation is negative, then no further action on the matter need be taken, except such negative recommendation shall be deemed a final decision, which may be appealed pursuant to Chapter 16.321. (12-01)

 

16.315.070 PUBLIC HEARING BY CITY COUNCIL
If the Planning Commission recommendation is positive, or if an appeal is filed of the Planning Commission’s negative recommendation, the City Council shall hold a public hearing. (12-01)

 

16.315.080 NOTIFICATION
Notice of the public hearings by the Planning Commission and the City Council on a Code amendment or a zone change shall be given pursuant to Government Code Sections 65854 and 65856. (12-01)

 

16.315.090 CITY COUNCIL ACTION
A.     In the event that the recommendation from the Planning Commission has received the affirmative votes required by Section 16.315.080, the City Council may approve the proposed amendment or ordinance by a majority vote of the Council.

B.     The Council shall not make any change or addition to the proposed amendment or ordinance which has not been previously considered by the Planning Commission during its hearing until the proposed change or addition has been referred to the Planning Commission for a report and a copy of the report has been filed with the Council. Failure of the Planning Commission to report within forty (40) days after the reference, or such longer period as may be designated by the Council, shall be deemed to be approval of the proposed change or addition. It shall not be necessary for the Planning Commission to hold a public hearing on such proposed change or addition.

C.    In the event the Council desires to effect any change contrary to the recommendation of the Planning Commission, then any ordinance affecting such change shall not be adopted except by at least four (4) affirmative votes of the Council except, after the referral set forth in subsection D of this section, a majority vote of the Council will be sufficient.

D.    In the event that the majority of the Council does not agree with the recommendation of the Planning Commission, and in the further event that the Council cannot obtain the vote of four (4) members of the Council for a change to the recommendation, then the proposed change shall be referred to a committee composed of two (2) members of the Planning Commission and two (2) members of the Council to further study the matter. This committee shall make a written report to the City Council no later than 60 days from the date of referral.

After receipt of this report, the City Council may approve the proposed amendment or ordinance by a majority vote of the Council. (08-05)

Chapter 16.318 GENERAL PLAN AMENDMENTS
16.318.000 ADOPTION PROCEDURE
The adoption of, or amendments to, elements of the General Plan and specific plans shall be adopted pursuant to this chapter. Whenever in this chapter the term Land Use Element of the General Plan is used, it shall also apply to other elements of the General Plan and whenever the term General Plan is used, it shall also apply to specific plans. (08-05)

 

16.318.010 INITIATION
An amendment to the General Plan relating to land use may be initiated by the City or by any person owning or having an interest in land which would be affected by a change. When initiated by any such person, the person shall file a petition with the City and pay a filing fee as required in Section 16.318.070 of this chapter. (08-05)

 

16.318.020 CONTENTS OF PETITION
Any petition filed by a person owning or having an interest in land shall contain the following information:

A.     The name and address of the petitioner and all persons having an interest in the land;

B.     The legal description of the property owned by the petitioner and a street designation thereof;

C.    The change of land use classification requested; and

D.    Such other information as the Director of Community Development may require. (08-05)

 

16.318.030 PUBLIC HEARING BY PLANNING COMMISSION
The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing before approving any amendment to the Land Use Element of the General Plan. Notice of time and place of the hearing shall be given at least ten (10) days before the hearing by publishing a notice thereof. The Planning Commission’s report and recommendation shall be completed not later than ninety (90) days after the referral of the proposed change. (08-05)

 

16.318.040 PLANNING COMMISSION ACTION
After the public hearing on the proposed amendment to the Land Use Element of the General Plan, the Planning Commission shall adopt by resolution a recommendation relating to the proposed amendment. An affirmative recommendation shall require the affirmative vote of at least five (5) members of the Commission when six (6) or more members are present and eligible to vote on the proposal. In the event that less than six (6) members are present or eligible to vote on the proposed amendment, four (4) affirmative votes shall be required to recommend a change. Any vote by the Commission which is less than the required number set forth in this section shall be considered a negative recommendation of the Planning Commission. (08-05)

 

16.318.050 PUBLIC HEARING BY COUNCIL
Before acting upon any proposed amendment to the Land Use Element of the General Plan, the City Council shall hold a public hearing thereon. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given in the time and manner provided for in giving of notice of the hearing by the Planning Commission in Section 16.318.030. (08-05)

 

16.318.060 CITY COUNCIL ACTION
A.     In the event that the recommendation from the Planning Commission has received the affirmative votes required by Section 16.318.040, the City Council may approve the proposed amendment by a majority vote of the Council.

B.     The Council shall not make any change or addition to the proposed amendment which has not been previously considered by the Planning Commission during its hearings until the proposed change or addition has been referred to the Planning Commission for a report and a copy of the report has been filed with the Council. Failure of the Planning Commission to report within forty (40) days after the reference, or such longer period as may be designated by the Council, shall be deemed to be approval of the proposed change or addition. It shall not be necessary for the Planning Commission to hold a public hearing on such proposed change or addition.

C.    In the event the Council desires to effect any change contrary to the recommendation of the Planning Commission, then any resolution affecting such change shall be adopted only by at least four (4) affirmative votes of the Council except, after the referral set forth in subsection D of this section, a majority vote of the Council will be sufficient.

D.    In the event that the majority of the Council does not agree with the recommendation of the Planning Commission, and in the further event that the Council cannot obtain the vote of four (4) members of the Council for a change to the recommendation, then the proposed change shall be referred to a committee composed of two (2) members of the Planning Commission and two (2) members of the Council to further study the matter. This committee shall make a written report to the Council no later than sixty (60) days from the date of referral. (08-05)

 

16.318.070 FILING FEE FOR GENERAL PLAN AMENDMENT
Fees shall be established by resolution of the City Council. (08-05)

Chapter 16.321 APPEALS AND COUNCIL REVIEW
16.321.000 INTENT
It is the intent of this chapter to provide recourse in the event that any person is aggrieved by any decision, condition of approval or determination made by a commission or a member of City staff, in the administration and enforcement of this title, and when requested by a councilperson, to provide a review of any action taken by a commission or a member of the City staff, which except for said review would constitute a final decision of the matter. (08-05)

 

16.321.010 APPEAL OF STAFF DECISION
A.     Applicability

Any person aggrieved by any determination, interpretation, decision, or similar action taken by the Director or other member of City staff, pursuant to the procedures of this title, may appeal such action. All appeals shall be heard by the Planning Commission, except an appeal of a staff action for a sign or architectural review shall be heard by the Architectural Commission.

B.     Time Limit

The appeal shall be filed no later than 5:00 p.m. on the tenth day following the date of the action from which the appeal is made, or on the first business day thereafter.

C.    Application and Fee

An appeal shall be filed with the Community Development Department on forms provided by the Director together with an appeal fee established by resolution of the City Council. Appeals shall set forth alleged inconsistency or non-conformity with procedures or criteria set forth in or pursuant to this title.

D.    Effect

Any action appealed to the Planning Commission shall be suspended until the Commission has taken action on the appeal.

E.     Hearing

1.     When a timely appeal of a staff decision is filed, the Director shall forward the appeal to the appropriate review body for a hearing at the next available meeting of the reviewing commission, considering notice requirements, unless a later date is requested by the project proponent. The hearing may be continued from time to time by vote of the Commission. The hearing need not be a public hearing.

a.     Appeals on Special Use and Development Permits and Minor Exception Permits

When an appeal of a staff decision on a special use and development permit or a minor exception permit is filed, the Director shall forward the appeal to the Planning Commission.

b.     Appeals on Sign and Architectural Reviews

When an appeal of a staff decision on a sign or architectural review is filed, the Director shall forward such appeal to the Architectural Commission.

2.     Staff shall submit to a commission that is considering an appeal, the findings that led to the staff decision, including reasons for any disapproval.

F.     Notice

Notice of an appeal hearing shall conform to the manner in which the original notice for the matter was given. In addition, notice shall be given to anyone who requested to be notified regarding the matter.

G.    Decision

The Commission may affirm or reverse, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision, conditions of approval, or determination of staff by a majority vote of the Commission members present and qualified to vote at the hearing. Such action may be appealed to council pursuant to the following procedures. (08-05)

 

16.321.020 APPEAL OF COMMISSION DECISIONS
A.     Applicability

Any person aggrieved by any determination, interpretation, decision, or similar action taken by a commission pursuant to the procedures of this title, may file for an appeal of such action. The procedure for an appeal of a commission decision shall be as set forth herein, except an appeal of a Planning Commission’s decision on a tentative parcel map shall be in accordance with the appeal procedures of Chapter 17.050 of this title and the Subdivision Map Act.

B.     Time Limit

The appeal shall be filed no later than 5:00 p.m. on the tenth day following the date of the action for which the appeal is made, or on the first business day thereafter.

C.    Application and Fee

An appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk on forms provided by the Director together with an appeal fee established by resolution of the City Council. Appeals shall set forth alleged inconsistency or nonconformity with procedures or criteria set forth in or pursuant to this title.

D.    Effect

Any action appealed to the Council shall be suspended until the Council has taken action on the appeal.

E.     Hearing

When a timely appeal is filed, the appeal shall be forwarded to the City Council for a hearing at their next available meeting, considering notice requirements, or a later date if the applicant agrees. The Council shall receive from the Commission that originally considered the matter, all deliberations from the Commission pertaining to the matter, including staff reports, minutes, public comments, and the findings to support the Commission’s decision. The hearing may be continued from time to time by vote of the City Council.

F.     Notice

Notice of an appeal hearing shall conform to the manner in which the original notice for the matter was given. In addition, notice shall be given to anyone who spoke at the Commission hearing or any person who requested to be notified regarding the matter.

G.    Decision

The Council may affirm or reverse, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision, conditions of approval, or determination made by the Commission by a majority vote of the Council members present and qualified to vote at the hearing. Such decision by the Council shall be final.

However, if the Council proposes changes or additions to code amendments, zone changes and general plan amendments which the Planning Commission has not previously considered, or desires to effect a change contrary to the recommendation of the Planning Commission on code amendments, zone changes, and general plan amendments, such changes or additions shall be referred to the Planning Commission and adopted pursuant to procedures set forth in Chapters 16.315 and 16.318. The Council may also choose to refer other matters back to the appropriate commission for further consideration and decision if significant new evidence is presented in conjunction with the appeal, which may include substantial changes to the original proposal. (08-05)

 

16.321.030 COUNCIL REVIEW
A.     Applicability

Whenever a decision or determination of a commission or member of the staff would otherwise constitute the final action for a matter if no timely appeal is filed, said decision shall not become final if a member of the City Council requests a review of said decision as herein provided. If a member of the City Council requests a review of an action by the Director or other member of City staff on which an appeal has been filed, the City Council review shall override the appeal and the appeal shall not be forwarded to a commission unless the City Council refers the matter to the appropriate commission for consideration and a decision.

B.     Time Limit

The Council member’s request for review shall be made within 15 calendar days of the date of the action for which the review is requested. A Council member shall make the request orally or in writing to the City Clerk, who shall set the matter for hearing.

C.    Effect

Filing of a request for a review by a member of the Council shall suspend the effective date of any commission or staff decision until such decision has been reviewed by the Council.

D.    Hearing

1.     If requested by a member of the Council, the matter shall be set for a hearing to be held at the next available Council meeting after the review request has been filed, considering notice requirements, unless a longer period is requested by the applicant. The hearing may be continued from time to time by vote of the City Council.

2.     The hearing shall be of the same type as required for the original decision and need not be a public hearing unless such was required for the original decision.

3.     The Council shall receive from the original review body all findings and specific facts that led to the decision including detailed reasons for any disapproval.

E.     Notice

Notice of a review hearing shall conform to the manner in which the original notice for the matter was given. In addition, notice shall be given to those who spoke at the commission hearing, if a review of a commission decision, or to any person who requested to be notified regarding the matter.

F.     Decision

The Council may affirm or reverse, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision, conditions of approval or determination of the commission or staff by a majority vote of the Council members present and qualified to vote at the hearing. Such action shall be final. (08-05)

Chapter 16.324 COMMUNITY HOUSING CONVERSIONS
16.324.000 INTENT
The intent of this chapter is to regulate the conversion of existing rental housing into community housing projects, condominiums, community apartments or stock cooperatives in order to:

A.     Maintain an adequate supply of rental housing units in the City and to reduce the impacts of conversions on residents in rental housing who may be displaced by providing procedures for notification of tenants.

B.     To promote the safety of conversion projects by requiring the correction of building code violations and the upgrading of existing rental housing units to current building and zoning code standards at time of conversions.

C.    To provide for the protection of potential purchasers of converted units. (08-05)

 

16.324.010 PROCEDURE
The conversion of existing rental housing to a community housing project shall require a conditional use permit approved pursuant to Chapter 16.303, and a final subdivision map approved pursuant to Title 17 of this Code (the City’s Subdivision Ordinance).

A tentative map application shall be submitted concurrently with the conditional use permit application. The subdivider shall waive the time limit for review of the tentative map to permit concurrent review of the tentative map and conditional use permit. (08-05)

 

16.324.020 COMMISSION REVIEW
A.     An application for the conversion of existing rental housing to a community housing project shall not be granted unless the conversion is consistent with the spirit and intent of the adopted Housing Element of the Claremont General Plan. The Planning Commission may deny a conversion if the City vacancy rate for rental apartment units is below three percent. The vacancy rate shall be determined at least twice a year by the Department of Community Development.

B.     The Planning Commission may allow conversion where special circumstances exist under which the quality of living may be substantially improved in such areas by those conditions specified under the conditional use permit. In making its decision, the Planning Commission shall consider, but not be limited to, the following criteria: compatibility of the proposed conversion with existing or proposed developments in the general neighborhood, the safety, quality and compatibility of the design of buildings, parking areas, landscaping, and other site features which may include functional aspects of the site development, such as automobile and pedestrian circulation.

C.    The Planning Commission may reduce or increase the amount of parking otherwise required herein upon a finding that such a reduction or increase is necessary, reasonable, and would not defeat the purposes of this requirement. If no enclosed parking is provided, lockable storage spaces shall be required. (08-05)

 

16.324.030 REQUIREMENTS
A.     Prior to conversion of an apartment or townhouse project to a community housing project, such project shall be in compliance with the latest adopted Uniform Housing Code, and any equipment or facilities determined by the Building Official to be deteriorated must be corrected.

Further, all community housing projects must have wall and floor-ceiling assemblies which conform to the sound insulation performance criteria promulgated in Title 24, State Building Code, Chapter 2-35, or its successor.

B.     All proposals for community housing conversions shall be in compliance with the current development standards of the district in which the project is located. (14-04; 08-05)

 

16.324.040 TENANT NOTIFICATION
When the conversion of rental housing to a community housing project is proposed, all tenants shall be notified, individually, in writing, of the intention to convert, and of the hearing, at least ten days prior to public hearings. This requirement is in addition to the notice requirements of the Subdivision Map Act. (08-05)

 

16.324.050 COMMON OWNERSHIP AND MAINTENANCE OF OPEN SPACE AREAS AND SHARED FACILITIES
All common open space and shared facilities shall remain in common ownership of all property owners in the development. Common ownership and maintenance for such areas and facilities shall be provided for by deed restrictions, recorded covenants, and other documents establishing homeowners’ associations and proposed method of maintenance. Drafts of all such documents shall be submitted with the conditional use permit application and shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission.

Prior to approval of a final map, all deed restrictions, covenants, and other legal agreements and documents shall be approved by the City Attorney as to legal form and effect, and by the Director as being essentially the same as and as being workable and suitable within the intent of the Planning Commission review approval of the rough drafts of such documents.

The City shall enter into an agreement with the declarant of the conditions, covenants, and restrictions that provides for the enforcement of the provisions of the conditions, covenants, and restrictions by the City. The existence of the enforcement agreement shall be referred to in a separate provision in the recorded conditions, covenants, and restrictions. (08-05)

 

16.324.060 COMPLIANCE WITH CONDITIONS
In the event of any noncompliance with any requirements of this chapter, the Subdivision Map Act, conditions made a part of the conditional use permit, or tentative or final subdivision map, approval for the conditional use permit for conversion may be revoked, the final map may be denied, or certificates of occupancy may be withheld. (08-05)

 

16.324.070 DENSITY BONUS
A.     An applicant requesting approval for the conversion of existing rental housing to a community housing project may submit an application concurrently for a density bonus or additional incentive(s) of equivalent financial value, when the applicant agrees to provide at least 33 percent of the total units of a proposed community housing project to persons and families of low or moderate income as defined in Health and Safety Code 50093, or 15 percent of the total units of the proposed community housing project to lower income households as defined in Health and Safety Code 50079.5. For purposes of this section, “density bonus” means an increase in units of 25 percent over the number of apartments within the existing structure or structures proposed for conversion. For purposes of this section, “other incentives of equivalent financial value” means the reduction or waiver of site development standards or zoning code requirements that would otherwise apply to the conversion of rental housing to a community housing project.

B.     The application for a density bonus or other incentives of equivalent financial value requested pursuant to this section, shall be filed and reviewed pursuant to the application process for a density bonus or additional incentives set forth in Section 16.033.100 of Chapter 16.033.

C.    An applicant shall be ineligible for a density bonus or other incentives under this section if the conversion of rental housing to a community housing project constitutes a qualified housing development project eligible for a density bonus or additional incentive(s) under Chapter 16.033. (13-04)

Chapter 16.327 HOME OCCUPATION PERMITS
16.327.000 INTENT
It is the intent of this chapter to provide for certain limited types of commercial or professional activities in conjunction with the use of a single-family and multifamily dwelling unit, provided that such activities are of a limited nature which will have no adverse effect on the neighborhood. (08-05)

 

16.327.010 HOME OCCUPATION PERMIT
Prior to the initiation of any home occupation, a home occupation permit shall be obtained from the Director and must be renewed on an annual basis.

The Director may grant a home occupation permit upon the finding that all of the criteria in Section 16.327.020 are and can continue to be met, and may include such conditions as necessary to assure compliance with the criteria in Section 16.327.020. The Director’s decision may be appealed to the Planning Commission. Such appeal must be submitted in writing with reference made to the criteria in Section 16.327.020 which are questioned. (08-05)

 

16.327.020 CRITERIA
All home occupations and limited commercial uses shall meet the following criteria:

A.     The limited business or home occupation use is merely incidental to the primary use of such dwelling unit for residential purposes.

B.     The person conducting the business or home occupation actually resides within the dwelling where located.

C.    Not more than one room or an area not to exceed 300 square feet shall be used for a permitted activity.

D.    There shall be no employment of persons outside the resident family except for one nurse or receptionist or one draftsman or stenographer or other clerical aide.

E.     All permitted home occupation activities shall be conducted in an fully enclosed building, except that occasional or seasonal swimming instruction may occur in outdoor residential swimming pools.

F.     No portion of any garage or carport shall be used for limited business or home occupational purposes, except work or storage areas in addition to required parking spaces. Any reduction in required parking spaces shall be prohibited.

G.    There shall be no sales of goods or merchandise on the premises, except by telephone or catalog and delivered off premises.

H.    The permitted use shall not be injurious to the use of the neighborhood property for residential purposes by reason of noise, odor, radio, or other electrical interference, or excessive parking or traffic problems. Upon a finding by the Planning Commission that any home occupation by virtue of its location, extent, or other specific findings, has become a detrimental factor sufficient to cause blight or other detrimental impact upon a neighborhood, this use shall be abated as provided for in Chapter 16.406 of this title.

I.      No display or advertising shall be allowed upon said premises except a nameplate, not over one square foot in area, and stating only the name of the proprietor and his or her profession or calling.

J.     The appearance of the structure shall not be so altered, nor shall the operation of any occupation within the structure be such that the structure may be reasonably recognized as serving a nonresidential use (either by color, materials, or construction, lighting, signs, sounds or noises, vibrations, etc.).

K.     There shall be no use of utilities or community facilities beyond that normal to the use of the property for residential purposes.

L.     All equipment, tools and materials used in a home occupation shall be stored or parked in an enclosed building. No exterior storage shall be permitted without approval of the Director of Community Development.

M.    Applicants requesting home occupations for catering, food handling, minor baking and cooking for public consumption shall provide written evidence of being licensed and held in good standing by state or county agencies regulating such activities/professions prior to the issuance of the home occupation. All such activities shall also comply with all other criteria applicable to home occupations. (08-05)

 

16.327.030 HOME OCCUPATION PERMIT FEES
Fees shall be established by resolution of the City Council. (08-05)

 

16.327.040 PROHIBITED HOME OCCUPATIONS
The following uses are prohibited as home occupations as they are not compatible with a residential neighborhood because of their potential to create a nuisance or hazardous condition:

A.     Kennel.

B.     Repair on the premises of major appliances such as machine washers, dryers, stoves, dishwashers, and motorized garden tools such as lawnmowers, chainsaws and leaf blowers, and similar appliances and equipment.

C.    Pest control.

D.    Vehicle related services on the premises such as, but not limited to, automobile repair, maintenance, dismantling, embellishment, cleaning, installation, manufacturing, or towing vehicles.

E.     Welding.

F.     Providing personal services such as beauty, hair, skin care, and nail services on the premises.

G.    Any use which requires a hazardous materials permit from the Fire Department. (08-05)

Chapter 16.330 SPECIAL OUTDOOR USE PERMITS
16.330.000 INTENT
The special outdoor use permit procedure is intended to provide for incidental outdoor uses which may be desirable in the City’s commercial districts but which could negatively affect the character and visual appearance of the districts if not properly designed, located or regulated. (08-05)

 

16.330.010 PERMITTED USES WITH A SPECIAL OUTDOOR USE PERMIT
Uses listed as permitted uses with a special outdoor use permit in Chapter 16.090, Incidental Outdoor Uses, may be permitted in all commercial districts subject to the provisions of this chapter. (08-05)

 

16.330.020 ADMINISTRATION
A.     Compliance Required

No person shall cause or permit any use contrary to or in violation of any provision of this chapter.

B.     Permit Applications

Applications for a special outdoor use permit shall be made on forms provided by the Department of Community Development. The forms shall be submitted together with any applicable fees and shall be accompanied by plans, exhibits and other material as required by the Director of Community Development.

C.    Fees Required

Special outdoor use permit and related fees shall be established by resolution of the City Council.

D.    Application Screening

Upon receipt of an application for a special outdoor use permit, staff shall review the application and inform the applicant as to the completeness of the application submittal and of additional materials required, if any.

E.     Notice Requirements

When an application for a special outdoor use permit is deemed complete, the subject property shall be posted with a notice of a request for permit. The property shall be posted for a minimum of 10 calendar days prior to any decision on the application. A notice of a request for a permit shall also be given to the City Council and the Planning Commission 10 days prior to any decision on the application.

F.     Review and Decision

All applications are subject to approval by staff. Staff shall act expeditiously on all applications. In reviewing an application, staff shall consider the required findings of this chapter, and shall accordingly approve, approve subject to conditions, or deny the application. A copy of all conditions of approval shall be mailed to the applicant.

G.    Periods of Time When Permit Is Void

The special outdoor use permit is an interruptible and terminable permit granted by the City. Staff may void a permit on certain dates to prevent conflicts with community events, filming, street or sidewalk repairs, utility repairs, street closures, other special events, or an excessive amount of outdoor uses in very close proximity to each other at the same time. To the extent possible, the City shall provide prior written notice to the permit holder of any time period during which the permit will be void.

H.    Referrals to Planning Commission

An application may be referred to the Planning Commission for determination when staff finds it necessary to ensure consistency with the intent of this chapter and Chapter 16.090. (08-05)

 

16.330.030 REQUIRED FINDINGS
Staff or the Planning Commission, before granting a special outdoor use permit, shall make the following findings:

A.     The proposed use is conducted by a business located in the building which fronts on the public right-of-way or property where the use is to be located, and the use is in compliance with this title and other City codes, and the use meets the intent of Chapter 16.090, Incidental Outdoor Uses; and

B.     The proposed use will not adversely affect pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or the public health, safety, or general welfare; and

C.    The proposed use will not have an adverse effect on adjacent property or the permitted use thereof; and

D.    The proposed use is compatible with the quality and character of surrounding development and will visually enhance the appearance of the community; and

E.     The proposed use will not block views, including the view of any display window, or conflict with the City streetscape in the vicinity. (08-05)

 

16.330.040 CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL
Conditions of approval may be imposed on any special outdoor use permit to ensure that the proposed use will be in accord with the required standards and findings of this chapter, and to ensure the protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare of the community. The permit shall not become effective until all applicable conditions of approval for the permit have been met. All conditions of approval shall be observed throughout the duration of the permit. (08-05)

 

16.330.050 APPEAL OR CALL-UP REVIEW OF ACTION
A.     Planning Commission Review

Any member of the Planning Commission may call up any staff decision regarding a special outdoor use permit for Commission review, provided such a request is made within 10 calendar days after the date of the decision. A Planning Commissioner shall make the request orally at a scheduled meeting, or in writing to the Director of Community Development.

A request for review by a Planning Commissioner shall suspend the effective date of the subject decision until it has been reviewed by the Commission. Such review shall take place no later than the next available Planning Commission meeting. Prior notice of the time and place of the review shall be given to the applicant. The Commission may confirm, modify, or reverse the subject staff decision.

B.     Appeals and City Council Review

In addition to the preceding, an applicant or any other person may appeal, or the City Council may choose to review, any staff or Planning Commission decision regarding a special outdoor use permit pursuant to the procedures in Chapter 16.321, Appeals and Council Review. (08-05)

 

16.330.060 EXPIRATION OF PERMIT
A.     Permit Approval Time Frame

All permits granted under the provisions of this chapter shall be valid for one year and may be renewed annually thereafter.

B.     Renewal Process

Prior to the expiration of a permit, staff shall determine if the outdoor use for which the permit was granted has been in substantial compliance with all applicable standards and conditions of approval during the year. If determined to have been in substantial compliance, the permit shall be renewed upon payment of the renewal fee. If the use is found not to have been in substantial compliance, the permit shall not be renewed and the use shall require approval of a new permit and payment of all applicable fees.

C.    Discontinued Uses

Permits for uses discontinued for a period for 180 days or more shall not be renewed. (08-05)

 

16.330.070 PERMIT TRANSFERABLE
A special outdoor use permit is transferable to new owners of the business for which the permit was granted. (08-05)

 

16.330.080 MODIFICATION AND ENFORCEMENT
A.     Modification of Approved Plans or Use

The permit shall be granted solely for the purpose specified in the permit. Any changes or revisions to the approved use shall be subject to approval by staff.

B.     Revocability of Permit

A special outdoor use permit may be revoked by the Director of Community Development before it expires after three written notices of violation of any applicable standard of this title or condition of approval, or if the use becomes nonconforming. Notice of such revocation shall be in writing and shall specify the cause for revocation. The Director’s decision may be appealed to the Planning Commission pursuant to Chapter 16.321.

C.    Enforcement Responsibility

It shall be the duty and authority of the Director, the Director’s designees, and the code enforcement officers of the Community Development Department to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (08-05)

Chapter 16.333 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS
16.333.000 INTENT
The purpose of this chapter is to facilitate the increased production of accessory dwelling units, as well as junior accessory dwelling units, and to provide reasonable regulations for their development on lots developed or proposed to be developed with a residential dwelling(s). Formerly referred to as “accessory second units” in the municipal code, such accessory dwelling units (ADUs) can contribute needed housing to the community’s housing stock and promote housing opportunities for persons from a range of socioeconomic backgrounds who wish to reside in the City of Claremont. In addition, the regulations in this ordinance are intended to promote the goals and policies of the City’s General Plan and comply with requirements codified in the State Planning and Zoning Law related to accessory dwelling units in residential areas, including Government Code Sections 65852.2 and 65852.22. (20-02; 19-07)

 

16.333.010 DEFINITIONS
“Accessory dwelling unit” shall be defined in accordance with Government Code Section 65852.2(j)(1).

“Architecturally and historically significant district,” is defined, for the purposes of this chapter, as the areas having a zoning designation of Historic Claremont (HC) as established in Chapter 16.004 or Arbol Verde Single-Family Residential (AV1 & AV2) as established in Chapter 16.019, and shall also include individual properties listed on the California Register of Historic Resources and/or the National Register of Historic Places.

“Car share vehicle area” is defined as a designated pick-up and drop-off area for two or more motor vehicles that are operated as part of a regional fleet by a public or private car sharing company or organization that provides hourly or daily car-sharing services.

“Height” shall be, for the purposes of this chapter, the vertical distance to the highest point of the structure from the average elevation of the ground under the building.

“Junior accessory dwelling unit” shall be defined in accordance with Government Code Section 65852.22(h)(1).

“Living Area” is defined, for the purposes of this chapter, in accordance with Government Code Section 65852.2(j)(4).

“Plate height” is defined as the vertical distance between the finished floor level and where the wall intersects with the roof or the floor joists of the story above.

“Public transit” is defined, for the purposes of this chapter, in accordance with Government Code Section 65852.2(j)(10).

References to the “Government Code” shall mean the California Government Code. Citations to specific sections of the Government Code shall mean the section, as amended from time to time or replaced by a successor statute. (20-02; 19-07)

 

16.333.020 EFFECT OF CONFORMING ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT
An accessory dwelling unit and junior accessory dwelling unit that conforms to this chapter shall:

A.     Be deemed an accessory use or an accessory building and not be considered to exceed the allowable density for the lot upon which it is located;

B.     Be deemed a residential use that is consistent with the General Plan and the zoning designations for the lot;

C.    Not be considered in the application of any ordinance, policy, or program to limit residential growth; and

D.    Not be considered a new residential use for the purposes of calculating connection fees or capacity charges for utilities, including water and sewer service. (20-02; 19-07)

 

16.333.030 APPLICABILITY
A.     New Accessory Dwelling Units and Junior Accessory Dwelling Units

Any construction, establishment, alteration, enlargement, or modification of an accessory dwelling unit or junior accessory dwelling unit shall comply with the requirements of this chapter, other development standards in this title applicable to the district in which the lot is located, and the City’s Building and Construction Codes as set forth in Title 15.

B.     Legal Nonconforming Accessory Dwelling Units

All accessory dwelling units and junior accessory dwelling units which were legal at the time of their creation but which do not conform to this chapter are deemed nonconforming and shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 16.400 (Nonconformities).

C.    Existing Illegal Accessory Dwelling Units

Subject to Government Code Section 65852.2(e)(2) and (n), the provisions of this chapter shall in no way validate any existing illegal accessory dwelling unit or junior accessory dwelling unit. An application may be made pursuant to this chapter to convert an illegal accessory dwelling unit to a legal conforming accessory dwelling unit, and shall be subject to the same standards and requirements as for a newly proposed accessory dwelling unit.

D.    Designation of Existing Primary Dwelling Unit to Accessory Dwelling Unit

An existing residential structure may be designated as an accessory dwelling unit at such time as a new primary dwelling unit is constructed, provided the existing structure conforms to all current development standards of this chapter and approval of an accessory dwelling unit permit is obtained. (20-02; 19-07)

 

16.333.040 PERMITTED SITES
Subject to Government Code Section 65852.2(e), one accessory dwelling unit or one junior accessory dwelling unit that meets the requirements of this chapter may be located on a lot in any area zoned to allow single-family or multifamily dwelling residential use that contains a proposed or existing dwelling unit. (20-02; 19-07)

 

16.333.050 PERMIT PROCEDURES
A.     Permits

With the exception of legal nonconforming accessory dwelling units described in Section 16.333.030.B above, all accessory dwelling units and all junior accessory dwelling units require an accessory dwelling unit permit. The applicant shall also obtain a building permit as required by the City’s Building and Construction Codes set forth in Title 15 and record a deed restriction as provided in Section 16.333.070.

B.     Application Processing

An application for an accessory dwelling unit or a junior accessory dwelling unit permit shall be made on forms provided by the Department of Community Development and be submitted with any applicable fees. The application shall include all information needed to determine compliance with this chapter. The application fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council.

C.    Review

1.     The Community Development Director or designee will review and approve complete applications for accessory dwelling unit permits for compliance with the requirements of this chapter. The accessory dwelling unit permit application shall be considered ministerially without any discretionary review or a public hearing.

2.     The Community Development Director or designee shall approve an application within 60 days after receiving a complete application if the proposed accessory dwelling unit complies with the requirements of this chapter. Prior to issuance of any building permits relating to the accessory dwelling unit, the applicant shall record the deed restriction described in Section 16.333.070.

3.     While it is not necessary for the City to provide notice that it has received an application for an accessory dwelling unit permit to owners of surrounding properties, the City shall provide notice that it has approved an accessory dwelling unit permit to the applicant and, as a courtesy, to the owners of adjacent properties within five days of the approval.

4.     Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and subject to Government Code Section 65852.2(f), the construction of an accessory dwelling unit shall be subject to any applicable fees adopted pursuant to the requirements of Government Code, Title 7, Division 1, Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 66000) and Chapter 7 (commencing with Section 66012).

5.     Revocation

a.     Subject to Government Code Section 65852.2(n), the Building Official or his or her designee may revoke an accessory dwelling unit permit if the accessory dwelling unit violates one or more requirements of this chapter.

The Building Official or designee shall provide written notice of the decision to revoke the accessory dwelling unit permit to the property owner by certified mail with return receipt requested.

b.     Within 21 days of the deposit of the notice of the decision to revoke the accessory dwelling unit permit in the United States mail, the property owner and/or occupant may request a hearing before the Community Development Director. If the City receives a timely request for a hearing in accordance with this Section 16.333.050.C.5.b, the decision to revoke shall be stayed until the hearing is concluded and the Director has made his or her determination. If the City does not receive a request for a hearing within 21 days, the revocation of the accessory dwelling unit permit shall be final.

c.     If, after a hearing, the Director of Community Development affirms the revocation of the accessory dwelling unit permit, the property owner and/or occupant may appeal the Director’s decision to the Planning Commission in accordance with Chapter 16.321. If the City receives a timely request for a hearing in accordance with Chapter 16.321, the decision to revoke shall be stayed until the hearing is concluded and the Planning Commission has made its determination.

d.     If, after a hearing, the Planning Commission affirms the revocation of the accessory dwelling unit permit, the property owner and/or occupant may appeal the Planning Commission’s decision to the City Council in accordance with Chapter 16.321. If the City receives a timely request for a hearing in accordance with Chapter 16.321, the decision to revoke shall be stayed until the hearing is concluded and the City Council has made its determination. Such decision by the Council shall be final.

e.     If an accessory dwelling unit permit is revoked, the property owner shall, within 60 days, remove the kitchen facilities from the unit space, and shall not rent the unit except together with the primary residence to a single household. (20-02; 19-07)

 

16.333.060 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
A.     An accessory dwelling unit shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, and cooking and sanitation facilities separate from the primary dwelling unit on the same lot.

B.     Accessory dwelling units shall meet the following standards:

1.     Development on the Lot

a.     A primary dwelling unit shall either exist on the lot or shall be constructed in conjunction with the accessory dwelling unit. The City shall not issue a certificate of occupancy for an accessory dwelling unit before it issues a certificate of occupancy for the primary dwelling.

b.     The accessory dwelling unit shall be:

i.      Detached from the proposed or existing primary dwelling unit, but located on the same lot as the proposed or existing dwelling; or

ii.     Attached to the proposed or existing dwelling; or

iii.     Located within the proposed or existing dwelling or an existing structure on the same lot as the primary dwelling (such as a garage, storage area, or accessory structure).

c.     Subject to Government Code Section 65852.2(e), only one accessory dwelling unit shall be allowed per lot.

d.     The accessory dwelling unit shall not be sold separate from the primary residence nor shall it be used for short-term rentals of less than 30 days.

2.     Building and Construction

a.     An accessory dwelling unit shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.

b.     The accessory dwelling unit shall be constructed on a permanent foundation.

c.     An accessory dwelling unit shall have fire sprinklers if the primary residence is also required to have fire sprinklers.

d.     Subject to Government Code Section 65852.2(f)(4), an accessory dwelling unit shall be connected to the public sewer, and that connection shall be subject to a connection fee, or capacity charge, or both, proportionate to the burden of the proposed accessory dwelling unit calculated in accordance with Government Code Section 65852.2(f)(5).

3.     Parking

a.     Subject to Government Code Section 65852.2(e), the development of an accessory dwelling unit on a lot where the existing dwelling unit does not comply with current parking standards shall be subject to the requirements of Municipal Code Section 16.400.040.A.3.

b.     Except as provided in subsection B.3.d below, accessory dwelling units shall meet the following parking standards:

i.      At least one off-street parking space shall be provided for an accessory dwelling unit.

ii.     Parking spaces shall comply with Municipal Code Section 16.136.040.A, and be provided on the same lot as the accessory dwelling unit. A covered parking space is preferred but not required.

iii.     The parking space(s) for the accessory dwelling unit shall be in addition to the parking required for the primary residence.

c.     If parking is required:

i.      If uncovered, required parking spaces may be located in required setback areas and may be provided through tandem parking. Applicants are encouraged to provide required uncovered parking spaces outside of front and street-side setback areas, if possible. If covered, required parking spaces shall comply with the setback requirements applicable to the subject property.

Parking arrangements pursuant to this subsection E.3 may be prohibited if the Community Development Director makes a finding that such parking arrangements are not feasible based upon specific site or fire or life safety conditions, or that such arrangements are not permitted anywhere in the jurisdiction.

ii.     When a garage, carport, or covered parking structure providing required parking for the primary residence is demolished in conjunction with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit or is converted into an accessory dwelling unit, replacement spaces may be located in any configuration on the same lot as the accessory dwelling unit, including, but not limited to, as covered spaces, uncovered spaces, or tandem spaces, or by the use of mechanical automobile parking lifts. If covered, replacement spaces shall comply with the setback requirements applicable to the subject property.

Per Government Code Section 65852.2(a)(1)(D)(xi), replacement parking is not required when parking for the primary residence is demolished in conjunction with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit or is converted into an accessory dwelling unit.

d.     Parking standards shall not be imposed on an accessory dwelling unit in any of the following circumstances:

i.      The accessory dwelling unit is located within one-half mile walking distance of public transit.

ii.     The accessory dwelling unit is located within an architecturally and historically significant historic district.

iii.     The accessory dwelling unit is part of the proposed or existing primary residence or an existing accessory structure.

iv.    When there is a car share vehicle area located within one block of the accessory dwelling unit.

v.     When on-street parking permits are required but not offered to the occupant of the accessory dwelling unit.

4.     Height

a.     The plate height of an accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed the plate height of the primary dwelling unit and the total height of the accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed 16 feet.

b.     An accessory dwelling unit shall not be constructed over a garage space.

5.     Setbacks

a.     An accessory dwelling unit shall be set back at least four feet from rear and side lot lines. Front yard setbacks shall be governed by the setback standards for the applicable zoning district.

b.     Notwithstanding subsection B.5.a, no setback shall be required for an accessory dwelling unit in an existing structure or a structure that is rebuilt in the same location and to the same dimensions as an existing structure.

6.     Unit Size

a.     Subject to subsection B.6.b below, if there is an existing primary dwelling, the total floor area of an attached accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed 50% of the living area of the existing primary dwelling.

b.     For all accessory dwelling units, the maximum square footage shall not exceed:

i.      850 square feet for accessory dwelling units having one bedroom or less; and

ii.     1,000 square feet for accessory dwelling units having more than one bedroom.

c.     The minimum square footage for an accessory dwelling unit is 150 square feet of floor area.

d.     The accessory dwelling unit shall contain no more than two bedrooms.

7.     Lot Coverage

The accessory dwelling unit shall meet the lot coverage standards of the applicable zoning district, provided those standards allow for an accessory dwelling unit of at least 800 square feet that is at least 16 feet in height with four-foot side and rear yard setbacks.

8.     Architectural Design Standards

Staff will apply the following standards in evaluating applications for an accessory dwelling unit:

a.     The color, material and texture of all building walls, window types, and door and window shall be substantially similar to the primary dwelling unit.

b.     The design, color, material, pitch, and texture of the roof shall be the same as that of the primary dwelling unit.

c.     The architectural style of the accessory dwelling unit shall be the same as that of the primary dwelling unit. If no architectural style can be identified, the design of the accessory dwelling unit shall be architecturally compatible with the primary dwelling unit.

d.     The design of the accessory dwelling unit shall maintain the scale and appearance of a single-family dwelling unit and shall not unduly interfere with or visually dominate the established development pattern of the surrounding neighborhood context.

e.     Exterior doors of the accessory dwelling unit shall not be oriented in the same direction as the primary exterior entrance of the primary dwelling unit when both would be visible from any public right-of-way, excluding alleys.

i.      Notwithstanding the above, on properties located at the intersection of two public streets, the exterior doors of the accessory dwelling unit shall not be oriented in the same direction as the primary exterior entrance of the primary dwelling unit but may be visible from a public right-of-way.

ii.     An accessory dwelling unit shall have no exterior entrances on elevations where the distance to a side property line is less than eight feet.

 

f.      The accessory dwelling unit shall be designed to preserve and/or retain on-site significant mature trees to the greatest extent possible. Removal of significant trees should be avoided, except where such trees have been determined by a licensed arborist to be of poor health or where retention is economically infeasible, as determined by the Community Development Director.

g.     All windows and doors of the accessory dwelling unit shall be designed to minimize privacy impacts to adjacent properties. Minimizing privacy impacts may be achieved through window placement above interior eye level and/or horizontally offset to avoid direct alignment with windows on neighboring properties, and also through orienting windows and doors towards the primary dwelling unit.

An accessory dwelling unit with less than an eight-foot side or rear setback shall only have clerestory windows which are a minimum of six feet above the floor on those sides.

h.     Enhanced landscaping and strategically located open space shall be provided to ensure privacy and screening of adjacent properties.

i.      When a garage, carport, or covered parking structure that is visible from any public right-of-way is converted or demolished in conjunction with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit, the design shall incorporate features to match the scale, materials and landscaping of the primary dwelling unit that preserve the existing streetscape and character of the surrounding neighborhood.

j.      The accessory dwelling unit shall not cause a substantial adverse change on any real property that is listed in the National Register of Historic Places, and/or California Register of Historic Places, and/or Register of Structures of Historic and Architectural Merit of the City of Claremont.

9.     Interior Amenities

a.     Washer/dryer hookups shall be provided within a closet or laundry room. Space for stacked units is acceptable.

b.     Units of 500 square feet or less shall have, at a minimum, a kitchen which will consist of:

i.      A 15-inch sink with garbage disposal and a one and one-half-inch waste line

ii.     An opening which will accommodate a 62-inch by 25-inch by 28-inch refrigerator.

iii.     A two-element electronic stove of 120 volts.

iv.    10-square feet of counter space.

c.     Units of greater than 500 square feet shall have, at a minimum, a kitchen which will consist of:

i.      A 22-inch sink with garbage disposal.

ii.     An opening that will accommodate a 69-inch by 30-inch by 29-inch refrigerator.

iii.     A four-element stove.

iv.    15-square feet of counter space.

F.     Junior accessory dwelling units shall meet the following standards:

1.     Development on the Lot

a.     A junior accessory dwelling unit shall be constructed within the existing walls of the residential structure and shall include an existing bedroom.

b.     Only one junior accessory dwelling unit shall be allowed per lot. Subject to Government Code Section 65822.2(e), junior accessory dwelling units are only permitted on lots zoned for single-family residences with a proposed or existing single-family residence.

c.     The junior accessory dwelling unit shall not be sold separate from the primary residence nor shall it be used for short-term rentals of less than 30 days.

2.     Building and Construction

a.     A junior accessory dwelling unit must include a separate entrance from the main entrance to the primary dwelling unit, with an interior entry to the main living area. A junior accessory dwelling unit may include a second interior doorway for sound attenuation.

b.     A junior accessory dwelling unit may include separate sanitation facilities, or may share sanitation facilities with the existing structure.

c.     A junior accessory dwelling unit must include an efficiency kitchen, which includes all of the following:

i.      A cooking facility with appliances;

ii.     A food preparation counter of reasonable size in relation to the size of the junior accessory dwelling unit;

iii.     Storage cabinets that of reasonable size in relation to the size of the junior accessory dwelling unit;

d.     The junior accessory unit shall meet the requirements of the building code, as adopted and amended by Title 15 of the Claremont Municipal Code, provided the unit shall not be considered a separate or new dwelling unit for the purposes of any fire or life protection regulation.

3.     Parking

No additional parking is required for a junior accessory dwelling unit

4.     Unit Size

The maximum size for a junior accessory dwelling unit is 500 square feet.

G.    Notwithstanding subsections B and C, the City shall ministerially approve a permit for an accessory dwelling unit or junior accessory dwelling unit that meets the standards set forth in Government Code Section 65822.2(e)(1); provided, however, accessory dwelling units approved under this section shall be subject to the standards for Interior Amenities set forth in subsection B.9 and for accessory dwelling units on a lot with a proposed or single-family dwelling, the Architectural Design Standards in subsection B.8. (20-02; 19-07)

 

16.333.070 DEED RESTRICTION
Prior to issuance of a building permit for an accessory dwelling unit or a junior accessory dwelling unit, a deed restriction shall be recorded against the title of the property in the Los Angeles County Recorder’s Office and a copy shall be filed with the City Clerk. Said deed restriction shall run with the land, and shall bind all future owners, heirs, successors, or assigns. The form of the deed restriction shall be provided by the City and shall provide that:

A.     Neither the accessory dwelling unit/junior accessory dwelling unit nor the primary dwelling unit shall be sold separately.

B.     Neither the accessory dwelling unit/junior accessory dwelling unit, nor the primary dwelling unit shall be rented for a period of less than 30 days.

C.    If the accessory dwelling unit or the primary dwelling unit is rented, that the owner of the property for which an accessory dwelling unit permit shall obtaining and maintain a valid business permit pursuant to CMC Chapter 5.20, Business Permits.

D.    The unit is restricted to the approved size and attributes of this chapter.

E.     The deed restrictions run with the land and may be enforced against future owners of the property.

F.     The deed restrictions may be removed if the owner eliminates the accessory dwelling unit as evidenced by the removal of the kitchen facilities, bathroom facilities, or both.

G.    The deed restrictions shall be enforced by the Director of Community Development or his or her designee for the benefit of the City of Claremont. Failure of the property owner to comply with the deed restrictions may result in legal action against the property owner and the City shall be authorized to obtain any remedy available to it at law or equity, including but not limited to obtaining an injunction enjoining use of the accessory dwelling unit in violation of the recorded restrictions or abatement of the illegal unit. (20-02; 19-07)

 

16.333.080 ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES
A.     Criminal Fines and Penalties

Any person responsible for violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction or a misdemeanor at the discretion of the City Attorney and/or district attorney. Upon conviction, the person shall be punished as prescribed in Chapter 1.12.

B.     Administrative Fines and Penalties

Whenever an officer charged with the enforcement of any provision of this Municipal Code determines that a violation of this chapter has occurred, the officer shall have the authority to issue an administrative citation to any person responsible for the violation in accordance with Chapter 1.14.

C.    Public Nuisance and Lien on Property

Any use or condition caused, or permitted to exist, in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be, and is hereby declared to be, a public nuisance and may be summarily abated by the City pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 731 or any other remedy available at law. In accordance with Chapter 1.15, the City may also collect any fee, cost, or charge incurred in the abatement of such nuisance by making the amount of any unpaid fee, cost or charge a lien against the property that is the subject of the enforcement activity.

D.    Civil Action

In addition to any other enforcement permitted by the City’s Zoning and/or Municipal Codes, the City Attorney may bring a civil action for injunctive relief and civil penalties against any person who violates any provision of this chapter. In any civil action that is brought pursuant to this chapter, a court of competent jurisdiction may award civil penalties and costs to the prevailing party.

E.     Permit Revocation

Any violation of this chapter may result in revocation of an accessory dwelling unit permit in accordance with Section 16.333.050.C.5.

Use of any one or more of these remedies shall be at the sole discretion of the City and nothing in this section shall prevent the City from initiating civil, criminal or other legal or equitable proceedings as an alternative to any of the proceedings set forth above.

To the extent the City seeks to enforce building standards pursuant to Article 1 (commencing with Section 17960) of Chapter 5 of Part 1.5 of Division 13 of the California Health and Safety Code, use of these remedies may be subject to Government Code Section 65822.2(n). (20-02; 19-07)

Chapter 16.336 SURFACE MINING AND RECLAMATION
16.336.000 INTENT
The City recognizes that the extraction of minerals is essential to continued economic well-being of the state and to the needs of society and that the reclamation of mined lands is necessary to prevent or minimize adverse effects on the environment and to protect the public health and safety. The City also recognizes that surface mining takes place in diverse areas where the geologic, topographic, climatic, biological, and social conditions are significantly different and that reclamation operations and the specifications therefor may vary accordingly.

The purpose and intent of this chapter is to ensure the continued availability of important mineral resources, while regulating surface mining operations as required by California’s Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975 (California Public Resources Code Section 2710 et seq.) (“SMARA”), and State Mining and Geology Board regulations (California Code of Regulations, Title 14, Section 3500 et seq.) (“State Regulations”), to ensure that:

A.     Adverse environmental effects are prevented or minimized and that mined lands are reclaimed to a usable condition which is readily adaptable for alternative land uses;

B.     The production and conservation of minerals are encouraged, while giving consideration to values relating to recreation, watershed, wildlife, range and forage, and aesthetic enjoyment; and

C.    Residual hazards to the public health and safety are eliminated. (08-05)

 

16.336.010 DEFINITIONS
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, words and phrases and their derivations shall have the meanings as defined in this section:

A.     Area of Regional Significance. An area designated by the State Mining and Geology Board which is known to contain a deposit of minerals, the extraction of which is judged to be of prime importance in meeting future needs for minerals in a particular region of the state within which the minerals are located and which, if prematurely developed for alternate incompatible land uses, could result in the premature loss of minerals that are of more than local significance.

B.     Area of Statewide Significance. An area designated by the Board which is known to contain a deposit of minerals, the extraction of which is judged to be of prime importance in meeting future needs for minerals in the state and which, if prematurely developed for alternate incompatible land uses, could result in the permanent loss of minerals that are of more than local or regional significance.

C.    Borrow Pits. Excavations created by the surface mining of rock, unconsolidated geologic deposits or soil to provide material (borrow) or fill elsewhere.

D.    Conditional Use Permit. A permit that complies with the requirements of Chapter 16.303 (Conditional Use Permits) and the requirements of the zoning district in which the mining operation is located.

E.     Compatible Land Uses. Land uses inherently compatible with mining and/or that require a minimum public or private investment in structures, land improvements, and which may allow mining because of the relative economic value of the land and its improvements. Examples of such uses may include, but shall not be limited to, very low density residential, geographically extensive but low impact industrial, recreational, agricultural, silvicultural, grazing, and open space.

F.     Haul Road. A road along which material is transported from the area of excavation to the processing plant or stock pile area of the surface mining operation.

G.    Idle. Surface mining operations curtailed for a period of one year or more, by more than 90 percent of the operation’s previous maximum annual mineral production, with the intent to resume those surface mining operations at a future date.

H.    Incompatible Land Uses. Land uses inherently incompatible with mining and/or that require public or private investment in structures, land improvements, and landscaping and that may prevent mining because of the greater economic value of the land and its improvements. Examples of such uses may include, but shall not be limited to, high density residential, low density residential with high unit value, public facilities, geographically limited but impact intensive industrial, and commercial.

I.      Mined Lands. The surface, subsurface, and ground water of an area in which surface mining operations will be, are being, or have been conducted, including private ways and roads appurtenant to any such area, land excavations, workings, mining waste, and areas in which structures, facilities, equipment, machines, tools, or other materials or property which result from, or are used in, surface mining operations are located.

J.     Minerals. Any naturally occurring chemical element or compound, or groups of elements and compounds, formed from inorganic processes and organic substances, including, but not limited to, coal, peat, and bituminous rock, but excluding geothermal resources, natural gas, and petroleum.

K.     Operator. Any person who is engaged in surface mining operations, or who contracts with others to conduct operations on his/her behalf, except a person who is engaged in surface mining operations as an employee with wages as his/her sole compensation.

L.     Reclamation. The combined process of land treatment that minimizes water degradation, air pollution, damage to aquatic or wildlife habitat, flooding, erosion, and other adverse effects from surface mining operations, including adverse surface effects incidental to underground mines, so that mined lands are reclaimed to a usable condition which is readily adaptable for alternate land uses and create no danger to public health or safety. The process may extend to affected lands surrounding mined lands, and may require backfilling, grading, resoiling, revegetation, soil compaction, stabilization, or other measures.

M.    Stream Bed Skimming. Excavation of sand and gravel from stream bed deposits above the mean summer water level or stream bottom, whichever is higher.

N.    Surface Mining Operations. All, or any part of, the process involved in the mining of minerals on mined lands by removing overburden and mining directly from the mineral deposits, open-pit mining of minerals naturally exposed, mining by the auger method, dredging and quarrying, or surface work incident to an underground mine. Surface mining operations include, but are not limited to, inplace distillation or retorting or leaching, the production and disposal of mining waste, prospecting and exploratory activities, borrow pitting, streambed skimming, and segregation and stockpiling of mined materials (and recovery of same). (08-05)

 

16.336.020 SCOPE
A.     The provisions of SMARA (California Public Resources Code Sections 2710 et seq.) and state regulations (California Code of Regulations, Title 14, Sections 3500 et seq.), as those provisions and regulations may be amended from time to time, are made a part of this chapter by reference with the same force and effect as if the provisions therein were specifically and fully set out herein, excepting that when the provisions of this chapter are more restrictive than correlative state provisions, this chapter shall prevail.

B.     Except as provided in this chapter, no person shall conduct surface mining operations unless a conditional use permit, reclamation plan, and financial assurances for reclamation have first been approved by the City. Any applicable exemption from this requirement does not automatically exempt a project or activity from the application of other regulations, ordinances or policies of the City, including but not limited to, the application of the California Environmental Quality Act, the payment of development impact fees, or the imposition of other dedications and exactions as may be permitted under the law. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all lands within the City, public and private, except that this chapter shall not apply to any of the activities set forth in California Public Resources Code Section 2714 and subsection D of this section.

C.    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of a court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter.

D.    Exceptions

This chapter does not apply to any of the following activities:

1.     Excavations or grading conducted for farming or onsite construction or for the purpose of restoring land following a flood or natural disaster.

2.     Onsite excavation and onsite earthmoving activities that are an integral and necessary part of a construction project that are undertaken to prepare a site for construction of structures, landscaping, or other land improvements associated with those structures, including the related excavation, grading, compaction, or the creation of fills, road cuts, and embankments, whether or not surplus materials are exported from the site, subject to all of the following conditions:

a.     All required permits for the construction, landscaping, or related land improvements have been approved by a public agency in accordance with applicable provisions of state law and locally adopted plans and ordinances, including, but not limited to, the California Environmental Quality Act (California Public Resources Code Section 21000 et seq.) (“CEQA”).

b.     The lead agency’s approval of the construction project included consideration of the onsite excavation and onsite earthmoving activities pursuant to CEQA (California Public Resources Code Section 21000 et seq.).

c.     The approved construction project is consistent with the City General Plan or zoning of the site.

d.     Surplus materials shall not be exported from the site unless and until actual construction work has commenced and shall cease if it is determined that construction activities have terminated, have been indefinitely suspended, or are no longer being actively pursued.

3.     Operation of a plant site used for mineral processing, including associated onsite structures, equipment, machines, tools, or other materials, including the onsite stockpiling and onsite recovery of mined materials, subject to all of the following conditions:

a.     The plant site is located on lands designated for industrial or commercial uses in the City General Plan.

b.     The plant site is located on lands zoned industrial or commercial, or are contained within a zoning category intended exclusively for industrial activities by the applicable city or county.

c.     None of the minerals being processed are being extracted onsite.

d.     All reclamation work has been completed pursuant to the approved reclamation plan for any mineral extraction activities that occurred onsite after January 1, 1976.

4.     Prospecting for, or the extraction of, minerals for commercial purposes and the removal of overburden where the removal of overburden or mineral product totals less than 1,000 cubic yards in any one location, and the total surface area disturbed is less than one acre.

5.     Surface mining operations that are required by federal law in order to protect a mining claim, if those operations are conducted solely for that purpose.

6.     Any other surface mining operations that the State Mining and Geology Board determine to be of an infrequent nature and which involves only minor surface disturbances.

7.     The solar evaporation of sea water or bay water for the production of salt and related minerals.

8.     Emergency excavations or grading conducted by the Department of Water Resources or the Reclamation Board for the purpose of averting, alleviating, repairing, or restoring damage to property due to imminent or recent floods, disasters, or other emergencies.

9.     Surface mining operations conducted on lands owned or leased, or upon which easements or rights-of-way have been obtained, by the Department of Water Resources for the purpose of the State Water Resources Development System or flood control, and surface mining operations on lands owned or leased, or upon which easements or rights-of-way have been obtained, by the Reclamation Board for the purpose of flood control, subject to the following conditions:

a.     The Department of Water Resources must adopt, after submission to and consultation with, the Department of Conservation, a reclamation plan for lands affected by these activities, and those lands must be reclaimed in conformance with the standards specified in regulations of the State Mining and Geology Board. The Department of Water Resources shall provide an annual report to the Department of Conservation by the date specified by the Department of Conservation on these mining activities.

b.     Nothing in this subsection shall require the Department of Water Resources or the Reclamation Board to obtain a permit or secure approval of a reclamation plan from any city or county in order to conduct surface mining operations specified in paragraph (I)(1). Nothing in this subsection shall preclude the bringing of an enforcement action pursuant to California Public Resources Code Section 2774,1 if it is determined that a surface mine operator, acting under contract with the Department of Water Resources or the Reclamation Board on lands other than those owned or leased, or upon which easements or rights-of-way have been obtained, by the Department of Water Resources or the Reclamation Board, is otherwise not in compliance with SMARA, State Regulations, or this chapter.

10.   Excavations or grading for the exclusive purpose of obtaining materials for roadbed construction and maintenance conducted in connection with timber operations or forest management on land owned by the same person or entity.

a.     This exemption is limited to excavation and grading that is conducted adjacent to timber operation or forest management roads and shall not apply to onsite excavation or grading that occurs within 100 feet of a Class One watercourse or 75 feet of a Class Two watercourse, or to excavation for materials that are, or have been, sold for commercial purposes.

b.     This exemption shall be available only if slope stability and erosion are controlled in accordance with California Code of Regulations, Title 14, Sections 3704(d) and 3706 and, upon closure of the site, the person closing the site implements, where necessary, revegetation measures and postclosure uses in consultation with the Department of Forestry and Fire Protection.

11.   Excavations or grading, or other earthmoving activities in an oil or gas field that are integral to, and necessary for, ongoing operations for the extraction of oil or gas that comply with all of the following conditions:

a.     The operations are being conducted in accordance with California Public Resources Code Section 3000 et seq.

b.     The operations are consistent with the City General Plan or zoning applicable to the site.

c.     The earthmoving activities are within oil or gas field properties under a common owner or operator.

d.     No excavated materials are sold for commercial purposes. (08-05)

 

16.336.030 PROCESS
A.     Applications for a conditional use permit and reclamation plan for surface mining or land reclamation projects shall be made on forms provided by the Planning Division. The application shall be filed in accord with this chapter and procedures to be established by the Community Development Director. The forms for reclamation plan applications shall require, at a minimum, each of the elements required by SMARA (California Public Resources Code Sections 2772—2773) and state regulations, and any other requirements deemed necessary to facilitate an expeditious and fair evaluation of the proposed reclamation plan, to be established at the discretion of the Community Development Director. As many copies of the conditional use permit application as may be required by the Community Development Director shall be submitted to the Planning Division.

B.     As many copies of a reclamation plan application as may be required shall be submitted in conjunction with all applications for conditional use permits for surface mining operations. All documentation for the reclamation plan shall be submitted to the City at one time.

C.    Applications shall include all required environmental review forms and information prescribed by the Community Development Director.

D.    Upon completion of the environmental review procedure and filing of all documents required by the Community Development Director, consideration of the conditional use permit and reclamation plan for the proposed or existing surface mine shall be completed pursuant to California Public Resources Code Section 2774 at a public hearing before the Planning Commission.

E.     Within 30 days of acceptance of an application for a conditional use permit for surface mining operations and/or a reclamation plan as complete, the Planning Division shall notify the State Department of Conservation of the filing of the application(s). Whenever mining operations are proposed in the 300-year flood plain of any stream, as shown in Zone A of the Flood Insurance Rate Maps issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, and within one mile, upstream or downstream, of any state highway bridge, the Planning Division shall also notify the State Department of Transportation that the application has been received.

F.     The Planning Division shall process the application(s) through environmental review pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act (Public Resources Code Sections 21000 et seq.) (“CEQA”) and the City’s environmental review guidelines.

G.    Subsequent to the appropriate environmental review, the Planning Division shall prepare a staff report with recommendations for consideration by the Planning Commission.

H.    The Planning Commission shall hold at least one noticed public hearing on the conditional use permit and reclamation plan.

I.      Prior to final approval of a reclamation plan, financial assurances, or any amendments to the reclamation plan or existing financial assurances, the Planning Commission shall certify to the State Department of Conservation that the reclamation plan and/or financial assurance comply with the applicable requirements of state law, and submit the plan, assurance, or amendments to the State Department of Conservation for review. The Planning Commission may conceptually approve the reclamation plan and financial assurance before submittal to the State Department of Conservation. If a conditional use permit is being processed concurrently with the reclamation plan, the Planning Commission may simultaneously also conceptually approve the conditional use permit; however, the Planning Commission may defer action on the conditional use permit until taking final action on the reclamation plan and financial assurances. If necessary to comply with permit processing deadlines, the Planning Commission may conditionally approve the conditional use permit with the condition that the Planning Division shall not issue the conditional use permit for the mining operations until cost estimates for financial assurances have been reviewed by the State Department of Conservation and final action has been taken on the reclamation plan and financial assurances.

Pursuant to Public Resources Code Section 2774(d), the State Department of Conservation shall be given 30 days to review and comment on the reclamation plan, and 45 days to review and comment on the financial assurance. The Planning Commission shall evaluate written comments received, if any, from the State Department of Conservation during the comment periods. Staff shall prepare a written response describing the disposition of the major issues raised by the state for the Planning Commission’s approval. In particular, when the Planning Commission’s position is at variance with the recommendations and objections raised in the state’s comments, the written response shall address, in detail, why specific comments and suggestions were not accepted. Copies of any written comments received and responses prepared by the Planning Commission shall be promptly forwarded to the operator/applicant. The Planning Commission shall also give the State Department of Conservation at least 30 days’ notice of the time, place, and date of the hearing to finally approve the reclamation plan.

J.     The Planning Commission shall then take action to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the conditional use permit and/or reclamation plan, and to approve the financial assurances pursuant to Public Resources Code Section 2770(d). Following this action, or following any appeal of the action to the City Council, the City shall send the Department of Conservation its final response to the Department’s comments within 30 days following the action being finally decided.

K.     The Planning Division shall forward a copy of each approved conditional use permit for mining operations and/or approved reclamation plan, and a copy of the approved financial assurances to the State Department of Conservation. By July 1st of each year, the Planning Division shall submit to the State Department of Conservation for each active or idle mining operation a copy of the conditional use permit or reclamation plan amendments, as applicable, or a statement that there have been no changes during the previous year.

L.     The City shall establish such fees as it deems necessary to cover the reasonable costs incurred in implementing this chapter and the state regulations, including but not limited to, processing of applications, annual reports, inspections, monitoring, enforcement and compliance. Such fees shall be paid by the operator, as required by the City, at the time of filing of the conditional use permit application, reclamation plan application, and at such other times as are determined by the City to be appropriate in order to ensure that all reasonable costs of implementing this chapter are borne by the operator. (08-05)

 

16.336.040 STANDARDS FOR RECLAMATION
A.     All reclamation plans shall comply with the provisions of SMARA (Public Resources Code Sections 2772 and 2773) and state regulations (California Code of Regulations, Title 14, Sections 3500—3505). Reclamation plans for proposed new mining operations and any substantial amendments to previously approved reclamation plans shall also comply with the requirements for reclamation performance standards (California Code of Regulations, Title 14, Sections 3700—3713). In addition, reclamation plans shall meet the following City standards:

1.     All mining operations shall be reclaimed to conditions that are coordinated and compatible with the surrounding land uses within City limits that are either existing, if actually developed at the time of the application, or identified in the City’s General Plan, if not yet developed, at the time of the application. For purposes of this requirement, a reclaimed operation is “coordinated and compatible with” surrounding properties only if it would blend in with the general environment, topography, appearance, and types of land uses found in the surrounding properties, or contemplated for the surrounding properties in the General Plan at the time of the application.

2.     Where mined property is to be reclaimed to an open space land use, the mined property shall, to the maximum extent feasible, be restored to a condition that is consistent with the character, vegetation, and appearance of the property in its pre-mining condition, and is readily adaptable for alternative uses that are consistent with open space land use and applicable sections of the City’s General Plan.

3.     During and following mining operations, the operator shall not diminish the water recharge capacity of or lower the water table under the mined property or degrade natural filtration properties to the extent that additional groundwater treatment would be required. Following reclamation, the water percolation on and groundwater flow through the mined property shall equal or exceed the percolation capacity and groundwater flow existing before mining.

4.     Mining waste and overburden piles that will be retained on site during mining operations shall, to the maximum extent feasible, be placed in locations and screened such that they are not visible from neighboring properties. Where it is not feasible to prevent neighboring properties from seeing the waste and overburden piles, appropriate measures shall be implemented to mitigate the visual impacts to those properties.

5.     For purposes of this section, “feasible” means capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, social, and technological factors.

B.     The City may impose additional performance standards as developed either in review of individual projects, as warranted, or through the formulation and adoption of Citywide performance standards in addition to those required in subsection A of this section.

C.    Reclamation activities shall be initiated at the earliest possible time on those portions of the mined lands that will not be subject to further disturbance. Interim reclamation may also be required for mined lands that have been disturbed and that may be disturbed again in future operations. Reclamation may be done on an annual basis, in stages compatible with continuing operations, or on completion of all excavation, removal, or fill, as approved by the City. Each phase of reclamation shall be specifically described in the reclamation plan and shall include (1) the beginning and expected ending dates for each phase; (2) all reclamation activities required; (3) criteria for measuring completion of specific reclamation activities; and (4) estimated costs for completion of each phase of reclamation.

D.    The person submitting the reclamation plan shall sign a statement accepting responsibility for reclaiming the mined lands in accordance with the reclamation plan. That statement shall be kept by the Planning Division in the mining operation’s permanent record. Upon sale or transfer of the operation, the new operation shall submit a signed statement of responsibility to the Planning Division for placement in the permanent record.

E.     The City shall establish such fees as it deems necessary to cover the reasonable costs incurred in implementing this chapter and the state regulations, including but not limited to, processing of applications, annual reports, inspections, monitoring, enforcement and compliance. Such fees shall be paid by the operator, as required by the City, at the time of filing of the conditional use permit application, reclamation plan application, and at such other times as are determined by the City to be appropriate in order to ensure that all reasonable costs of implementing this chapter are borne by the mining operator. (08-05)

 

16.336.050 FINDINGS FOR APPROVAL
A.     Conditional Use Permits

In addition to any findings required by this title, conditional use permits for surface mining operations shall include a finding that the project complies with the provision of SMARA and state regulations.

B.     Reclamation Plans

For reclamation plans, the following findings shall be required:

1.     That the reclamation plan complies with California Public Resources Code Sections 2772 and 2773, and any other applicable provisions;

2.     That the reclamation plan complies with applicable requirements of the State Regulations (California Code of Regulations, Title 14, Sections 3500—3505, 3700—3713);

3.     That the reclamation plan and potential use of reclaimed land pursuant to the plan are consistent with this chapter and the City’s General Plan and any applicable resource plan or element;

4.     That the reclamation plan has been reviewed pursuant to CEQA (California Public Resources Code Sections 21000 et seq.) and the City’s environmental review guidelines, and all significant adverse impacts from reclamation of the surface mining operations are mitigated to the maximum extent feasible;

5.     That the land and/or resources such as water bodies to be reclaimed will be restored to a condition that is compatible with, and blends in with, the surrounding natural environment, topography, and other resources, or that suitable off-site development will compensate for related disturbance to resource values;

6.     That the reclamation plan will restore the mined lands to a usable condition which, as determined by the City, is readily adaptable for alternative land uses consistent with the General Plan and applicable resource plan; and

7.     That a written response to the State Department of Conservation has been prepared, describing the disposition of major issues raised by that Department. Where the City’s position is at variance with the recommendations and objections raised by the State Department of Conservation, said response shall address, in detail, why specific comments and suggestions were not accepted. (08-05)

 

16.336.060 FINANCIAL ASSURANCES
A.     To ensure that reclamation will proceed in accordance with the approved reclamation plan, the City shall require as a condition of approval a financial security which will be released upon satisfactory performance. The applicant may post security in the form of a surety bond, trust fund, irrevocable letter of credit from an accredited financial institution, or other method acceptable to the City and State Mining and Geology Board as specified in state regulations, and which the City reasonably determines is adequate to perform reclamation in accordance with the surface mining operation’s approved reclamation plan. Financial assurances shall be made payable to the City of Claremont and the State Department of Conservation.

B.     Financial assurances will be required to ensure compliance with all elements of the reclamation plan, including but not limited to, revegetation and landscaping requirements, restoration of aquatic or wildlife habitat, restoration of water bodies and water quality, slope stability and erosion and drainage control, disposal of hazardous materials, and other measures, if necessary.

C.    Cost estimates for the financial assurance shall be submitted to the Planning Division for review and approval prior to the operator securing financial assurances. The Community Development Director shall forward a copy of the cost estimates, together with any documentation received supporting the amount of the cost estimates, to the State Department of Conservation for review. If the State Department of Conservation does not comment within 45 days of receipt of these estimates, it shall be assumed that the cost estimates are adequate, unless the City has reason to determine that additional costs may be incurred. The Community Development Director shall have the discretion to approve the financial assurance if it meets the requirements of this chapter, SMARA, and state regulations.

D.    The amount of the financial assurance shall be based upon the estimated costs of reclamation for the years or phases stipulated in the approved reclamation plan, including any maintenance of reclaimed areas as may be required, subject to adjustment for the actual amount required to reclaim lands disturbed by surface mining activities in the upcoming year. Cost estimates should be prepared by a California registered Professional Engineer and/or other similarly licensed and qualified professionals retained by the operator and approved by the Community Development Director. The estimated amount of the financial assurance shall be based on an analysis of physical activities necessary to implement the approved reclamation plan, the unit costs for each of these activities, the number of units of each of these activities, and the actual administrative costs. Financial assurances to ensure compliance with revegetation, restoration of water bodies, restoration of aquatic or wildlife habitat, and any other applicable element of the approved reclamation plan shall be based upon cost estimates that include but may not be limited to labor, equipment, materials, mobilization of equipment, administration, and reasonable profit by a commercial operator other than the permittee. A contingency factor of 10 percent shall be added to the cost of financial assurances.

E.     In projecting the costs of financial assurances, it shall be assumed without prejudice or insinuation that the surface mining operation could be abandoned by the operator and, consequently, the City or the State Department of Conservation may need to contract with a third party commercial company for reclamation of the site.

F.     The financial assurances shall remain in effect for the duration of the surface mining operation and any additional period until reclamation is completed (including any maintenance required).

G.    The amount of financial assurances required of a surface mining operation for any one year shall be adjusted annually to account for new lands disturbed by surface mining operations, inflation, and reclamation of lands accomplished in accordance with the approved reclamation plan. The financial assurances shall include estimates to cover reclamation for existing conditions and anticipated activities during the upcoming year, excepting that the permittee may not claim credit for reclamation scheduled for completion during the coming year.

H.    Revisions to financial assurances shall be submitted to the Community Development Director each year prior to the anniversary date for approval of the financial assurances. The financial assurance shall cover the cost of existing disturbance and anticipated activities for the next calendar year, including any required interim reclamation. If revisions to the financial assurances are not required, the operator shall explain, in writing, why revisions are not required. (08-05)

 

16.336.070 ENFORCEMENT
A.     Interim Management Plans

1.     Within 90 days of a surface mining operation becoming idle, the operator shall submit to the Planning Division a proposed Interim Management Plan (IMP). The proposed IMP shall fully comply with the requirements of SMARA, including but not limited to all conditional use permit conditions, and shall provide measures the operator will implement to maintain the site in a stable condition, taking into consideration public health and safety. The proposed IMP shall be submitted on forms provided by the Planning Division, and shall be processed as an amendment to the reclamation plan. IMPs shall not be considered a project for the purposes of environmental review.

2.     Financial assurances for idle operations shall be maintained as though the operation were active.

3.     Upon receipt of a complete proposed IMP, the Planning Division shall forward the IMP to the State Department of Conservation for review. The IMP shall be submitted to the State Department of Conservation at least 30 days prior to approval by the Planning Commission.

4.     Within 60 days of receipt of the proposed IMP, or a longer period mutually agreed upon by the Community Development Director and the operator, the Planning Commission shall review and approve or deny the IMP in accordance with this chapter. The operator shall have 30 days, or a longer period mutually agreed upon by the operator and the Community Development Director, to submit a revised IMP. The Planning Commission shall approve or deny the revised IMP within 60 days of receipt. If the Planning Commission denies the revised IMP, the operator may appeal that action to the City Council/Board of Supervisors.

5.     The IMP may remain in effect for a period not to exceed five years, at which time the Planning Commission may renew the IMP for another period not to exceed five years, or require the surface mining operator to commence reclamation in accordance with its approved reclamation plan.

B.     Surface mining operators shall forward an annual surface mining report to the State Department of Conservation and to the City Planning Division on a date established by the State Department of Conservation, upon forms furnished by the State Mining and Geology Board. New mining operations shall file an initial surface mining report and any applicable filing fees with the State Department of Conservation within 30 days of permit approval, or before commencement of operations, whichever is sooner. Any applicable fees, together with a copy of the annual inspection report, shall be forwarded to the State Department of Conservation at the time of forwarding the annual surface mining report.

C.    The Planning Division shall arrange for inspection of a surface mining operation within six months of receipt of the annual report required in subsection B of this section to determine whether the surface mining operation is in compliance with the approved conditional use permit and/or reclamation plan, approved financial assurances, and state regulations. In no event shall less than one inspection be conducted in any calendar year. Such inspections may be made by a state-registered geologist, state-registered civil engineer, state licensed landscape architect, or state-registered forester, who is experienced in land reclamation and who has not been employed by the mining operation in any capacity during the previous 12 months, or other qualified specialists, as selected by the Community Development Director. All inspections shall be conducted using a form approved and provided by the State Mining and Geology Board.

The Planning Division shall notify the State Department of Conservation within 30 days of completion of the inspection that the inspection has been conducted, and shall forward a copy of the inspection notice and any supporting documentation to the mining operator. The operator shall be solely responsible for the reasonable cost of such inspection.

D.    If the Community Development Director, based upon an annual inspection or otherwise confirmed by an inspection of the mining operation, determines that a surface mining operation is not in compliance with this chapter, the City shall follow the procedures set forth in California Public Resources Code Sections 2774.1 and 2774.2 concerning violations and penalties.

E.     Any person aggrieved by an act or determination of the Planning Division in the exercise of the authority granted herein, shall have the right to appeal to the Planning Commission or the City Council, whichever is the next higher authority. An appeal, along with the designated appeal fee, shall be filed on forms provided within 10 calendar days after the rendition, in writing, of the appealed decision. (08-05)

 

16.336.080 MINERAL RESOURCE PROTECTION
Mine development is encouraged in compatible areas before encroachment of conflicting uses. Mineral resource areas that have been classified by the State Department of Conservation’s Division of Mines and Geology or designated by the State Mining and Geology Board shall be protected from intrusion by incompatible land uses that may impede or preclude mineral extraction or processing, to the extent possible for consistency with the City’s General Plan.

In accordance with California Public Resources Code Section 2762, the City’s General Plan and resource maps will be prepared to reflect mineral information (classification and/or designation reports) within 12 months of receipt from the State Mining and Geology Board of such information. Land use decisions within the City will be guided by information provided on the location of identified mineral resources of regional significance and shall be made in accordance with the applicable element(s) of the City’s General Plan addressing mineral resources. Conservation and potential development of identified mineral resource areas will be considered and encouraged. Recordation on property titles of the presence of important mineral resources within the identified mineral resource areas may be encouraged as a condition of approval of any development project in the impacted area. Prior to approving a use that would otherwise be incompatible with mineral resource protection, conditions of approval may be applied to encroaching development projects to minimize potential conflicts. (08-05)

 

16.336.090 VESTED RIGHTS
No person who obtained a vested right to conduct surface mining operations prior to January 1, 1976, shall be required to secure a permit to mine, so long as the vested right continues and as long as no substantial changes have been made in the operation except in accordance with SMARA, State regulations, and this chapter. Where an operator with vested rights has continued surface mining in the same area subsequent to January 1, 1976, the operator shall obtain City approval of a reclamation plan covering the mined lands disturbed by such subsequent surface mining. In those cases where an overlap exists (in the horizontal and/or vertical sense) between pre- and post-Act mining, the reclamation plan shall call for reclamation proportional to that disturbance caused by the mining after the effective date of the Act (January 1, 1976).

All other requirements of state law and this chapter shall apply to vested mining operations. (08-05)

Chapter 16.339 FINDING OF SIMILAR USE
16.339.000 INTENT
The intent of this chapter is to allow the Director of Community Development to determine whether a use that is not specifically listed in this title as a permitted, conditional or special use in a district, shall be as a permitted use, conditional use or special use in one or more districts on the basis of its similarity to uses that are specifically listed. (08-05)

 

16.339.010 APPLICATION AND FILING FEE
A.     Application Filing

Application for a finding of similar use shall be made on forms provided by the Department of Community Development together with applicable fees. The application shall include an explanation of the requested use, the districts in which the use is proposed, why the use should be permitted, and any additional information as may reasonably be required by the Director of Community Development for a complete understanding of the proposal. Filing of an application does not constitute an indication of approval.

B.     A person may not file, and the Department of Community Development shall not accept, an application for a finding of similar use which is the same or substantially the same as an application upon which final action has been taken by the City of Claremont within 12 months prior to the date of said application, unless accepted for filing by a motion of the Planning Commission or City Council.

C.    Filing Fee

The application filing fee for a finding of similar use shall be established by resolution of the City Council. (08-05)

 

16.339.020 PROCEDURE
A.     Application Screening

Upon receipt of an application for a finding of similar use, staff shall review the application and inform the applicant as to the completeness of the submittal and of additional materials required, if any.

B.     Review and Decision

When an application is deemed complete for a finding of similarity, the Director of Community Development shall act expeditiously on the application. The Director shall compare the proposed use characteristics with the General Plan goals and objectives, the land use district descriptions and permitted uses, and determine if the requested use is consistent with the intent of the General Plan and applicable land use district, and whether the required findings of this chapter can be made. In making a decision to permit a use in a land use district, the Director may require that the use be permitted subject to approval of a conditional use permit or a special use and development permit, or the Director may establish special development standards for the use as may be deemed necessary to assure consistency with the intent of the General Plan and applicable land use district, to promote the public health, safety and welfare. The Director shall notify the applicant and the Planning Commission of his/her decision by writing.

C.    Required Findings

The Director shall not approve an application for a finding of similar use, unless the Director has made the following findings:

1.     That the proposed new use is not contrary to the General Plan.

2.     That the proposed use is consistent with the intent and description of the land use district in which it is proposed, and is of similar intensity to other permitted uses or uses permitted with a conditional use permit or a special use and development permit within the land use district.

3.     That the proposed new use will not impair the integrity and character of the land use district where it is proposed, or otherwise have an adverse effect on adjacent uses or properties.

4.     That the proposed use will not endanger or otherwise constitute a menace to the public health, safety or general welfare.

D.    Listing of Decisions

The Director of Community Development shall maintain a list of all decisions on proposed findings of similarity. A finding of similarity shall not be construed as an amendment to this title. (08-05)

 

16.339.030 APPEALS
The applicant or any other person may appeal, or the City Council may review, any decision of the Director pertaining to finding of similar use pursuant to Chapter 16.321. (08-05)

Chapter 16.400 NONCONFORMITIES
16.400.000 INTENT
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the continuation, maintenance, expansion and abatement of lots, uses and structures, which, although lawful at the time of construction or initiation, do not conform to the standards of this title. (08-05)

 

16.400.010 APPLICABILITY
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to lots, uses and structures which were legally constructed or initiated but which do not conform to the present code because of subsequent changes in land use regulations and annexations. (08-05)

 

16.400.020 CONTINUANCE OF NONCONFORMITIES
Nonconforming lots, uses, and structures may be continued, maintained, and expanded subject only to the provisions of this chapter. (08-05)

 

16.400.030 NONCONFORMING LOTS
All lots, legally created, which do not meet the minimum lot area and dimension standards of the district in which they are located are hereby deemed nonconforming lots.

A.     Permitted Development on Nonconforming Lots

1.     Undeveloped, nonconforming lots may be used and have a structure erected upon them, provided the development standards of the district can be met. Such lots may be a proper subject for a variance, but shall be considered on a case by case basis.

2.     No nonconforming lot shall be reduced in area or dimensions unless a variance is granted by the Planning Commission pursuant to Chapter 16.309.

B.     Development on Nonconforming Lots in the RM Districts

In the RM (2000) and RM (3000) Districts, any lot with an area less than the minimum required for the District may be developed only to the RM (4000) District density, provided that any lot in any RM District that has an area less than 8000 square feet may be developed only with a single-family unit pursuant to the RS (8000) District development standards. (08-05)

 

16.400.040 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES
All structures including main buildings, accessory buildings, walls, fences, and other structures, which do not meet the height or setback standards, or which result in an outdoor living area less than required or in a lot coverage or floor area more than permitted by this title, or for which the number of parking spaces provided is less than required, and any residential structures in commercial and industrial districts except in the CV District, are hereby deemed to be nonconforming structures, and the following provisions shall apply:

A.     Enlargement and Extension of Nonconforming Structures and Permitted Reductions in Setbacks

1.     General Provisions for All Zones

No enlargement or extension shall be made to a nonconforming structure, except if otherwise specifically permitted by this title or a variance is granted pursuant to Chapter 16.309.

2.     Permitted Building Additions to Nonconforming Structures in the RS, HC, and AV Districts

Building additions to nonconforming structures that do not meet current interior setbacks, may have the same interior setbacks as established with the existing structure as noted in Chapter 16.130, provided all other development standards can be met.

3.     New Construction on Single-Family Residential Property Without Required Parking

In single-family residential districts, an existing building may be expanded or a new accessory structure may be constructed on a lot where the parking requirements of the district are not met, provided the sum of the floor area of all buildings on a lot is not increased by more than 25 percent or 1000 square feet, whichever is less, during a period of five years or less, and if the new construction does not occupy the only available area suitable for the required parking and access thereto.

B.     Replacement of Nonconforming Structures

1.     General Provisions for All Districts

Any nonconforming structure which is damaged may be restored to its original condition provided that the cost of such restoration does not exceed 50 percent of the replacement value of the structure, as determined by the Director, and that the restoration must start within one year from the date the damage occurred.

2.     Replacement of Structures Not Meeting Lot Coverage, Floor Area or Height Restrictions in the RS, HC and AV Districts

In the RS, HC and AV Districts, dwelling units and accessory structures, nonconforming in that they do not meet lot coverage, floor area or height restrictions of the district, may be reconstructed if damaged or destroyed even if the cost of restoration exceeds 50 percent of the replacement cost of the structure, subject to the following requirements:

a.     The original structure was constructed in compliance with all applicable codes at the time of its construction.

b.     The replacement construction duplicates the size, location, and footprint of the destroyed structure.

c.     The reconstruction, if not replicating the original structure, shall be subject to architectural review pursuant to Chapter 16.300.

d.     Reconstruction starts within one year from the date the damage occurred.

3.     Replacement of Nonconforming Structures in the HC District

a.     In the HC District, legal dwelling units and accessory structures destroyed by natural catastrophe may be rebuilt at the previous density, provided reconstruction starts within one year from the date when the damage occurred.

b.     Legal nonconforming fences may be maintained, repaired or replaced provided all replacement materials are reviewed and approved by the Director.

4.     Replacement of Nonconforming Structures in the RR Districts

In the RR Districts, legal nonconforming single-family residences and accessory structures which are damaged or destroyed may be reconstructed even if the cost of restoration exceeds 50 percent of the replacement cost of the structure pursuant to Chapter 16.007, Nonconformities.

5.     Reconstruction of Multifamily Housing

For reconstruction, restoration, or rebuilding of multifamily housing, see also California Government Code Section 65852.25.

C.    Signs Erected Prior to May 22, 1990

All signs legally erected prior to May 22, 1990 shall be treated as conforming signs. All such signs may be continued, maintained, and repaired so long as the sign is not expanded, structurally altered or abandoned pursuant to Title 18. (08-05)

 

16.400.050 RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT IN THE CV DISTRICT
In the CV District, existing residential structures shall be treated as conforming structures.

A.     New Construction on Existing Residential Lots

Where there is no commercial use of the lot in combination with the residential use, an existing residential structure may be expanded or a new residential accessory structure may be constructed on the lot pursuant to the HC (7500) District development standards.

B.     New Construction on Lots With Combination of Residential and Commercial Uses

On lots with a combination of residential and commercial uses, the expansion of an existing residential structure or construction of a new residential accessory structure shall require an amendment to the conditional use permit that was originally granted when the combined commercial and residential uses were initiated. If no conditional use permit was required at the time of initiation, a new conditional use permit shall be required. (08-05)

 

16.400.060 NONCONFORMING SITE DEVELOPMENT AND BUILDING APPURTENANCES EXCEPT SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
Nonconforming site development is development on any site, except single-family residential development, where such development or building appurtenances do not meet the standards of this title for yard landscaping, parking lot landscaping, trash enclosures, fencing and screening, undergrounding of utilities, and/or mechanical equipment screening.

For nonconforming site development, no building permit for a new structure, or an addition to an existing structure which adds 25 percent or more to the floor area of an existing structure within a five-year period, shall be issued unless plans to bring any nonconforming site development or building appurtenance into compliance with the standards of this title, or as near to compliance as is practically feasible, are approved by the Director. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until such improvements are completed per the approved plans. (08-05)

 

16.400.070 NONCONFORMING USES
Nonconforming uses are those uses that were legally established but which are not currently listed as permitted, special or conditional uses in the district where they are located, or which currently require a special use and development permit or conditional use permit but at the time of their initiation did not require a special use and development permit or conditional use permit.

A.     General Provisions for Nonconforming Uses

1.     No nonconforming use shall be expanded or moved in whole or part to any portion of the lot or parcel or other structure other than that occupied by such use at the time it was established.

2.     No nonconforming use may be changed to a different nonconforming use.

3.     If a nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of 90 days or more, such nonconforming use shall not be re-established.

B.     Abatement of Nonconforming Uses

Abatement of nonconforming uses may be initiated by the City. Any person may request the abatement of a nonconforming use by letter to the Planning Commission or the City Council. If the Planning Commission or the City Council decides to initiate the abatement, the following procedures shall be followed:

1.     Planning Commission Hearing

a.     The matter shall be considered by the Planning Commission at their next available meeting after initiation of the abatement.

b.     The Planning Commission shall review the nonconforming use to determine if the use has adverse environmental impacts and is incompatible with the intent of this title and the General Plan. The Planning Commission shall announce its findings by formal resolution. The Planning Commission’s recommendation shall be forwarded for consideration by the City Council.

2.     City Council Decision

If the Council determines that the use has adverse environmental impacts and is incompatible with the intent of this title and the General Plan, the Council may require that, within five years after the Council’s decision, the nonconforming use shall cease, or be modified to conform to this title, or where applicable, that any necessary permits be obtained.

3.     Notice

The business owner and the owner of the property where the use is located shall be given written notice at least ten days in advance of any proceedings and deliberation of the Planning Commission and City Council. (08-05)

Chapter 16.403 CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY
16.403.000 INTENT
It is the intent of this chapter to assure that all new buildings or additions to existing buildings are completed in accordance with, and that any change in use is in conformity with, this title. (08-05)

 

16.403.010 APPLICABILITY
No building hereafter erected, moved, enlarged, or altered shall be occupied or used until a certificate of occupancy is issued by the Building Official, except this section shall not apply to alterations of existing single-family residences. (08-05)

 

16.403.020 FORM
The certificate of occupancy shall state that the building or proposed use of a building or land has complied with all laws and ordinances and with the provisions of this title. A record of all certificates shall be kept in the office of the Building Official and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land affected. (08-05)

Chapter 16.406 VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT
16.406.000 INTENT
It is the intent of this chapter to assure compliance with the provisions of Titles 16, 17, and 18 of the Claremont Municipal Code. (08-05)

 

16.406.010 VIOLATION AND PENALTIES
No person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, shall violate, cause the violation of, or otherwise fail to comply with any of the requirements of Titles 16, 17, and 18. Unless a different penalty is prescribed for violating a specific provision of these titles, every act prohibited or declared unlawful and every failure to perform an act made mandatory shall be a misdemeanor or an infraction, at the discretion of the City Attorney or the district attorney.

Each person, firm or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate crime for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of these titles is committed, continued, or permitted by such person, firm or corporation, and shall be punishable as provided in this section.

Every misdemeanor offense shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Every offense in these titles prosecuted as an infraction shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense, a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second offense of the same provision within one (1) year, and a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional offense of the same provision within one (1) year.

As used in this section, the term “year” means any consecutive twelve-month period. As used in this section, the term “offense” includes any violation of these titles which is cited or charged and which does not result in:

A.     An acquittal;

B.     A finding of “not guilty”;

C.    A dismissal of charges by the City or the court.

In addition to the penalties provided in this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of these titles is hereby declared a public nuisance, and may be abated by civil proceedings such as restraining orders, civil injunction, abatement proceedings or the like.

The expense of such abatement proceedings may, by resolution of the City Council, be declared to be a lien against the property on which such nuisance is maintained, and such lien shall be made the personal obligation of the property owner. (08-05)

 

16.406.020 ENFORCEMENT AND ISSUANCE OF CITATIONS
A.     The Director of Community Development, and the Director’s designees, shall have the duty and authority to enforce the provisions of Titles 16, 17, and 18.

B.     In addition, the City Manager shall designate specific City employees to be code enforcement officers of the Community Development Department. These code enforcement officers shall have the duty and authority to enforce the provisions of these titles. The designated code enforcement officers are authorized by the City Council, pursuant to Sections 832, 836.5, and 19(d) of the California Penal Code, and subject to the training provisions of paragraph 2 of this subsection, to arrest a person without warrant whenever the code enforcement office has reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has violated a provision contained in these titles in the officer’s presence.

1.     In any case in which a person is arrested by a code enforcement officer pursuant to the authority granted in this section, the code enforcement officer shall issue a NOTICE TO APPEAR and shall release such person on his or her written promise to appear in court, pursuant to Sections 836.5, 853.5 and 853.6 of the California Penal Code. Under no circumstances may the code enforcement officer take the person to be arrested into custody. In the event that the person to be arrested demands to be taken before a magistrate or refuses to provide his or her written promise to appear in court, the code enforcement officer shall either (1) summon a police officer and request that the officer arrest the person and take that person into custody, or (2) promptly refer the matter to the prosecuting attorney and request that a complaint be prepared and filed against that person.

2.     Each code enforcement officer shall complete a course of training to be coordinated by the Chief of Police which shall include, at minimum, training in (1) the evidentiary prerequisites to criminal prosecution, and (2) procedures for prudently exercising the officer’s arrest and citation authority.

C.    The City Manager shall designate specific City employees to issue parking citations for violations of these titles. The City Council, pursuant to Vehicle Code Sections 40202 and 41102, authorizes these designated employees to issue parking citations for violations of these titles that pertain to the parking or standing of vehicles. If the vehicle is unattended during the time of the violation, the employee authorized to issue parking citations shall securely attach to the vehicle a notice of parking violation setting forth the following: (1) a reference to the section of these titles violated; (2) the approximate time of the violation: (3) the location where the violation occurred; (4) the vehicle license number; (5) the registration expiration date; (6) the color of the vehicle; and, if possible, (7) the make of the vehicle. The notice of parking violation shall be attached to the vehicle either under the windshield wiper or in another conspicuous place upon the vehicle so as to be easily observed by the person in charge of the vehicle upon return of that person. Once the notice of parking violation has been attached to the vehicle as provided above, the notice of parking violation shall be filed with the City’s processing agency. Thenceforth, these citations shall be dealt with in the same manner as are the parking citations issued by the Police Department of the City of Claremont.

As used in this section, the term “parking” means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading and unloading merchandise or passengers.

As used in this section, the term “vehicle” is a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, excepting a device moved exclusively by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (08-05)

 

16.406.030 EVIDENCE OR PROCEDURE
Formal rules of evidence or procedure which are followed in court shall not be applied to hearings before the Council or commission. No action, inaction or recommendation regarding any planning or zoning matter by either the Council or commission or any staff member shall be held void or invalid or be set aside by any court on the ground of the improper consideration or rejection of evidence or by reason of any error or otherwise in any of the administrative or legislative procedures so long as such error was not prejudicial or injurious to the complainant and the omission of such error would not have afforded a different decision by the Council, commission or staff. (08-05)

 

16.406.040 MANNER OF ENFORCEMENT
The following individuals shall enforce the provisions of Titles 16, 17, and 18: the Director of Community Development; the Director’s designees; the code enforcement officers of the Community Development Department who are designated and trained in accordance with Section 16.406.020 of this chapter; and, the City employees authorized to issue parking citations who are designated in accordance with Section 16.406.020 of this chapter. (08-05)

Chapter 16.409 ZONING MAP ADMINISTRATION
16.409.000 INTENT
It is the intent of this chapter to establish an “Official Zoning Map” and procedures for its administration. (08-05)

 

16.409.010 ZONING MAP
The zoning districts created by this title and the boundaries of such districts are shown upon a map attached hereto and made a part of this title, being designated as the “Official Zoning Map,” and said map and all the notations, references and other information shown thereon shall be as much a part of this title as if the matters and information set forth by said map were all duly described herein.

The original zoning map shall be kept on file with the Director and shall constitute the original record. A copy of said map shall also be filed with the City Clerk.

All amendments and changes shall be recorded by the City Clerk within forty-eight (48) hours after such amendments or changes become effective. These data shall at that time be filed with the Director. A new amended Official Zoning Map shall be prepared by the Director at the end of each fiscal year upon which is shown all changes and amendments enacted during the previous period of time. Said Zoning Map shall hereafter be filed with the City Clerk, Building Official, and Director. (08-05)

 

16.409.020 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
Where indicated, district boundaries are approximately street, alley or lot lines, said lines are determined to be the boundaries of the district. Otherwise, the boundaries shall be determined by the dimensions shown on the “Official Zoning Map.” In the absence of a dimension, the boundary shall be determined by use of the scale shown on said map.

A street, alley, railroad or railway right-of-way, water course, drainage channel or body of water included on the Zoning Map shall, unless otherwise indicated, be included within the zone of adjoining property on either side thereof; and where such street, alley, right-of-way, water course, or drainage channel or body of water serves as a boundary between two or more different zoning districts, the center line of such right-of-way, water course, channel or body of water shall be considered the boundary between zoning districts.

In the event that a vacated street, alley, right-of-way, or easement was the boundary between two (2) districts, the new zoning district boundaries shall be at the new property line or at a line established at or within fifty (50) feet of the centerline of the street or alley that has been vacated.

Where uncertainties exist, the Commission shall, by written decision, determine the location of the District boundary. (08-05)

Chapter 16.412 ANNEXED AREAS
16.412.000 INTENT
It is the intent of this chapter to provide for automatic zoning of land annexed to the City. (08-05)

 

16.412.010 ZONING DISTRICT DESIGNATION
Land annexed to the City of Claremont shall be automatically zoned as set forth in this section unless other zoning is established concurrently with the annexation proceedings following the procedure set forth in Chapter 16.315 of this title, and where reference is made to the County Zoning it shall mean the land use zoning in effect under Los Angeles County Ordinance No. 1494, as amended to January 1, 1962.

A.     Parcels lying south of Base Line Road zoned C-1 or C-3 by the County shall be automatically placed in the CH District.

B.     Other parcels lying south of Foothill Boulevard shall be automatically placed in the RS (8000) District.

C.    Other parcels lying between Foothill Boulevard and Base Line Road shall be automatically placed in the RS (10,000) District.

D.    Parcels lying north of Base Line Road shall be automatically placed in the district corresponding to the County Zoning in effect on January 1, 1962, as follows:

1.     Where the County Zoning requires a minimum lot area of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet or less, the parcel shall be placed in the RS (13,000) District.

2.     Where the County Zoning requires a minimum lot area of more than fifteen thousand (15,000) but less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, the parcel shall be placed in the RS (20,000) District.

3.     Where the County Zoning requires a minimum lot area of more than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, the parcel shall be placed in the RS (2 acre) District. (08-05)

Chapter 16.415 SEVERABILITY
16.415.000 VALIDITY AND ADOPTION SEVERABLE
If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this title is for any reason held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this title. The Council of the City of Claremont hereby declares that it would have adopted this title and each section, sentence, clause and phrase hereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid, or unconstitutional. (08-05)

Chapter 16.900 GLOSSARY OF DEFINITIONS
Note
*      Prior chapter history: Ord. Nos. 08-05, 09-16, 12-01.

       All citations to state code sections refer to those sections as they may be amended, superseded or repealed from time to time.

 

16.900.005 ABUTTING
Abutting shall mean two or more lots or parcels of land sharing a common boundary line.

 

16.900.010 ACCESS
Access shall mean the place or way by which pedestrian and vehicles shall have safe, adequate and suitable ingress and egress to a property or use as required by this Code.

 

16.900.015 ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE
Accessory building or structure shall mean a detached building or structure, the use of which is incidental and accessory to that of the main building or structure, or to the main use of the land, and which is located on the same lot or parcel of land with the main building or structure, or use. Anything attached or joined to the main building shall be counted as part of the main building, except if attached by only a breezeway.

 

16.900.025 ACCESSORY SECOND UNIT
Accessory second unit shall mean an attached or detached dwelling unit that is subordinate to and on the same lot or parcel of property as a single-family dwelling unit in a residential district. Such second dwelling unit shall be designed, occupied, or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters, with kitchen and sanitation facilities for the exclusive use of not more than one household.

 

16.900.030 ACCESSORY USE
Accessory use shall mean any use which is: (1) incidental, related or subordinate to a principal use; (2) located on the same lot as the principal use; (3) does not alter or adversely affect the principal use; (4) does not affect the use of other properties in the same zone; and (5) does not serve property other than the lot on which the principal use is located.

 

16.900.035 ADJACENT
Adjacent shall mean nearby, adjoining, immediately preceding or following. (14-04)

 

16.900.040 ADULT DAY HEALTH CENTER
Adult day health center shall mean a licensed facility which provides an organized day program of therapeutic, social, and skilled nursing health activities and services to elderly persons or adults with disabilities with functional impairments, either physical or mental, pursuant to Chapter 3.3 of Division 2 of the California Health and Safety Code. (14-04)

 

16.900.050 AGRICULTURAL OPERATIONS; AGRICULTURAL USE
Agricultural operations and agricultural use shall mean any use of property for agricultural purposes, including, but not limited to, wholesale nurseries, farming, planting, harvesting or other similar operations/activities. (14-04)

 

16.900.055 ALTERNATIVE TRANSPORTATION
Alternative transportation shall mean the use of modes of transportation other than the single passenger motor vehicle, including but not limited to carpools, vanpools, bus pools, public transit, walking and bicycling.

 

16.900.060 AIRPORT
Airport shall mean any area which is used or is intended to be used for the taking off and landing of aircraft, including helicopters, and any appurtenant areas which are used or intended to be used for airport buildings, or facilities, including open spaces, taxiways, or tie-down areas.

 

16.900.065 ALLEY
Alley shall mean public or private way, at the rear or side of property, permanently reserved as a means for secondary access to abutting property.

 

16.900.070 AMBIENT NOISE LEVEL
Ambient noise level shall mean the all-encompassing noise level associated with a given environment, being a composite of sounds from all sources, excluding the alleged offensive noise, at the location and approximate time at which a comparison with the alleged offensive noise is to be made. For the purpose of measurement, the ambient noise shall be the average noise level over a 15-minute period with the noise of the offending source, near the location and time of the alleged offense. The average noise level is ten times the logarithm of the arithmetic average of the antilog of 1/10 of the noise values for all measurements being averaged.

 

16.900.072 ANCILLARY; ANCILLARY USE
Ancillary shall mean associated with and directly related to, but incidental and subordinate to the predominant use. Ancillary use shall mean any use which is incidental, related to, or subordinate to a principal use; and does not alter or adversely affect the principal use. See 16.900.030, Accessory Use. (14-04)

 

16.900.075 ANTENNA
Antenna shall mean a device or other components constructed for and used in transmitting or receiving electromagnetic waves.

 

16.900.077 ANTENNA ARRAY
Antenna array shall mean one or more antennas which may include omnidirectional antennas (whip), directional antennas (panel), and parabolic antennas (disc). (14-04)

 

16.900.080 ANTENNA HEIGHT
Antenna height shall mean the overall vertical distance to the highest point of the antenna, including the support structure, measured from the average elevation of the ground under the antenna or support structure, or if such system is located on a building or other structure, the overall vertical distance, measured from the average elevation of the ground under the building or structures upon which the antenna or support structure is mounted.

 

16.900.085 ANTENNA, HORIZONTAL-WIRE OR SLOPING-WIRE
Horizontal-wire or sloping-wire antenna shall mean a horizontal or sloping antenna which is constructed of wire and which does not include self-supporting tubing or booms or components and materials of similar visibility.

 

16.900.090 ANTENNA, PANEL
Panel antenna shall mean an antenna or an array of flat, rectangular antennas that are designed to concentrate electromagnetic signals in a particular direction or area. Also referred to as directional antennas.

 

16.900.095 ANTENNA MAST-POLE
Antenna mast-pole shall mean an antenna support structure which consists of a single pole supported only at or near its base except for visually obtrusive guying provisions.

 

16.900.100 ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE
Antenna support structure shall mean any structure, mast pole, tripod, or tower utilized for the purpose of supporting an antenna or antennas for the purpose of transmission or reception of electromagnetic waves.

 

16.900.105 ANTENNA, VERTICAL OR WHIP
Vertical or whip antenna shall mean an antenna consisting of a single, slender, rod-like main element, perpendicular to the ground, which (1) is supported only at or near its base except for visually unobtrusive guying provisions; (2) may include visually unobtrusive horizontal or sloping wires, usually called radials or counterpoises, at its base; and (3) may include customary coils and/or small parallel elements along the length of the vertical element which do not significantly increase the visual impact of the antenna.

 

16.900.110 APARTMENT
Apartment shall mean a room or group of rooms that is designed, used or intended to be used as a single-family unit and is located in a multiple-family dwelling.

 

16.900.125 AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION
Automobile service station shall mean an area which provides for the servicing of motor vehicles, including tube and tire repairs, battery charging, storage of merchandise, and supplies related to the servicing of motor vehicles, sale of gasoline and lubricants, automobile washing (not including mechanical car wash) and grease racks, but excluding body and fender work, painting, repair and rebuilding of electro-chemical batteries, or other work of a similar nature.

 

16.900.127 AUXILIARY; AUXILIARY USE
See Sections 16.900.030, Accessory Use, and 16.900.072, Ancillary; Ancillary Use. (14-04)

 

16.900.130 “A” WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL
“A” weighted sound level shall mean the total sound level in decibels of all sound as measured with a sound level meter with reference pressure of 20 micropascals using the “A” weighted network (scale) at slow response. The unit of measurement shall be defined as Db(A).

 

16.900.135 BASEMENT
Basement shall mean a space wholly or partly underground, and having more than one-half (1/2) of its height, measuring from its floor to its ceiling below the average adjoining grade; if the finished floor level directly above a basement is more than six (6) feet above grade at any point, such basement, shall be considered a story.

 

16.900.140 BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT
Bed and breakfast establishment shall mean one or more buildings containing a dwelling unit and not more than 20 guest rooms, where only breakfast or similar early morning meal is provided to registered guests and the price of the meal is included in the price of the accommodations. The relationship between the operator of the establishment and the occupants of the guest rooms shall be that of innkeeper and guests. Guest rooms shall not be rented for a period of less than 18 hours at a time.

 

16.900.145 BEDROOM
Bedroom shall mean any room having a minimum area of 70 square feet, other than a kitchen, dining room, family room, or bathroom, which is separated from other rooms, and which is designed or capable of being used for sleeping quarters.

16.900.150 BOARDING HOUSE
Boarding and/or rooming house shall mean a structure containing a single-family dwelling unit and not more than five (5) sleeping rooms for rent to no more than five (5) persons. Meals may be provided in connection with such renting or the kitchen may be commonly used. Rooms shall not be rented for less than 30 days. Boarding house shall not include health and care facilities, rest homes, or establishments designed or used for transient occupancy such as hotel, motel or bed and breakfast establishment.

 

16.900.155 BREEZEWAY
Breezeway shall mean a roofed, narrow, open or enclosed pedestrian passageway which connects two buildings (as a house and a garage), or halves of a building.

 

16.900.165 BUILDING
Building shall mean any permanently located structure having a roof supported by walls, and intended or used for shelter, housing or enclosure of any person, animal, process, equipment, goods and materials of any kind or nature.

 

16.900.170 BUILDING FRONTAGE
Building frontage shall mean those building elevations which face upon a public street or parking area between such building and said street.

 

16.900.175 BUILDING HEIGHT
Building height shall mean the vertical distance to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs; to the deck line of mansard roofs; and to the midpoint between eaves and the highest ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs, measured from the curb level if the building is within 10 feet from the front property line, or from the average elevation of the ground under the building.

 

16.900.180 BUILDING, MAIN
Main building shall mean a building within which is conducted the principal use permitted on the lot, as provided by this Code.

 

16.900.185 BUS POOL
Bus pool shall mean a vehicle carrying 16 or more passengers commuting on a regular basis to and from work with a fixed route, according to a fixed schedule.

 

16.900.190 CANOPY
Canopy shall mean a structural, ornamental, roof-like appendage, freestanding or attached to a building, which extends over public or private walkways, driveways, etc.

 

16.900.195 CARPOOL
Carpool shall mean a vehicle carrying two to six persons commuting together to and from work on a regular basis.

 

16.900.200 CARPORT
Carport shall mean a permanent roofed structure with not more than two enclosed sides, used or intended to be used for automobile shelter and storage.

 

16.900.205 CHILD DAY CARE FACILITY; CHILD DAY CARE CENTER
Child day care facility shall mean a facility that provides nonmedical care to children under 18 years of age in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual on less than a 24-hour basis. Child day care facility includes day care centers, employer-sponsored child care centers, and family day care homes, pursuant to Chapters 3.4, 3.5 and 3.6 of Division 2 of the California Health and Safety Code. (14-04)

 

16.900.210 CIRCULATION ELEMENT
Circulation element shall mean the circulation element of streets and highways of the City as shown on the General Plan adopted by the Planning Commission and the City Council.

 

16.900.220 COMMERCIAL PROPERTY
Commercial property shall mean a parcel of real property which is developed and used either in part or in whole for commercial purposes.

 

16.900.225 COMMERCIAL SPACE
Commercial space shall mean an enclosed building or part of an enclosed building which is occupied by a single business.

 

16.900.230 COMMUNITY HOUSING AND COMMUNITY HOUSING PROJECT
Community housing and community housing project shall mean and include the following: a condominium project, as defined in Section 783 of the Civil Code; a community apartment project, as defined in Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code, containing two or more rights of exclusive occupancy; a stock cooperative as defined in Section 11003.2 of the Business and Professions Code, containing two or more rights of exclusive occupancy, and a planned development as defined in Section 11003 of the Business and Professions Code, containing two or more separately owned lots, parcels or areas.

 

16.900.235 CONDOMINIUM
Condominium shall refer to the ownership of single units in a multi-unit project with common elements.

 

16.900.245 COVERED PATIO, DECK OR BALCONY
Covered patio, deck or balcony shall mean a patio, deck or balcony where there is a structure above the patio, deck or balcony, and the structure is such that less than 50 percent of its horizontal surface is open to permit the transmission of light, air and vision. A patio, deck or balcony with a structure above where more than 50 percent of the horizontal surface of the structure is open to permit the transmission of light, air and vision shall be considered an uncovered patio, deck or balcony for purposes of this Code.

 

16.900.250 CUMULATIVE PERIOD
Cumulative period shall mean an additive period of time composed of individual time segments which may be continuous or interrupted.

 

16.900.255 CUT
Cut shall mean an excavation of the earth.

 

16.900.265 DECIBEL (dB)
Decibel (dB) shall mean a unit which denotes the ratio between two quantities which are proportional to power: the number of decibels corresponding to the ratio to two amounts of power is 10 times the logarithm to the base 10 of this ratio.

 

16.900.270 DEDICATED TO THE CITY
Dedicated to the City shall mean land deeded to the City and legally accepted as such for public use. (14-04)

 

16.900.275 DENSITY
Density shall mean the number of dwelling units that may be constructed per acre or per square foot of lot area.

 

16.900.280 DEVELOPMENT
Development shall mean the physical extension and/or construction of urban land uses. Development activities include: subdivision of land; construction or alteration of structures, roads, septic systems, utilities, and other facilities; grading, deposit of refuse, debris, or fill materials; clearing and planting of vegetative cover; and any use or expansion of the use of land. Routine repair and maintenance activities are exempted.

 

16.900.285 DINING, INSIDE
Inside dining shall mean the gross area of a restaurant that is enclosed in a building by three or more walls and a roof.

 

16.900.290 DINING, OUTSIDE
Outside dining shall mean the gross area of a restaurant that is enclosed in a building with two or fewer walls. Such an area may be covered by a roof. Outside dining areas may include, but shall not be limited to, trellises, arbors, gazebos and other open-air structures. Areas with landscaping shall not be included in the calculation of gross area.

 

16.900.293 DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
Director of Community Development shall mean the department head authorized to perform the duties of the Director of Community Development, including Acting Director of Community Development or other City employee designated by the City Manager to perform the duties of the Director of Community Development, and the Director of Community Development’s designee. (14-04)

 

16.900.295 DISPLAY WINDOW
Display window shall mean a window through which the public can view products for sale within a commercial space.

 

16.900.300 DRIVEWAY
Driveway shall mean a paved access to an off-street parking facility, having not less than ten feet in paved width and not encumbered by any properties to a height of not less than eight feet above the ground.

 

16.900.305 DWELLING UNIT
Dwelling unit shall mean a building or portion of a building designed, occupied, used, or intended for residential purposes by no more than a single-housekeeping unit. A dwelling shall contain a kitchen and shall have continuous interior access provided to all rooms and areas within the dwelling.

 

16.900.310 EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
Educational institutions shall mean public and other institutions conducting regular academic instruction at pre-school, kindergarten, elementary, secondary and collegiate levels, and including graduate schools, universities, and non-profit research institutions. Such institutions must either (1) offer general academic instruction equivalent to the standards prescribed by the State Board of Education; or (2) confer degrees as a college or university of undergraduate or graduate standing; or (3) conduct research. This definition does not include commercial or trade schools.

 

16.900.315 EFFICIENCY UNIT
Efficiency unit shall mean a dwelling unit consisting of not less than 400 square feet, which contains one habitable room together with kitchen or kitchenette and sanitary facilities for the exclusive use of not more than one household.

 

16.900.318 EMERGENCY MACHINERY, VEHICLE, WORK OR WARNING ALARM
Emergency machinery, vehicle, work or warning alarm shall mean any machinery, vehicle, work, or alarm used, employed, performed, or operated in an effort to protect, provide, or restore safe conditions in the community or for the citizenry, or work by private or public utilities when restoring utility service or when utilizing emergency equipment. (14-04)

 

16.900.320 EMERGENCY SHELTER
Emergency shelter shall mean housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person. No individual or household may be denied occupancy in an emergency shelter because of an inability to pay. (Health and Safety Code Section 50801(e)).

 

16.900.325 EMPLOYEE PARKING AREA
Employee parking area shall mean the portion of total required parking at a development which is allocated for use by on-site employees.

 

16.900.330 FAMILY
Family shall mean one or more individuals occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single household unit where individuals have common access to, and common use of, all living and eating areas, and all areas and facilities for the preparation and storage of food within the dwelling unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding or rooming house, or hotel.

 

16.900.340 FEASIBLE
Feasible shall mean capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time taking into account economic, environmental, social or technological factors.

 

16.900.345 FENCE
Fence shall mean any structure, other than a building, made of any material or combination of materials, which is used as a barrier or boundary to screen or enclose areas of land. A “solid” fence shall be a fence which is constructed so less than 50 percent of the vertical surface is open to permit the transmission of light and air. This shall include concrete block, wood or other materials that are solid and are so assembled as to form a solid barrier. Fence shall not include a barrier of living material (i.e., hedge).

 

16.900.350 FILL
Fill shall mean deposits of soil, rock, or other similar irreducible materials placed by man.

 

16.900.355 FIRST POINT OF CONNECTION
First point of connection shall mean the point at which a utility line serving the development first connects with an off-site utility line having capacity to serve the project.

 

16.900.360 FIXED NOISE SOURCE
Fixed noise source shall mean a stationary device which creates sounds while fixed or motionless including but not limited to residential, agricultural, industrial, and commercial machinery and equipment, pumps, fans, compressors, air conditioners, and refrigeration equipment.

 

16.900.365 FLOOR AREA
Floor area shall mean the sum of the horizontal areas of all floors under a roof. For residential development, the horizontal areas of floors shall be measured from the exterior faces of the walls or exterior supports of the structure, including the area of an upper level not separated from a lower level by a floor/ceiling assembly. It shall include the floor area of covered patios and covered balconies, but not crawl spaces, uncovered patios, or uncovered balconies. It shall also not include basements and attics that are not designed or finished to be used for human occupancy, or where the floor to ceiling height is less than six feet, six inches. For nonresidential development, floor area shall be measured from the interior walls, and shall include only those horizontal areas within a building or tenant space where there are floors, except where the ceiling height is less than six feet, six inches.

 

16.900.370 FLOOR AREA, NET
Net floor area shall mean the total of all floor areas of a building excluding stairwells and elevator shafts, equipment rooms, interior vehicular parking or loading, and spaces that are not designed for human occupancy. Net floor area shall also include all floors below the first or ground floor, except where the floor to ceiling height is less than six feet, six inches.

 

16.900.385 GARAGE
Private garage shall mean a detached accessory building or a portion of a main building on the same lot as a dwelling for the housing of vehicles of the occupants of the dwelling. Public garage shall mean any garage other than a private garage.

 

16.900.390 GENERAL PLAN
General Plan shall mean the comprehensive, long-term general plan for the physical development of the City as adopted by Ordinance.

 

16.900.395 GRADING
Grading shall mean any excavating or filling of earth, material or any combination thereof conducted at a site to prepare said site for construction or other improvements thereon.

 

16.900.400 GROSS AREA
Gross area shall mean the total area of a parcel or lot including any proposed public highways, streets, or alleys or other public sites. (14-04)

 

16.900.405 GUEST ROOM
Guest room shall mean a room or rooms, within a commercial establishment—such as a hotel/motel or bed and breakfast establishment—that are designed, used, or intended to be used as temporary or overnight accommodations by transients. (14-04)

 

16.900.415 HEALTH CARE INSTITUTION
Health care institution shall mean any hospital, convalescent home or other similar facilities which provide health care, medical treatment, room, board, or other services for the ill, retarded or convalescent.

 

16.900.420 HERTZ (Hz)
Hertz (Hz) shall mean the unit which describes the frequency.

 

16.900.435 HOTEL/MOTEL
Hotel/motel shall mean a commercial land use in a building or portion of a building containing guest rooms which are designed, occupied, used, or intended to be used, rented or hired out as temporary or overnight accommodations for tourists or transients. A hotel/motel shall not include residential and health care facilities that provide care of persons in need of medical or nursing care, personal care, developmental and supportive services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living.

 

16.900.440 INCOME—PERSONS AND HOUSEHOLDS
Very low-income household shall mean a household whose income does not exceed the very low-income limits applicable to Los Angeles County, as published and periodically updated by the State’s Department of Housing and Community Development pursuant to Section 50105 of the California Health and Safety Code.

 

Lower-income household shall mean a household whose income does not exceed the lower income limits applicable to Los Angeles County, as published and periodically updated by the State’s Department of Housing and Community Development pursuant to Section 50079.5 of the California Health and Safety Code.

 

Moderate-income household shall mean a household whose income does not exceed the moderate-income limits applicable to Los Angeles County, as published and periodically updated by the State’s Department of Housing and Community Development pursuant to Section 50093 of the California Health and Safety Code. (14-04)

 

16.900.455 INTRUDING NOISE LEVEL
Intruding noise level shall mean the total sound level, in decibels, created, caused, maintained, or originating from an alleged offensive source at a specified location while the alleged offensive source is in operation.

 

16.900.460 KENNEL
Kennel shall mean any lot, building, structure, enclosure or premises wherein four or more dogs or four or more cats are kept, whether for commercial, non-commercial or veterinary purposes, including places where dogs or cats are boarded, kept for sale or kept for hire.

 

16.900.465 KITCHEN
Kitchen shall mean a room or other space within a building designed, used or intended to be used for the cooking and/or preparation of food. Kitchens may include, but are not limited to, the following facilities: sinks, ovens, ranges, refrigerators, and stoves.

 

16.900.470 LANDSCAPING
Landscaping shall mean the planting and continued maintenance of living ornamental plant materials and shall include the installation, use and continued maintenance of a permanent irrigation system. Exceptions shall be approved by the Director of Community Development.

 

16.900.480 LICENSED
Licensed shall mean the issuance of a formal license or a permit by the City or other governmental authority. (14-04)

 

16.900.490 LOADING SPACE
Loading space shall mean an off-street space or berth on the same lot with a main building, or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of commercial vehicles while loading or unloading, and which abuts a street, alley, or other appropriate means of ingress and egress.

 

16.900.495 LOCATION ON PRIVATE PROPERTY WHICH IS VISIBLE FROM THE STREET
Location on private property which is visible from the street shall mean all locations on private property which can be seen while standing in a public street and which is not behind a five (5) foot high opaque fence.

 

16.900.500 LOCATION ON PRIVATE PROPERTY WHICH IS VISIBLE FROM NEIGHBORING PROPERTIES
Location on private property which is visible from neighboring properties shall mean all locations on private property which can be viewed either from neighboring structures or from neighboring yards while one is in the normal standing position in any portion of those locations. However, it shall not include any location on private property that is totally enclosed in a roofed garage or other enclosed roofed structure.

 

16.900.505 LOT
Lot shall mean:

A.     A parcel of real property with a separate and distinct number or other designation shown on a plat recorded in the Office of the County Recorder; and/or

B.     A parcel of real property delineated on an approved record of survey, lot split or sub-parceling map as filed in the Office of the County Recorder or the Department of Community Development, and abutting at least one public street; and/or

C.    A parcel of real property containing not less area than required by the district in which it is located, abutting at least one public street and held under separate ownership from adjacent property prior to May 1, 1958.

 

16.900.510 LOT AREA OR SIZE
Lot area or size shall mean the total of the area, measured in a horizontal plane, within the lot lines of a lot.

 

16.900.515 LOT, CORNER
Corner lot shall mean a lot located at the intersection or interception of two or more streets at an angle of not more than 120 degrees. If the angle is greater than 120 degrees, the lot shall be considered an interior lot.

 

16.900.520 LOT, CORNER, REVERSED
Reversed corner lot shall mean a corner lot, the side line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot lines of the lots to its rear, whether across an alley or lot lines of the lots to its rear or not.

 

16.900.525 LOT, CORNER, STANDARD
Standard corner lot shall mean a corner lot which is not a reversed corner lot.

 

16.900.530 LOT COVERAGE
Lot coverage shall mean the total area of a lot covered by buildings and structures that are constructed on a foundation or slab, whether at ground level, above ground level, or below ground level. Lot coverage shall be measured from the exterior wall of the buildings and structures. (Refer to district development standards for explanation on what is included in maximum lot coverage calculations.)

 

16.900.535 LOT DEPTH
Lot depth shall mean the perpendicular distance from the front property line to a line, within the lot, which has a length of not less than ten feet at a maximum distance from, and parallel to, the front property line.

 

16.900.540 LOT, INTERIOR
Interior lot shall mean a lot other than a corner lot.

 

16.900.545 LOT, THROUGH
Through lot shall mean a lot having frontage on two dedicated streets, not including a corner or reversed corner lot. The Director shall determine which frontage or frontages shall be considered as the lot front or lot frontages for purposes of compliance with yard and setback provisions of this Code.

 

16.900.550 LOT WIDTH
Lot width shall mean the distance from side property line to side property line, measured at a point midway between the front and rear property lines, parallel to the front property line or to a tangent at the midpoint of a curved front property line.

 

16.900.555 MASTER ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW
Master Architectural Review shall mean a long range plan for development of all or part of an educational institution or other institution which includes a conceptual site plan delineating the siting and intensity of development, location of open space areas, other physical improvements, data regarding anticipated student, faculty and staff growth resulting from the proposed improvements, and any necessary written components.

 

16.900.560 MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT
Mechanical equipment shall mean any heating, cooling, venting or similar equipment or appurtenance servicing a structure.

 

16.900.565 MICRO-PASCAL
Micro-pascal shall mean the reference pressure level in calculating decibels.

 

16.900.570 MINI-WAREHOUSE FACILITIES
Mini-warehouse facilities shall mean enclosed and lockable compartments, a structure, or group of structures for the dead storage of customer goods and wares where individual stalls or lockers are rented out to different tenants for storage. This may include indoor and/or outdoor storage of recreational vehicles.

 

16.900.575 MOBILE HOME PARK
Mobile home park shall mean any area or tract of land where space is rented or sold to owners or users of mobile homes, auto trailers or trailer coaches.

 

16.900.585 MOTEL
Motel shall mean one or more buildings containing one or more guest rooms, without kitchen facilities, with at least 50 percent of all rooms having direct access to the outside without the necessity of passing through the main lobby of the building. Such facilities shall be designed, used or intended to be used as short-term overnight accommodations for transients. Guest rooms shall not be rented for a period of less than 18 hours at a time. Motel may include one dwelling unit for use as a resident manager’s unit.

 

16.900.590 MOTOR HOME
Motor home shall mean a motor vehicle that is designed, altered, and/or used for human habitation that carries persons and property and that is in excess of nine feet in height and/or 19 feet in length. A van or truck with a detachable camper shell is not considered a motor home.

 

16.900.600 NOISE DISTURBANCE
Noise disturbance shall mean any intruding noise level in excess of the maximum allowable exterior noise level as established in this Code.

 

16.900.605 NURSERY SCHOOL
Nursery school shall mean public or private educational facilities for five or more pre-school and/or kindergarten children.

 

16.900.610 OCCASIONAL SALE
Occasional sale shall mean any sale of four or more items of personal property from a residential district including a garage sale, a patio sale, a moving sale, rummage sale, or any similar sale.

 

16.900.615 OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS
Off-site improvements shall mean the installation or construction of facilities outside the boundaries of a private parcel or lot such as street paving, curbs and gutters, sidewalks, street trees, street lights, street signs, sewers, utilities, and drainage structures.

 

16.900.618 ONLINE EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION
Online educational institution shall mean an institution offering academic instruction through online or other digital methods. An online educational institution shall not offer regularly scheduled classes on-site and its students shall not convene regularly at the institution’s physical location. Online educational institutions shall not include educational institutions which offer academic instruction in both physical and online settings. In terms of parking, an online educational institution shall be considered an office use. (16-03)

 

16.900.620 OPEN SPACE
Open space shall mean any space or area that is open and unobstructed from the ground upward except for permitted encroachments and is not used for private streets, driveways, parking or loading.

 

16.900.625 OPEN SPACE, COMMON
Common open space shall mean an open space at ground level held in common ownership in one or more lots and developed for the recreational use of all residents in a residential unit development. Common open space shall not include the front or street side yard setback established by the general development plan. Structures designed for recreational use may be allowed in this space.

 

16.900.630 OUTDOOR LIVING AREA
Outdoor living area shall mean open area set aside for the use of occupants of dwelling units on the same lot.

 

16.900.635 PARK OR PARKING
Park or parking shall mean the standing of the vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.

 

16.900.640 PARKING AREA, PRIVATE
Private parking area shall mean an area (including driveways) of a prepared surface (i.e., crushed rock, cement or asphalt) used for the parking of automobile vehicles capable of movement under their own power. The area and location of private parking shall be restricted by the provisions of Title 16 of this Code.

 

16.900.645 PARKING SPACE
Parking space shall mean a space exclusive of driveways, ramps, columns, loading areas, or work areas, within a building or open parking area for the parking of one automobile.

 

16.900.655 PASSIVE SOLAR
Passive solar shall mean a method for heating or cooling buildings or for heating domestic water in which thermal energy flows by natural means, without pumps or fans.

 

16.900.660 PEDESTRIAN ARCADE
Pedestrian arcade shall mean a one- or two-story structure with 2 or more commercial spaces having access onto an interior covered pedestrian walkway.

 

16.900.665 PERSON
Person shall mean any person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business trust, corporation or company. (14-04)

 

16.900.670 POOLS
Pools, swimming or ornamental, shall mean any body of water measuring more than 18 inches deep at its deepest point, whether above or below the surface of the ground. Said pools shall not be located in any required front yard.

 

16.900.675 PREFERENTIAL CARPOOL/VANPOOL PARKING
Preferential carpool/vanpool parking shall mean parking spaces designated for use by potential carpool and vanpool vehicles that are provided in a location more convenient to a place of employment than parking spaces provided for single occupant vehicles. The spaces shall be assigned, as demand warrants, for carpool and vanpool vehicles through use of a sign or painted space markings.

 

16.900.680 RECREATION COURT
Recreation court shall mean any area with an impervious or permeable surface designed or intended to be used for sport, athletic or game activities, such as tennis, handball, volleyball, basketball, shuffleboard, and ball batting. Included as part of the recreation court shall be any fencing, overhead enclosures, netting, equipment, and other applicable structures design, used or intended to be used in the activity.

 

16.900.685 RESIDENCE
Residence shall mean a building or portion thereof designed or used for human habitation.

 

16.900.690 RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY
Residential property shall mean a parcel of real property which is zoned or developed and used either in part or in whole for residential purposes, other than transient uses such as hotels and motels.

 

16.900.695 ROOM
Room shall mean an unsubdivided portion of the interior of a dwelling unit, excluding bathrooms, closets, hallways and service porches.

 

16.900.700 ROOMING HOUSE
Rooming house shall have the same meaning as boarding house.

 

16.900.705 ROW HOUSE
Row house shall mean a residence which shares a common sidewall or walls with another residence.

 

16.900.710 SETBACK
Setback shall mean the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the structure line, or a line parallel to the lot line if there is no structure.

 

16.900.715 SHOPPING CENTER
Shopping center shall mean a group of commercial establishments, planned, developed, owned and managed as a unit, with parking provided on the property.

 

16.900.725 SIMPLE TONE NOISE
Simple tone noise shall mean a noise characterized by a predominant frequency or frequencies so that other frequencies cannot be readily distinguished. If measured, simple tone noise shall exist if the one-third octave band sound pressure levels in the band with the tone exceeds the arithmetic average of the sound pressure levels of the two contiguous one-third octave bands as follows: 5 dB frequency settings at 500 Hertz (Hz) and above; or by 8 dB for frequency setting between 160 and 400 Hertz (Hz); or by 15 dB for frequency settings less than or equal to 125 Hertz (Hz).

 

16.900.730 SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING
Single-family and/or one-family dwelling shall mean a detached building containing one dwelling unit designed, used or intended for the exclusive occupancy by one household.

 

16.900.740 SITE PLAN
Site plan shall mean a plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensioning, all of the uses proposed for a specific parcel of land. The data contained on said plan shall include information on all buildings, structures, signs whether on or separated from parking, access, vehicular circulation, loading, and lighting. In addition thereto, the site plan shall include such other data as may be necessary to clearly define the intended use of the subject property.

 

16.900.745 SOLAR
Solar shall mean derived from, or relating to, the sun.

 

16.900.750 SOLAR ACCESS EASEMENT
Solar access easement shall mean a right to receive sunlight across the real property of another for any solar energy system.

 

16.900.755 SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM
Solar energy system shall mean any solar collector or other solar energy device or any structural design feature of a building whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage and distribution of solar energy for space heating or cooling, for water heating or for electricity.

 

16.900.760 SOUND
Sound shall mean an oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces that causes compression and rarefaction of that medium. The description of sound may include any characteristic of such sound, including duration, intensity and frequency.

 

16.900.765 SOUND LEVEL
Sound level shall mean the weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use of a sound level meter and frequency weighting network, such as A, B, or C as specified in American National Standards Institute specifications for sound level meters (ANSI S1.4-1971 or the latest revision thereof). If the frequency weighting employed is not indicated, the A-weighting shall apply.

 

16.900.770 SOUND LEVEL METER
Sound level meter shall mean an instrument meeting American National Standards Institute’s Standard S1.4-1971 or most recent revision thereof for Type 1 or Type 2 sound level meters or an instrument and the associate recording and analyzing equipment which will provide equivalent data.

 

16.900.775 SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL
Sound pressure level of a sound, in decibels, shall mean 20 times the logarithm to the base ten (10) of the ratio of the pressure of the sound to a reference pressure, which reference pressure shall be explicitly stated.

 

16.900.780 STAFF
Staff shall mean the Community Development Director of the City of Claremont, or another designated by the City Manager or the Director to perform any task assigned to staff in this Code.

 

16.900.785 STORY
Story shall mean a building between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above, or if there is no floor above, then the space between such floor and the ceiling or roof above.

 

16.900.790 STREET
Street shall mean a public thoroughfare or right-of-way dedicated, deeded or condemned for use as such, other than an alley, which affords the principal means of access to abutting property including avenue, place, way, drive, lane, boulevard, highway, road and any other thoroughfare, except as excluded in this Code.

 

16.900.795 STREETS, COLLECTOR
Collector streets shall mean that system of streets next in importance to secondary streets.

 

16.900.800 STREET FRONTAGE
Street frontage shall mean the linear frontage of a parcel of property abutting a public street.

 

16.900.805 STREETS, MAJOR
Major streets shall mean that system of streets designated as major streets on the Circulation Element of the General Plan.

 

16.900.810 STREETS, MINOR, LOCAL AND CUL-DE-SAC
Minor streets, local streets, and cul-de-sacs shall mean all other streets, except alleys designed to provide direct access to abutting land.

 

16.900.815 STREETS, PRIVATE
Private streets shall mean any land not dedicated as a public street over which a private easement for road purposes has been recorded and used or intended to be used for ingress to or egress from a lot or lots, which may or may not have frontage on a public street.

 

16.900.820 STREETS, SECONDARY
Secondary streets shall mean that system of streets designated as secondary streets on the Circulation Element of the General Plan.

 

16.900.825 STREET, SERVICE
Service street shall mean a street adjacent to a major or secondary highway, or freeway, separated therefrom by a dividing strip and providing ingress to and egress from abutting property.

 

16.900.830 STRUCTURE
Structure shall mean anything constructed or built, any edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, which requires location on the ground or is attached to something having a location on the ground, excepting outdoor paved patio areas, walks, driveways, playing surfaces or outdoor tennis courts, and other similar types of paved recreational surfaces.

 

16.900.832 SUPPORTIVE HOUSING
Supportive housing shall mean housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population, and that is linked to an on-site or off-site service that assists the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community. “Target population” means persons with low incomes who have one or more disabilities, including mental illness, HIV or AIDS, substance abuse, or other chronic health conditions, or individuals eligible for services provided pursuant to the Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act (Division 4.5 (commencing with Section 4500) of the Welfare and Institutions Code), and may include, among other populations, adults, emancipated minors, families with children, elderly persons, young adults aging out of the foster care system, individuals exiting from institutional settings, veterans, and homeless people. This type of housing shall be permitted as a residential use, subject only to restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in the same zone. (Government Code Section 65582.) (17-07)

 

16.900.833 SUPPORT STRUCTURE
Support structure shall mean any structure designed and constructed to support an antenna array, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy-wire support towers, and monopole towers. (14-04)

 

16.900.835 TOXIC OR NOXIOUS MATTER
Toxic or noxious matter shall mean any solid, liquid, or gaseous matter containing properties which by chemical means are inherently harmful or irritating and likely to impair health or capable of causing injury to well-being of persons or damage to property.

 

16.900.840 TRAILER, AUTOMOBILE
Automobile trailer shall mean a vehicle without motive power, designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle and to be used for human habitation or for carrying persons and property, including a trailer coach and mobile home.

 

16.900.845 TRANSIENT
Transient shall mean a person who is receiving temporary sleeping or overnight accommodations, at a location within the City, for a price, with or without meals, and who has a primary residence elsewhere.

 

16.900.850 TRANSITIONAL HOUSING
Transitional housing and transitional housing development shall mean buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that require the termination of assistance and recirculating of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at a predetermined future point in time that shall be no less than six months from the beginning of the assistance. This type of housing shall be permitted as a residential use, subject only to restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in the same zone. (Government Code Section 65582.) (17-07)

 

16.900.855 TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT (TDM)
Transportation Demand Management shall mean the alteration of travel behavior—usually on the part of commuters—through programs of incentives, services, and policies. TDM addresses alternatives to single occupant vehicles such as carpooling and vanpooling, and changes in work schedules that move trips out of the peak period or eliminate them altogether (as in the case of telecommuting or compressed work weeks).

 

16.900.860 TRIP REDUCTION
Trip reduction shall mean reduction in the number of trips made by single occupant vehicles.

 

16.900.870 UNPAVED AREA
Unpaved area shall mean an area lacking a concrete, asphalt, or other continuous connected surface. However, areas covered with a large quantity of substances such as matching small rocks or decomposed granite will not be classified as an unpaved area if they are installed for the purpose of paving in conformance with the prior written approval of the Director of Community Development.

 

16.900.875 USE, OFFICE
Office use shall mean the use of an area where professional, administrative and clerical work is performed. Office uses shall include, but not be limited to, general, medical offices, architects, real estate brokers, interior designers, and research institutes.

 

16.900.880 USE, RETAIL
Retail use shall mean the use of an area where the business of selling to the general public, at retail, of goods, wares, merchandise or commodities is performed.

 

16.900.885 UTILITY LINES
Utility lines shall mean electric, communications, street lighting, and cable television transmission lines, not including appurtenances and equipment associated with those lines, such as surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes, meter cabinets, facilities necessary to the transmission or reception of wireless communication media, and concealed ducts for an underground system.

 

16.900.890 UTILITY LINE, OFF-SITE
Off-site utility line shall mean any utility line not located within or on the boundaries of the parcel or lot at the time an application for development or subdivision is made.

 

16.900.895 UTILITY LINE, ON-SITE
On-site utility line shall mean a utility line within or on boundaries of the parcel or lot at the time an application for development or subdivision is made.

 

16.900.900 UTILITY SERVICE PROVIDER
Utility service provider shall mean any company, public or private, established for the purpose of providing electric, communications, street lighting, or cable television services.

 

16.900.905 VACANT PARCEL
Vacant parcel shall mean a parcel which has no structure(s) located thereon or which contains a structure or structures which are not habitable or are not regularly frequented by employees in the course of business operations.

 

16.900.910 VANPOOL
Vanpool shall mean a vehicle carrying seven or more persons commuting together to and from work on a regular basis, usually in a vehicle with a seating arrangement designed to carry no more than 15 adult passengers, on a prepaid subscription basis.

 

16.900.915 VEGETATION
Vegetation shall mean all plant life.

 

16.900.920 VEHICLE
Vehicle shall mean a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, street, alley, or road except as a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.

 

16.900.925 VIBRATION
Vibration shall mean any movement of the earth, ground or other similar surface created by a temporal and spatial oscillation of displacement, velocity or acceleration in any mechanical device or equipment located upon attached, affixed or in conjunction with that surface.

 

16.900.930 WALL
Wall shall mean a fence made of concrete, concrete block, brick, stone or similar masonry materials. (See Fence.)

 

16.900.935 WIRELESS EQUIPMENT, ACCESSORY
Accessory wireless equipment shall mean all equipment or materials including any structure to house the equipment or materials which are necessary for operation of a wireless telecommunications facility, including equipment referred to as Base Transceiver Station (BTS) units.

 

16.900.940 WIRELESS FACILITIES, PERSONAL
Personal wireless facilities shall mean transmitters, antenna structures and other types of installations used for commercial mobile services (including cellular telephone services regulated under Part 22 of the FCC’s rules, specialized mobile radio transmitter services regulated under Part 90 of the FCC rules, and personal communication services regulated under Part 24 of the FCC rules) and unlicensed wireless services (telecommunication services using duly authorized devices which do not require individual licenses excluding direct-to-home satellite services), and common carrier wireless exchange access services.

 

16.900.945 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY
Wireless telecommunications facility shall mean a land use that transmits and/or receives electromagnetic communication signals that enable people and/or devices to communicate independent of location, an unstaffed facility for the transmission and/or reception of wireless telecommunications services, or a wireless tower or base station within the meaning of 47 U.S.C. Section 1455(a), usually consisting of an antenna array, a support structure, an equipment facility, and accessory wireless equipment. (14-04)

 

16.900.950 YARD
Yard shall mean the area of a lot located between a lot line and the building or buildings on the lot. The front yard is the horizontal area of lot located between the building or buildings and the front property line, extending the width of the lot. A street side yard is the horizontal area of the lot located between the building and a property line, other than the front property line, which abuts the street, extending the depth of the lot.

 

16.900.955 YARD, FRONT
Front yard shall mean a space between the front yard setback line and the front lot line or highway setback line, and extending the full width of the lot.

 

16.900.960 YARD, REAR
Rear yard shall mean a space between the rear yard setback line and the rear lot line, extending the full width of the lot.

 

16.900.965 YARD, SIDE
Side yard shall mean a space extending from the front yard, or from the front line where no front yard is required by this Code, to the rear yard, or rear lot line, between a side lot line and the side yard setback line.

TITLE 17 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
Note
Note
Chapter 17.000 SUBDIVISION TITLE AND PURPOSE
Chapter 17.010 TENTATIVE MAP PREPARATION
Chapter 17.013 SUBDIVISION DESIGN
Chapter 17.016 REQUIRED SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS
Chapter 17.050 TENTATIVE MAP REVIEW AND TIME PERIODS
Chapter 17.053 VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS
Chapter 17.056 EXPIRATION OF TENTATIVE MAPS
Chapter 17.059 AMENDMENTS TO APPROVED TENTATIVE MAPS
Chapter 17.062 ADDITIONAL INFORMATION TO BE RECORDED
Chapter 17.100 RENTAL HOUSING CONVERSION
Chapter 17.150 GENERAL DEDICATION REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 17.153 RESERVATION OF LAND FOR PUBLIC FACILITIES
Chapter 17.156 SCHOOL SITES AND FEES
Chapter 17.159 PARK REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 17.162 STORM DRAINAGE FEES
Chapter 17.165 TRANSPORTATION IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 17.168 GENERAL FEES AND DEPOSITS
Chapter 17.200 APPLICATION FOR FINAL MAP APPROVAL
Chapter 17.203 IMPROVEMENT PLANS
Chapter 17.206 FINAL MAP REVIEW AND RECORDATION
Chapter 17.209 DEDICATION, IMPROVEMENT, AND SURVEY REQUIREMENT
Chapter 17.212 COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS
Chapter 17.250 VOLUNTARY MERGER AND CONTIGUOUS PARCELS
Chapter 17.253 REVERSIONS TO ACREAGE
Chapter 17.256 LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS
Chapter 17.259 CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE
Chapter 17.261 WAIVER OF PARCEL MAP REQUIREMENT (66428)

Note
*      Prior history: Included in the Claremont Land and Use Development Code, Ordinance No. 599, adopted April 1958, and amended through January 9, 2007, and codified as part of the Claremont Municipal Code, Ordinance No. 2008-05, May 8, 2008.

Note
**    Numbers included in titles within parentheses refer to the applicable sections of the state Subdivision Map Act or other portions of the California Government Code and are not adopted as part of this Ordinance.

Chapter 17.000 SUBDIVISION TITLE AND PURPOSE
17.000.000 TITLE
Title 17 of the Municipal Code shall be known as the “Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Claremont.”

All references in this title to articles, parts, chapters, subsections, or paragraphs, shall, unless otherwise specified, mean text in Titles 16, 17, and 18. Similarly, all references to codes shall, unless otherwise specified, mean Titles 16, 17, and 18. (08-05)

 

17.000.010 PURPOSE AND SCOPE (66411)
A.     Purpose

This title is enacted for the purpose of adopting local tract and parcel map regulations in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act (Division 2 of Title 7 of the California Government Code) and repeals all other regulations of the City of Claremont in conflict with this title; provided, however, that such repeal shall not affect any agreement, contract, or bond executed pursuant to such regulations or any rights of action accruing thereunder.

B.     Scope

The provisions of the title shall apply to all tract maps and parcel maps or portions of tract or parcel maps entirely or partially within the City of Claremont. (08-05)

 

17.000.020 INAPPLICABILITY (66412)
This title does not apply to leases, conversions, transactions, conveyances, or other acts which are specifically designated as exempted from the Subdivision Map Act. (08-05)

 

17.000.030 PLANNING COMMISSION AUTHORITY (66415)
The Planning Commission is hereby designated as the Advisory Agency with respect to review of tract maps and the final decision-making body with respect to review of parcel maps. (08-05)

 

17.000.040 SEPARATE MAPS REQUIRED FOR PHYSICALLY-SEPARATED PARCELS
Where land is physically separated from other land in a proposed subdivision by other than a street, highway, alley, railroad right-of-way, flood control right-of-way, or public utility right-of-way, a separate subdivision map shall be prepared for each portion of land so separated and each of the maps shall comply with the provisions of this title. (08-05)

 

17.000.050 PARCEL MAP REQUIREMENTS SAME AS TRACT MAP (66411.1, 66428)
A tentative parcel map and final parcel map shall be required for any division of land which does not require a tentative and final tract map pursuant to the California Subdivision Map Act. Subject to the limitations on improvements associated with parcel maps set forth in Chapter 17.016, form, content, design, and other requirements for parcel maps shall be the same as set forth in this title for tract maps.

Further, as used in this title, the term “tentative map” shall encompass both tentative tract and tentative parcel maps, and the term “final map” shall encompass both final tract and final parcel maps. (08-05)

Chapter 17.010 TENTATIVE MAP PREPARATION
17.010.000 TRACT MAPS REQUIRED (66426)
Approval of a tentative and final tract map shall be required in accordance with this title for any subdivision creating 5 or more parcels, 5 or more condominiums as defined in Section 783 of the California Civil Code, a community apartment project containing 5 or more parcels, or for the conversion of a dwelling to a stock cooperative containing 5 or more dwelling units, except where:

A.     The land before division contains less than 5 acres, each parcel created by the division abuts upon a maintained public street or highway and no dedications or improvements are required by the City Council; or

B.     Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of 20 acres or more and has an approved access to a maintained public street or highway; or

C.    The land consists of a parcel or parcels of land having approved access to a public street or highway which comprises part of a tract of land zoned for industrial or commercial development, and which has the approval of the City Council as to street alignments and widths; or

D.    Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of not less than 40 acres or is not less than a quarter of a quarter section.

A tentative and final parcel map shall be required for those subdivisions described in subsections A through D of this section. (08-05)

 

17.010.010 PARCEL MAPS REQUIRED (66426, 66428)
Approval of a tentative and final parcel map shall be required in accordance with this title for any subdivision creating 4 or fewer parcels and for any subdivision which requires a parcel map pursuant to Chapter 17.010, except that parcel maps shall not be required for:

A.     Subdivisions of a portion of the operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation, defined by Section 230 of the California Public Utilities Code, which are created by short-term leases terminable by either party on not more than 30 days notice in writing; or

B.     Land conveyed to or from a governmental agency, public entity, or public utility, or for land conveyed to a subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance to such public utility for rights-of-way, unless a showing is made by the City in individual cases, upon substantial evidence, that public policy necessitates a parcel map; or

C.    Lot line adjustments which are exempt from parcel map requirements in accordance with the criteria of Chapter 17.256.

In addition to the preceding situations, the City Council may waive the requirement for a parcel map in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.261. (08-05)

 

17.010.020 PREPARATION AND FILING
Tentative maps shall be filed with the Department of Community Development by a record owner or owners of the property to be divided or by their authorized agents. The number of copies of the tentative map to be submitted to support the application shall be as determined by the Director. The tentative map shall be accompanied by the required application fee(s). (08-05)

 

17.010.030 TENTATIVE MAP FORM AND CONTENT
Tentative tract and tentative parcel maps shall be prepared by a civil engineer registered by the State of California in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act and this title. Tentative maps shall be in map form and shall contain all information required by the Director of Community Development, and shall be accompanied by other reports, exhibits, information, and materials as required by the Director. The Director shall provide application forms and a list of required tentative map information on request. (08-05)

 

17.010.040 COMPLETENESS OF APPLICATION (65943)
Not later than 30 calendar days after receipt of a tentative map application, the Department of Community Development shall determine in writing whether the application is complete and shall immediately transmit the determination to the subdivider. Tentative maps shall not be deemed complete until any necessary general plan amendment and/or zone change is adopted by the City Council.

If the written determination of completeness is not made within 30 days after receipt of the application and the application includes a statement that it is an application for a development permit, the application shall be deemed complete for purposes of this title. If an application is determined to be not complete, the notification to the subdivider shall identify those parts of the application which are incomplete and shall indicate the manner in which they can be made complete. (08-05)

 

17.010.050 NOTIFICATION OF INTENT TO FILE MULTIPLE FINAL MAPS (66456.1)
Multiple final maps within a subdivision may be filed prior to the expiration of a tentative map if:

A.     The subdivider, at the time the tentative map is filed, informs the City of the subdivider’s intention to file multiple final maps on the tentative map; or

B.     After filing of the tentative map, the City and the subdivider concur in the filing of multiple final maps.

In providing such notice of multiple final maps, the subdivider shall not be required to define the number or configuration of the proposed multiple final maps, and the filing of a final map on a portion of an approved tentative map shall not invalidate any part of such tentative map. The right of a subdivider to file multiple final maps shall not limit the authority of the City to impose reasonable conditions relating to the filing of multiple final maps. (08-05)

 

17.010.060 TECHNICAL REPORTS (66490)
A preliminary soils report and/or other such data and design plans as the Director determines to be necessary shall be submitted with all tentative maps unless the Director determines that, due to existing information on the soil and geological qualities and topography of the property to be subdivided, no such report or reports are necessary. (08-05)

Chapter 17.013 SUBDIVISION DESIGN
17.013.000 LOT DESIGN
A.     Lot Lines

Lots shall be designed so that side lot lines are approximately at right angles or radial to the street centerline. Unless determined infeasible or undesirable by the City, lot lines shall be placed at the top of slopes.

B.     Access to Lots

Subdivisions shall be designed so that all lots or parcels shall have access to a public or private street improved to City standards.

C.    Building Pad Locations

The City may require that building pad locations or buildable area within any lot or parcel be shown on tentative maps and filed and/or recorded on an additional map.

D.    Lot Size

Lot area, width, dimensions, and other lot characteristics shall conform to the applicable zoning district regulations set forth in Title 16. Lot area, width, depth, and other dimensions shall be measured in accordance with the Glossary of Title 16, Chapter 16.900. (08-05)

 

17.013.010 COMPATIBILITY WITH ADJACENT PROPERTIES
In order to minimize conflicts with adjacent properties, the following subdivision design and other requirements shall be met.

A.     Grading and other subdivision design features shall ensure blending with surrounding properties along the subdivision’s boundaries.

B.     Significant vegetation existing within the property prior to development shall be maintained by the subdivider until the assumption of responsibility by the lot buyers or homeowners association.

C.    Dead-end streets shall be barricaded or cul-de-saced as required by the City.

D.    Drainage facilities shall be installed along subdivision boundaries to prevent erosion.

E.     Boundary areas for phased subdivisions shall not be left unfinished in anticipation of the resumption of work on future phases.

F.     Construction materials shall not be stockpiled adjacent to subdivision boundaries.

G.    Construction or other areas within the subdivision shall be fenced off as determined necessary by the City. (08-05)

 

17.013.020 SLOPES AND GRADING
A.     Grading Plans

Preliminary grading plans shall be reviewed in conjunction with subdivision review unless waived by the City. Final grading plans shall conform to the General Plan, any applicable specific plan, Titles 16 and 17 of this Code, Chapter 70 of the Uniform Building Code, and any applicable tentative map conditions of approval. Final grading plans shall be submitted with improvement plans or, if improvement plans are not required, at the time that improvement plans would be submitted. All grading plans shall be prepared by a civil engineer registered in California.

B.     Slope Ratio

Manufactured slopes shall be no steeper than that allowed by the Uniform Building Code or by City code.

C.    Slope Landscaping

All manufactured slopes shall be provided with erosion-control landscaping and irrigation, installed per plan approved by the City, immediately upon completion of rough grading operations. The subdivider shall ensure effective maintenance of all slope plantings and irrigation systems until such time as the lots or parcels containing the slope are occupied, or a homeowners association accepts slope maintenance responsibility, or one year, whichever is greater. (08-05)

 

17.013.030 ENERGY CONSERVATION AND SOLAR ACCESS
A.     General

Subdivisions of 5 or more lots shall provide, to the extent feasible, for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in the subdivision.

B.     Solar Access Easement Required

The City may require the dedication of solar access easements for the purpose of assuring that no building, wall, fence, or other structure shall be constructed and no vegetation allowed to grow on individual lots so as to prevent unobstructed sunlight from reaching the south face of a structure constructed within the buildable area on any other lot between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. Pacific Standard Time on December 21st, except that deciduous trees on adjacent property may shade a south-facing wall if it leaves such structure’s roof area unobstructed between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. Pacific Daylight Time on June 21. All solar easements shall be offered in form and content sufficient to satisfy the preceding requirements to the satisfaction of the Director and shall be recorded with the Los Angeles County Recorder concurrent with recordation of the final map.

C.    Solar Access Exemptions

1.     Modification or Waiver by Decision-Making Body

The decision-making body may modify or waive the requirements of subsection B of this section for one or more lots in a subdivision if it determines that the dedication of such solar easement would not be feasible or would cause results inconsistent with the intent of providing unobstructed solar access because of the contour and/or configuration of the land to be subdivided, existing vegetation on or near the property, the need for new vegetation to moderate wind or temperatures, the effect of allowing permitted land uses on properties to the north of the subdivision, or similar considerations. Further, in no event shall the subdivider be required to:

a.     Reduce allowable densities; or

b.     Reduce the percentage of a lot which may be occupied by a building under the applicable zoning in force at the time the tentative map is filed; or

c.     Remove existing vegetation either on or off of the property to be subdivided.

2.     Airspace Conversion Projects Exempted

The requirements of this section are not applicable to condominium projects, which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing building where no new buildings are added. (08-05)

Chapter 17.016 REQUIRED SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS
17.016.000 GENERAL IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS
The subdivider shall design and construct all required on-site and off-site improvements to permanent line and grade in accordance with the requirements of the City Engineer and applicable tentative map conditions of approval. Improvements shall also be consistent with the General Plan, any applicable specific plan, and with the applicable zoning and subdivision regulations set forth in Titles 16 and 17 of this Code. No final tract or parcel map shall be presented to the City Council for approval until the subdivider either completes the required improvements or enters into an agreement with the City, pursuant to Chapter 17.212 to complete the improvements. (08-05)

 

17.016.010 LIMITATION ON PARCEL MAP IMPROVEMENTS (66411.1)
A.     Limitation

Parcel map improvement requirements shall be limited to the dedication of rights-of-way, easements, and the construction of off-site and on-site improvements for the parcels being created. Requirements for the construction of such off-site and on-site improvements shall be noticed by a statement on the parcel map, on the instrument evidencing the waiver of the parcel map, or by a separate instrument. Such improvement requirements shall be recorded on, concurrently with, or prior to the parcel map or instrument of waiver of a parcel map being filed for record.

B.     Timing of Improvements

Fulfillment of parcel map construction requirements shall not be required until the time a permit or other grant of approval for development of the parcel is issued by the City or until the time the construction of the improvements is required pursuant to an agreement between the subdivider and the City, except that in the absence of such an agreement, the City may require fulfillment of the construction requirements within a reasonable time following approval of the tentative parcel map and prior to the issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for the development of a parcel upon a finding by the City that fulfillment of the construction requirements is necessary for either of the following reasons: (1) The public health and safety; or (2) the required construction is a necessary prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area. (08-05)

 

17.016.020 STREETS, HIGHWAYS, AND RELATED IMPROVEMENTS
A.     Streets, Highways, and Alleys

Arterial highways and collector streets shall be constructed in accordance with the locations and alignments shown on the General Plan. Local streets and alleys shall be constructed as shown on the approved tentative map and/or as required by the tentative map conditions of approval.

B.     Design and Construction

Right-of-way and roadway widths, street sections, sidewalks, bikeways, trails, medians, parkways, street trees, driveways, and related street facilities shall be designed, constructed, and dedicated in accordance with (1) the General Plan; (2) the conditions of approval imposed on the tentative tract or parcel map; (3) City design standards.

C.    Private Streets

Private streets shall be designed and constructed to the same standards as public streets unless modified street designs are approved by the decision-making body. The subdivider shall provide for permanent maintenance of all private streets.

D.    Local Transit Facilities

The City may require dedication or an irrevocable offer of dedication of land within the subdivision for local transit facilities such as bus turnouts, benches, shelters, landing pads and similar items that directly benefit the residents of the subdivision. (14-04; 08-05)

 

17.016.030 WATER SUPPLY
Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall be served by a domestic water system approved by the City Engineer. On-site water facilities shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the latest revision of the Uniform Plumbing Code. Fire hydrants and fire flow capacity shall be approved by the Los Angeles County Fire Department. (08-05)

 

17.016.040 SANITARY SEWERS
A.     Public Sewer Connection

Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall be served by a sanitary sewer system approved for connection to the City’s sewer system by the City Engineer, except where alternative systems are approved pursuant to Title 13 of the Municipal Code. Sewer facilities shall be designed and constructed in accordance with City standards and the latest revision of the Uniform Plumbing Code.

B.     Septic Tanks

Septic tanks and other private sanitation systems are prohibited unless an exemption is approved by the City in accordance with Title 13 of the Municipal Code.

C.    Sewer Easements

Sewer easements shall be provided as required by the City Engineer. No structure shall be placed on any part of such an easement except those structures directly related to the purpose of the easement. (08-05)

 

17.016.050 STORM DRAINS
A.     Drainage Improvements

The subdivider shall design and construct to the satisfaction of the City Engineer and in accordance with the City Master Drainage Plan as last amended, all drainage facilities, including open and closed channels, catch basins, manholes, junction structures, desilting basins, and similar facilities necessary for the removal of surface water from the subdivision and protection of off-site properties. In addition, interim drainage improvements for removal of surface water during construction may be required by the City Engineer.

B.     Drainage Capacity

The storm drain system shall be designed for the ultimate development of the subdivision and its watershed and shall be capable of collecting and conveying runoff in accordance with the standards of the Los Angeles County Flood Control District.

C.    Drainage Fees

In addition to the improvements required by this chapter, the subdivider shall pay storm drainage fees for master plan facilities in accordance with Chapter 17.162.

D.    Drainage Easements

Easements for underground storm drains and surface drainage shall be provided as required by the City Engineer. No structure shall be placed on any part of such an easement except those structures directly related to the purpose of the easement. (08-05)

 

17.016.060 UTILITIES
A.     On-Site Utilities

The subdivider shall, as provided in Chapter 16.151 of Title 16, place underground: (1) all utility lines to serve the subdivision, such as electric, communications, street lighting, cable television, and similar lines, beginning at the first point of connection to existing off-site utility lines; and (2) all such on-site utility lines.

B.     Off-Site Utilities

1.     Utility Improvement Fees

The subdivider shall pay a utility improvement fee, as set forth in Chapter 16.206 of Title 16, for those properties in the RR Districts and the Hillsides, as shown in the “Area of Benefit” in Chapter 16.151 of Title 16.

2.     Off-Site Lines Abutting the Property

The subdivider shall, at the subdivider’s own expense, place underground all off-site utility lines located in the dedicated public right-of-way abutting the property on the project side of the street unless the Planning Commission determines that placing off-site utilities underground is impractical pursuant to Chapter 16.151 of Title 16. The subdivider shall satisfy the requirements of this section prior to the recordation of a final tract or parcel map for the project except as provided in Chapter 16.151 of Title 16. As used in this section, the “dedicated public right-of-way” means that corridor upon which a public right-of-way has been recorded.

3.     In-Lieu Fees for 66KV and Larger

Notwithstanding anything else in this section, utility lines that are on poles with 66KV or larger lines shall not be required to be placed underground, but an in-lieu fee for lines less than 66KV shall be paid for the full amount shown in Chapter 16.151 of Title 16 prior to the recordation of a final tract or parcel map for the project of the issuance of a building permit for which the in-lieu fee has been paid, except as provided in Chapter 16.151 of Title 16.

C.    Exemptions

Those exemptions listed in Chapter 16.151 of Title 16 shall apply to the provisions of this section. (08-05)

 

17.016.070 WALLS AND FENCES
When the rear of any lot abuts any drainage channel, railroad right-of-way, or freeway, a fence shall be erected along the rear lot line by the subdivider to conform to the standards of the City. Where lots back up to a street or highway and where it is intended that there shall be no access from said lots to said street or highway, a masonry wall of a height approved by the Planning Commission shall be erected on the rear property line within the street right-of-way as a physical separation between the lots and the street or highway.

Where required walls are located between a residential subdivision and a major or secondary highway and there is more that one lot either backing or siding on said major or secondary street, dedication of additional right-of-way and installation of landscaping and automatic irrigation systems shall be provided pursuant to the guidelines on file at the City’s Department of Community Development. In the case of side-on lots facing an extended cul-de-sac where pedestrian access may be intended, the preceding requirements shall apply except that in the area between the major or secondary highway and the end of the cul-de-sac, the masonry wall may be omitted.

Variation and originality in the design of the preceding improvements are encouraged. The details of such fences and walls, including colors, textures, and materials, are subject to architectural review pursuant to Chapter 16.300. (12-01; 08-05)

 

17.016.080 OTHER IMPROVEMENTS
Other subdivision-related improvements, such as but not limited to, grading, street lights, traffic signals, pavement markings, landscaping, monumentation, walkways, bikeways and other bicycle facilities, equestrian trails, or fees in lieu of any of the foregoing, shall also be required as determined by the City in accordance with Titles 16 and 17 of this Code, the General Plan, the tentative map conditions of approval, and City standards and specifications. (08-05)

 

17.016.090 IMPROVEMENT OVERSIZING (66585)
The subdivider may be required to install and dedicate to the public improvements for the benefit of the subdivision, which may be of supplemental size, capacity, or number as will benefit property not within the subdivision. Such improvements may be a condition precedent to the approval of a tentative tract or tentative parcel map. (08-05)

Chapter 17.050 TENTATIVE MAP REVIEW AND TIME PERIODS
17.050.000 PREFILING CONFERENCE
Prior to the filing of a development application, the subdivider may submit to the Department of Community Development maps, plans, and other information concerning the proposed subdivision. The Department shall thereupon schedule a conference with the subdivider to provide information and recommendations regarding the subdivision design, grading, required improvements, and related matters. Such a prefiling conference is optional to the subdivider and shall not be a prerequisite to filing a tentative map. (08-05)

 

17.050.010 REVIEW OF TENTATIVE MAPS BY OTHER AGENCIES (66453)
Within 5 days of the filing of a tentative map, copies of the map shall be sent to all agencies as required by law for the opportunity to comment on such maps. In addition, copies of the tentative map shall be sent for comment to all utilities and similar service entities, which the Director deems may be affected by the proposed subdivision. (08-05)

 

17.050.020 ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW (66453.1)
A.     Submission of Information and Fees

The subdivider shall submit information as required by the Director sufficient to permit environmental review of the project in accordance with the California Environmental Quality Act and local guidelines. The subdivider shall also pay all fees necessary for the completion of environmental review, including but not limited to, the preparation of an environmental impact report if required.

B.     Mitigation Measures

As part of a proposed negative declaration, the City may, with the subdivider’s consent, impose mitigation measures as conditions of approval on a tentative tract or parcel map in order to mitigate a project’s environmental impacts to a level of insignificance. (08-05)

 

17.050.030 EXTENSION AND/OR WAIVER OF TIME LIMITS FOR MAP REVIEW (66451.1)
A.     Extension by Mutual Consent

The time limits specified in this chapter for reporting and acting on maps may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the Director for good cause.

B.     Use of Outside Consultant to Meet Time Limits

At the time the subdivider makes an application pursuant to this Article, the Director shall determine whether or not the City is able to meet the time limits specified in this chapter for reporting and action on maps. If the Director determines that such time limits cannot be met, the Director, upon request of the subdivider and for the purpose of meeting such limits, shall contract or employ a private consultant, person, or entity on a temporary basis to perform such services as necessary to permit the agency to meet such time limits.

C.    Effects of Legislative Acts on Time Limits

When a tentative map is predicated on approval of other land use applications, including but not limited to general plan amendments, zone changes, conditional use permits, or variances, the subdivider shall agree to a waiver of the time frames. If a waiver is not forthcoming, the tentative map application may not be deemed complete until the necessary other land use applications are approved. (08-05)

 

17.050.040 TENTATIVE MAP REVIEW AUTHORITY
The Planning Commission shall have the authority to approve, conditionally approve, or deny tentative parcel maps. The City Council shall have the authority to approve, conditionally approve, or deny tentative tract maps. (08-05)

 

17.050.050 PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW
A.     Staff Report (66452.3)

After review and analysis of a tentative parcel or tract map, the Director shall forward a report, together with a recommendation of approval, approval subject to conditions, or denial, to the Planning Commission. Also, at least three days prior to any hearing or action on the tentative map, the staff report shall be sent to the subdivider, to each owner of the subject property if other than the subdivider, and, in the case of a proposed conversion of residential real property to a condominium, community apartment, or stock cooperative project, to each tenant of the subject property.

B.     Tentative Parcel Map Action (66452.1, 66452.4, 66452.5, 66463)

1.     Review Time Limits When No EIR Is Required

If the City determines that no environmental impact report (EIR) is required for review of a tentative parcel map, within 50 days of the adoption of a negative declaration or other determination that no EIR is required, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing to receive testimony and thereafter shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the tentative parcel map unless a time extension is mutually agreed upon pursuant to this chapter.

2.     Review Time Limits When an EIR Is Required

If an environmental impact report is prepared for the tentative parcel map, the preceding 50-day time period shall not commence to run until the date of certification of the environmental impact report as complete.

3.     Public Hearings

Public hearings shall be noticed and held in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act and this Code.

4.     Required Findings

In approving a tentative parcel map, the Planning Commission shall make all of the findings set forth in this chapter.

5.     Approval by Inaction

If no action is taken upon a tentative parcel map by the Planning Commission within the time limits specified in this chapter or any authorized extension thereof and appropriate notice has been given by the subdivider or the City, the tentative parcel map as filed shall be deemed to be approved insofar as it complies with other applicable requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, this Code, and the General Plan. It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to certify said approval.

6.     Appeal of Planning Commission Action

In accordance with the Subdivision Map Act, the subdivider or any other interested person may appeal any action of the Planning Commission with respect to a tentative parcel map to the City Council. Such appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk within 10 days after the action of the Planning Commission. Upon the filing of an appeal, the City Council shall set the matter for public hearing. The hearing shall be noticed in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act and this Code and shall be held within 30 days after filing of the appeal. Within 7 days following the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall render its decision on the appeal. If no decision is forthcoming within the time limits specified, then the last action taken shall stand.

C.    Tentative Tract Map Recommendation (66452.1)

1.     Review Time Limits When No EIR Is Required

If the City determines that no environmental impact report (EIR) is required for review of a tentative tract map, within 50 days of the adoption of a negative declaration or other determination that no EIR is required, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing to receive testimony, and thereafter shall forward a written report and recommendation on the tentative tract map to the City Council within such 50-day period unless a time extension is mutually agreed upon pursuant to this chapter.

2.     Review Time Limits When an EIR Is Required

If an environmental impact report is prepared for the tentative parcel map, the preceding 50-day time period shall not commence to run until the date of certification of the environmental impact report as complete.

3.     Public Hearings

Public hearings shall be noticed and held in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act and this Code. (08-05)

 

17.050.060 CITY COUNCIL REVIEW
A.     Tentative Tract Map Action (66451.3, 66452.2)

Within 30 days after receipt of Planning Commission recommendations on a tentative tract map, the City Council shall hold a public hearing to receive testimony on the project. The Council shall then take final action to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the tentative tract map within such 30-day period unless a time extension is mutually agreed upon pursuant to this chapter. Public hearings shall be noticed and held in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act and this Code.

B.     Required Findings

In approving a tentative tract map, the City Council shall make all of the findings set forth in this chapter.

C.    Approval by Inaction (66452.4)

If no action is taken upon a tentative tract map by the City Council within the time limits specified in the Subdivision Map Act or any authorized extension thereof and appropriate notice has been given by the subdivider or the City, the tentative parcel map as filed shall be deemed to be approved insofar as it complies with other applicable requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, this Code, and the General Plan. It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to certify said approval. (08-05)

 

17.050.070 REQUIRED FINDINGS FOR TENTATIVE MAP APPROVAL (66473 et seq.)
In approving a tentative parcel map or tentative tract map, the decision-making body shall make all of the following findings:

A.     That the proposed map or the design or improvement of the subdivision is consistent with the General Plan or any applicable specific plan, and with other applicable provisions of this Code.

B.     That the site is physically suitable for the type and density of development.

C.    That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are not likely to cause substantial environmental damage nor substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat. However, notwithstanding the foregoing, the decision-making body may nevertheless approve such a subdivision if a tentative map was prepared for the project and a finding was made that specific economic, social, or other considerations make infeasible the mitigation measures or project alternatives identified in the environmental impact report.

D.    That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements is not likely to cause serious public health or safety problems.

E.     That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will not conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of, property within the proposed subdivision. In this connection, the decision-making body may approve a map if it finds that alternate easements, for access or for use, will be provided and that these easements will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public. This subsection shall apply only to easements of record or to easements established by judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction and no authority is hereby granted to the City Council to determine that the public at large has acquired easements for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision.

F.     That solar access and passive heating and cooling design requirements have been satisfied in accordance with Chapter 17.013.

G.    That the subdivision balances the housing needs of the region against the public service needs of the City’s residents and available fiscal and environmental resources.

H.    That the discharge of waste from the proposed subdivision into the existing sewer system will not result in a violation of existing requirements of the Los Angeles Regional Water Quality Control Board. (08-05)

 

17.050.080 USE OF REGULATIONS IN EFFECT AT TIME OF MAP FILING (66474.2)
A.     Regulations in Effect at Time Application Determined Complete

Except as otherwise provided in subsections B and C of this section, the decision-making body, in determining to approve or deny a tentative map application, shall apply only those ordinances, policies, and standards in effect on the date that the City determined that the application was complete pursuant to Chapter 17.010.

B.     New Regulations Initiated Before Application Determined Complete

Subsection A of this section shall not apply if the City, prior to determining a tentative map application to be complete, has done both of the following:

1.     Initiated proceedings by way of ordinance, resolution, or motion to amend this title, the General Plan, any applicable specific plan(s), or other City regulations; and

2.     Published a public hearing notice containing a description sufficient to notify the public of the nature of the proposed change(s) to this Code, the General Plan, any applicable specific plan(s), or other City regulations.

If both conditions (1) and (2) preceding have been met, the City may apply any ordinances, policies, or standards enacted or instituted as a result of those proceedings which are in effect on the date the City approves or denies the tentative map.

C.    Changes to Regulations Requested by the Subdivider

If the subdivision applicant requests changes to applicable ordinances, policies, or standards in connection with the same development project, any ordinances, policies, or standards adopted pursuant to the applicant’s request shall apply. (08-05)

Chapter 17.053 VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS
17.053.000 GENERAL VESTING MAP PROVISIONS
A.     Purpose

Whenever a provision of Title 17 requires that a tentative map be filed, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed.

B.     Vested Right to Proceed

Subject to the requirements of this chapter, the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies, and standards described in Government Code Section 66474.2. (08-05)

 

17.053.010 CONSISTENCY OF VESTING TENTATIVE MAP WITH ZONING AND GENERAL PLAN (66473.5, 66498.3)
No land shall be subdivided and developed pursuant to a vesting tentative map for any purpose which is inconsistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan or which is not permitted by applicable provisions of Title 16. A vesting tentative map shall not be approved unless it is consistent with the existing zoning and General Plan designation on the property proposed to be subdivided at the time the application is filed. (08-05)

 

17.053.020 FILING AND REVIEW
A.     Map Title

A vesting tentative map shall have the words “Vesting Tentative Map” printed conspicuously on its face.

B.     Submittal and Design Requirements

Vesting tentative maps shall be accompanied by the same supporting materials and shall conform to the same design and other requirements as Residential Unit Developments as set forth in Chapter 16.030 of Title 16.

C.    Review of Vesting Tentative Maps

1.     Procedures and Required Findings

Vesting tentative maps shall be subject to the same review procedures as set forth for other tentative maps in Chapter 17.050. No vesting tentative map shall be approved unless the decision-making body makes all of the findings required for tentative map approval as set forth in Chapter 17.050.

2.     Same Requirements as Residential Unit Developments

Prior to review by the City Council, vesting tentative maps shall be subject to the same review requirements as residential unit developments per Chapter 16.030 of Title 16. Approval of a vesting tentative map shall not become effective until the general development plan for the project is approved by the Architectural Commission in accordance with Chapter 16.030. (08-05)

 

17.053.030 FINDINGS AFFECTING VESTING TENTATIVE MAP PROJECTS (66498.1)
Notwithstanding this chapter, the City may condition or deny a permit, approval, extension, or entitlement for a project under a vesting tentative map if it finds any of the following:

A.     A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both.

B.     The condition or denial is required in order to comply with state or federal law. (08-05)

 

17.053.040 EFFECTS OF VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS ON CONDITIONS IMPOSED (66498.6)
A.     Conditions of Approval During Subsequent Review Phases not Limited

An approved or conditionally-approved vesting tentative map shall not limit the City from imposing reasonable conditions on subsequent required approvals or permits necessary for the development and authorized by the General Plan, this Code, and other applicable ordinances, policies, and standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative map is approved or conditionally approved.

B.     Obligation to Comply with State and Federal Laws

The rights conferred by this chapter shall relate only to the imposition by the City of conditions or requirements created and imposed by City ordinances. Nothing in this chapter removes, diminishes, or affects the obligation of any subdivider to comply with the conditions and requirements of any state or federal laws, regulations, or policies and does not grant the City the option to disregard any state or federal laws, regulations, or policies. (08-05)

 

17.053.050 AMENDMENTS TO VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS (66498.2)
A.     Amendments in Response to Changes in City Policies or Standards

If the General Plan, this Code, or other applicable policies or standards of the City are changed subsequent to the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map, the subdivider or the subdivider’s assignee, at any time prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map pursuant to Section 17.053.060 may apply for an amendment to the vesting tentative map to secure a vested right to proceed with development in accordance with said changes. The application for map amendment submitted by the subdivider shall clearly specify the change in the General Plan, this Code, or other policies or standards for which the amendment is sought.

B.     Amendment Filing Procedure

Proposed amendments to approved or conditionally-approved vesting tentative maps, whether in response to changes in City policies or standards or for any other reason, shall be filed and processed pursuant to Chapter 17.059. (08-05)

 

17.053.060 EXPIRATION OF MAP AND OF RIGHT TO PROCEED (66498.1)
A.     Expiration of Map

Approved vesting tentative maps shall expire at the end of the same time period and shall be subject to the same time extensions as established for other tentative maps in Chapter 17.056.

B.     Effect of Vesting Map Expiration

The rights conferred by this chapter shall expire if a final map is not approved prior to the expiration of a vesting tentative map.

C.    Expiration of Right to Proceed

If the final map is approved, the right to proceed with development conferred by this chapter shall expire one year from the date of recordation of the final map. Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, the one-year initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded.

D.    Time Extensions for Right to Proceed

The one-year initial time period to proceed with development shall be automatically extended by any time used by the City for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for design or architectural review if the time used by the City to process the application exceeds 30 days from the date a complete application is filed. At any time prior to expiration of the initial one-year time period provided by this chapter, the subdivider may apply to the City Council for a one-year extension.

E.     Extension Via Application for Building Permit

If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the time periods for proceeding with development provided in this chapter, the right to proceed with development shall continue until the expiration of that permit or extension thereof granted by the City. (08-05)

 

17.053.070 VESTING MAP FILING NOT A PREREQUISITE TO DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL (66498.5)
If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by this chapter, the filing of a vesting tentative map shall not be a prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision, permit for construction, or work preparatory to construction. (08-05)

Chapter 17.056 EXPIRATION OF TENTATIVE MAPS
17.056.000 MAP EXPIRATION
Tentative tract maps and tentative parcel maps shall expire 36 months after the date of approval or conditional approval. This chapter shall apply to all tentative maps in existence on or after September 26, 1995. (08-05)

 

17.056.010 EXTENSION OF TENTATIVE MAPS
A.     Granting of Extensions

Upon application by the subdivider filed before expiration of a tentative map, the decision-making body may extend the life of the map for a period or periods not exceeding a total of five years. The timely filing of a request for extension shall automatically extend the map until City action on the request or for 60 days, whichever occurs first. If the Planning Commission denies a request to extend a tentative parcel map, the subdivider may appeal the denial to the City Council within 10 calendar days after the denial.

B.     Imposition of New Conditions

A timely request for a tentative map extension shall be presented to the decision-making body within 60 days after it is deemed complete by the Director of Community Development. In granting an extension, the decision-making body shall not add new conditions to the map without the subdivider’s written consent. If the decision-making body determines that the map as previously approved would be injurious to the public health, safety, or welfare, then no extension shall be granted unless conditions are identified by the City, which would alleviate the problem(s), and the subdivider agrees to such new conditions.

C.    Automatic Extensions Related to Off-Site Improvements

For subdivisions with multiple final maps, each filing of a final map shall extend the expiration of the tentative map by 36 months from the date of its expiration or the date of the previously filed map, whichever is later, subject to the following:

1.     The subdivider is required to expend in excess of a specific amount determined annually by the State Allocation Board pursuant to Government Code Section 66452.6(a)(2), to construct, improve, or finance the construction or improvement of public improvements outside the property boundaries of the tentative map, excluding improvements of public right-of-way which abut the boundary of the property to be subdivided and which are reasonably related to the development of the property.

2.     The extensions shall not extend the tentative map more than 10 years from the date of its approval or conditional approval.

3.     The number of phased final maps, which may be filed for each tentative map, shall be determined by the City Council at the time of the approval or conditional approval of the tentative tract or tentative parcel map.

4.     The term “public improvements,” as used in this chapter, includes, but shall not be limited to, traffic controls, streets, roads, highways, freeways, bridges, overcrossings, street interchanges, flood control or storm drain facilities, water facilities, and lighting facilities.

D.    Extensions Related to Development Agreements

A tentative map on property subject to a development agreement authorized by state law may be extended for the period of time provided for in the agreement, but not beyond the duration of the agreement. (08-05)

 

17.056.020 STAY OF TIME PERIODS
A.     The 36-month map expiration period specified in this chapter shall not include any period of time during which a development moratorium, imposed after approval of a tentative map, is in existence. However, the length of the moratorium shall not exceed 5 years. Once a moratorium is terminated, the tentative map shall be valid for the same period of time as was left to run on the map at the time that the moratorium was imposed. However, if the remaining time is less than 120 days, the map shall be valid for 120 days following the termination of the moratorium.

B.     Litigation

The City Council may approve a stay of the map expiration period specified in this chapter, including any extension thereof, for the period of time during which a lawsuit involving the approval or conditional approval of the tentative map is, or was, pending in a court of competent jurisdiction. After service of the initial petition or complaint upon the City, but before expiration of the tentative map, the subdivider may apply to the City Council for a stay of the time period. Within 40 days after receiving the application, the City Council shall either stay the time period for up to 5 years or deny the stay. (08-05)

Chapter 17.059 AMENDMENTS TO APPROVED TENTATIVE MAPS
17.059.000 MINOR AMENDMENTS
Minor amendments to approved tentative tract or tentative parcel maps or to any condition of approval thereon may be approved by the Director, provided the Director determines that all of the following criteria are met:

A.     No lots, units, building sites, or structures are added to the project.

B.     Such changes are consistent with the intent of the original tentative map approval.

C.    The change involves no substantial change in lot configuration, street layout, improvements, or conditions of approval.

D.    The resulting tentative map remains in conformity with this title and with the Subdivision Map Act. (08-05)

 

17.059.010 MAJOR AMENDMENTS
If the Director determines that a proposed amendment to an approved tentative map or to any condition of approval thereon does not meet the criteria for a minor amendment set forth in this chapter, the Director shall require the filing of a map amendment application and fee. Such major tentative map amendments shall thereupon be reviewed in the same manner as a tentative map application. Any such approved amendment shall not alter the expiration date of the tentative map unless an extension is also approved in accordance with Chapter 17.056. (08-05)

Chapter 17.062 ADDITIONAL INFORMATION TO BE RECORDED
17.062.000 ADDITIONAL INFORMATION TO BE RECORDED
The City may require additional information to be filed with the City or recorded with the County simultaneously with a final tract or parcel map. The additional information shall be in the form of a separate document or an additional map sheet which shall indicate its relationship to the final tract or parcel map, and shall contain a statement that the additional information is for informational purposes, describing conditions as of the date of filing and is not intended to affect record title interest.

The document or additional map sheet may also contain a notation that the additional information is derived from public records or reports and does not imply the correctness or sufficiency of those records or reports by the preparer of the document or additional map sheet. Additional survey and map information may include, but need not be limited to building setback lines, flood hazard zones, seismic lines and setbacks, geologic mapping, and archaeological sites. (08-05)

Chapter 17.100 RENTAL HOUSING CONVERSION
17.100.000 APPLICABILITY
The subdivision regulations of this title and the specific requirements of this chapter shall apply to all subdivisions proposed to convert rental housing into a condominium, community apartment, or stock cooperative project, and the conversion of commercial lease spaces to ownership. (08-05)

 

17.100.010 REQUIREMENTS FOR RENTAL HOUSING CONVERSION APPROVAL (66427.1)
A final map for a subdivision to be created from the conversion of rental or lease property shall only be approved if:

A.     The City Council makes all of the findings set forth in the Subdivision Map Act regarding notification of tenants and other matters; and

B.     In the case of residential developments, all of the requirements of Chapter 16.030 of Title 16 are met. (08-05)

 

17.100.020 NOTICE OF CONVERSION TO PROSPECTIVE TENANTS (66452.8)
Commencing on a date not less than 60 days prior to the filing of a tentative map for conversion of rental or lease property, the subdivider or the subdivider’s agent shall give notice of such tentative map filing in the form set forth in the Subdivision Map Act (SMA) to each person applying after such date for rental or lease of a unit of the subject property immediately prior to the acceptance of any rent or deposit from the prospective tenant by the subdivider. Failure of a subdivider to provide such notice shall not be grounds to deny the conversion, but shall make the subdivider subject to the penalties specified in the SMA. (08-05)

 

17.100.030 NOTICE OF CONVERSION TO EXISTING TENANTS (66452.9)
At least 60 days prior to the filing of a tentative map for conversion of rental or lease property, the subdivider or the subdivider’s agent shall give notice of such tentative map filing in the form set forth in the Subdivision Map Act to each tenant of the subject property. (08-05)

 

17.100.040 AGREEMENT TO RETAIN NEW RENTAL HOUSING (66452.50)
The City may, in connection with the approval of a tentative or final map for a residential condominium project requiring approval of a tentative or final map pursuant to this title, enter into a binding agreement with the subdivider mandating that the units be first made available for rental housing for a period of not less than 10 years from the date a certificate of occupancy has been issued for the units within the development subject to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. (08-05)

 

17.100.050 CONVERSION OF AIRSPACE IN EXISTING BUILDINGS (66427.2)
Applications to convert airspace in existing buildings where no new units are to be constructed or added shall be approved or denied in accordance with the criteria set forth for review of proposed conversions of community housing projects set forth in Chapter 16.030 of Title 16. The City shall take action on such airspace conversions in accordance with the time frames specified in the Subdivision Map Act. (08-05)

 

17.100.060 CONVERSION OF COMMUNITY HOUSING PROJECTS
Applications to convert community housing projects shall be reviewed in accordance with Chapter 16.030 of Title 16. (08-05)

Chapter 17.150 GENERAL DEDICATION REQUIREMENTS
17.150.000 DEDICATION OF STREETS AND OTHER FACILITIES (66475)
As a condition of approval of a tentative map, the City may require the subdivider to dedicate or make an irrevocable offer to dedicate to the public, to the City, or to such other public agency as the City may deem appropriate all real property, both on-site and off-site, required for public use or benefit, including but not limited to streets, highways, alleys, access rights, bikeways, walkways, equestrian trails, rights-of-way for drainage and erosion control facilities, open space and other public easements, and public utility easements. In addition, the City may require dedications and reservations of park sites, school sites, and sites for other public facilities in accordance with the provisions of Chapters 17.150 through 17.168. (08-05)

 

17.150.010 WAIVER OF ACCESS RIGHTS (66476)
As a condition of approval of a tentative map, the City may require that dedications or offers of dedication of streets include a waiver of direct access rights to any such street from any property within or abutting the subdivision. (08-05)

 

17.150.020 CERTIFICATES OF DEDICATION AND RECONVEYANCE (66477.5)
A.     Certificate to Be Recorded

The City shall record a certificate with the County Recorder regarding property to be dedicated in fee for public purposes or for making public improvements or for construction of public facilities, other than for open space, parks, or schools. The certificate shall be attached to the final map and shall contain all of the following information:

1.     The name and address of the subdivider dedicating the property.

2.     A legal description of the real property being dedicated.

3.     A statement that the City shall reconvey the property to the subdivider if the City makes a determination pursuant to this section that the same public purpose for which the property was dedicated does not exist or that the property or any portion thereof is not needed for public utilities as specified in subsection C of this section.

B.     Determination Whether Public Need for Dedication Still Exists

The subdivider may request that the City make the determination that the same public purpose for which the dedication was required still exists after payment of a fee which shall not exceed the amount reasonably required to make the determination. The determination may be made by reference to a capital improvement plan as specified in the Government Code, to an applicable general or specific plan requirement, to the subdivision map, or to other public documents that identify the need for the dedication.

C.    Reconveyance Upon Determination that Need No Longer Exists

If the City has determined that the same public purpose for which the dedication was required does not exist, it shall reconvey the property to the subdivider specified in subsection A of this section or to the subdivider’s successor in interest, except for all or any portion of the property that is required for that same public purpose or for public utilities.

D.    Notice to Subdivider Before Disposition of Dedicated Property

If the City decides to vacate, lease, sell, or otherwise dispose of the dedicated property, the local agency shall give at least 60 days notice to the subdivider whose name appears on the certificate before vacating, leasing, selling, or otherwise disposing of the dedicated property. This notice is not required if the dedicated property will be used for the same public purpose for which it was dedicated.

E.     Applicability

This chapter is applicable only to property required to be dedicated on or after January 1, 1990. (08-05)

Chapter 17.153 RESERVATION OF LAND FOR PUBLIC FACILITIES
17.153.000 RESERVATION REQUIREMENTS (66479)
As a condition of approval of a tentative map, the subdivider may be required to reserve sites, appropriate in area and location for parks, recreation facilities, fire stations, libraries, or other public uses according to the standards contained in this chapter. (08-05)

 

17.153.010 STANDARDS FOR RESERVATION OF LAND (66479)
Where a park, recreation facility, fire station, library or other public use is shown on the General Plan or an adopted specific plan, the City may require the subdivider to reserve such sites as the City may determine to be in accordance with the standards and policies contained in the General Plan or adopted specific plan, subject to the following conditions:

A.     The reserved area shall be of such size and shape as to permit the balance of property within which the reserved land is located to develop in an orderly and efficient manner.

B.     The amount of land to be reserved shall not make development of the remaining land held by the subdivider economically unfeasible.

C.    The reserved area shall conform to the General Plan or applicable adopted specific plan and shall be in such multiples of streets and parcels as to permit an efficient division of the reserved area in the event that it is not acquired within the prescribed period specified in this chapter. (08-05)

 

17.153.020 ACQUISITION OF RESERVED LAND (66480)
A.     Acquisition Procedure

The public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved shall at the time of approval of the final tract or parcel map enter into a binding agreement to acquire such reserved area within two years after completion and acceptance of all improvements unless such period of time is extended by mutual agreement.

B.     Payment to Subdivider

The purchase price of the reserved land shall be the market value thereof at the time of the filing of the tentative map, plus the taxes against the reserved land from the date of the reservation and any other costs incurred by the subdivider in the maintenance of the reserved land, including interest costs incurred on any loan covering the reserved land. (08-05)

 

17.153.030 TERMINATION OF RESERVATION (66481)
If the public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved does not enter into such a binding agreement, the reservation of such area shall automatically terminate. (08-05)

Chapter 17.156 SCHOOL SITES AND FEES
17.156.000 DEDICATION OF ELEMENTARY SCHOOL SITES
A.     Dedication Requirement

As a condition of approval of a tentative tract or parcel map, a subdivider who develops or completes the development of one or more subdivisions within the Claremont Unified School District may be required to dedicate to the school district such lands as the City Council shall deem to be necessary for the purpose of constructing thereon schools necessary to assure the residents of the subdivision adequate elementary school service.

B.     Dedication Procedure

The requirements of the school site dedication shall be imposed at the time of approval of the tentative map. If within 30 days after the dedication requirement is imposed by the City, the school district does not offer to enter into a binding commitment with the subdivider to accept the dedication, the requirement shall be automatically terminated. The required dedication may be made anytime before, concurrently with, or up to 60 days after the filing of the final tract or parcel map on any portion of the subdivision.

C.    Payments to Subdivider for Dedication

The school district shall, if it accepts the school site dedication, repay to the subdivider or the subdivider’s successors the original cost to the subdivider of the dedicated land plus a sum equal to the total of the following amounts:

1.     The cost of any improvements to the dedicated land since acquisition by the subdivider;

2.     The taxes assessed against the dedicated land from the date of the School District’s offer to enter into the binding commitment to accept the dedication;

3.     Any other costs incurred by the subdivider in the maintenance of such dedicated land, including interest costs incurred on any loan covering such land.

D.    Exemptions from Dedication Requirement

The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to a subdivider who has owned the land being subdivided for more than 10 years prior to the filing of the tentative map(s). (08-05)

 

17.156.010 INTERIM CLASSROOM FACILITIES (65974, 65995)
The City may impose fees or dedication requirements on new residential subdivisions for the purpose of providing interim school classroom facilities to alleviate conditions of overcrowding which may be caused by new residential development. (08-05)

 

17.156.020 PERMANENT SCHOOL FACILITIES
In addition to the requirements for interim facilities set forth in this chapter, the Claremont Unified School District may impose fees on new residential development to pay for permanent school facilities. (08-05)

Chapter 17.159 PARK REQUIREMENTS
17.159.000 INTENT
It is the intent of this chapter to require the payment of fees in conjunction with any residential development for the purpose of acquisition and/or development of land to be used for public recreation use. The City Council has determined that:

A.     The public interest, convenience, health, welfare, and safety require that four acres of land for each 1,000 persons residing within the City be devoted to park and recreational purposes.

B.     1.5 acres of the preceding 4 acres/1,000 standard may be satisfied by cooperative arrangements between the City and the local school districts.

C.    The park fees established in this chapter are commensurate with the costs for both acquisition and development of the required parkland in accordance with the preceding standards. (08-05)

 

17.159.010 APPLICABILITY
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the construction of any residential unit except for those dwelling units that are located in a subdivision which previously dedicated land or paid park fees under City requirements. (08-05)

 

17.159.020 PARK AND RECREATION FACILITIES FUND
All fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in a special fund, to be known as the “Park Dedication Fund.” Said fund shall be administered by the City and shall be used for the acquisition of land, the provision of improvements, or the purchase of capital equipment for the recreational use of the public. (08-05)

 

17.159.030 PARK FEES SET BY ORDINANCE
Park fees shall be set by separate ordinance, as amended from time to time. (08-05)

 

17.159.040 USE OF PARK FEES
The City shall utilize the park fees collected under this chapter for the acquisition and development of either neighborhood or community park facilities which are planned to serve the development(s) from which the fees were collected. Priority for expenditure of the funds shall be given to the applicable neighborhood park unless the minimal development of said neighborhood park, e.g. off-site improvements, turf and irrigation system, are already substantially completed. (08-05)

 

17.159.050 LAND DEDICATION INSTEAD OF FEES
A.     City Council Authority

Land may be dedicated to the City to satisfy the parks and recreation requirements of this chapter in lieu of the park fees required under this chapter if the City Council determines that such dedication is consistent with the General Plan and with other City goals and policies. The City Council decision regarding such land dedication shall be final and conclusive.

B.     Criteria for Council Determination

In considering whether land may dedicated in lieu of fee payment, the City Council shall consider the following:

1.     The General Plan.

2.     The topography, geology, access, and location of the land available for dedication.

3.     The size and shape of the land available for dedication.

C.    Valuation of Land to Be Dedicated

The percentage of credit toward satisfaction of the park fee requirement by land dedication shall be determined by the “fair market value” of the land to be dedicated. “Fair market value” may be determined by either of the following methods:

1.     The value as determined by the City Council based upon the then-assessed value modified to equal market value in accordance with current practice of the County Assessor; or

2.     The value as mutually agreed upon by the City and the developer.

D.    Timing of Land Dedication

The developer shall transfer title to the land to be dedicated to the City at the time of final map approval. However, the City shall not record the transfer of title until after the building permit is issued. (08-05)

 

17.159.060 CREDIT FOR PRIVATE PARK OR RECREATION FACILITIES
A.     Amount of Credit

Where private open space for recreation purposes is provided by a residential development, such areas in excess of the minimum required pursuant to Title 16 may be credited toward the fees required. The amount of such credit shall be determined by the City Council. For the purposes of this chapter, “open space” shall include turfed and landscaped areas, recreation buildings, and other recreation facilities such as swimming pools and recreational courts.

B.     Standards for Granting Credit

In approving credit for private open space against required park fees, the City Council shall find that all of the following standards are met:

1.     That yards, court areas, setbacks, and other open areas required to be maintained by the zoning and building regulations shall not be included in the computation of private open space.

2.     That the private ownership and maintenance of the open space is adequately provided for by written agreement.

3.     That the use of the private open space is restricted to park and recreation purposes only by recorded covenants which run with the land and which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the City Council.

4.     That the proposed private open space is reasonably adaptable for use for park and recreation purposes, taking into consideration such factors as size, shape, topography, geology, access, and location of the open space.

C.    Amount of Credit to Be Granted

In considering the amount of credit to be granted against park fees for private open space, the City Council shall make an assessment of the relationship between the proposed private open space and the total community recreation needs as set forth in the General Plan. In cases where credit is granted for 50 percent or more of the required park fees, the Council shall find that the private open space provides exceptional park or recreational facilities which will substantially offset the need for the public neighborhood facilities for which the credited fees would otherwise be used. (08-05)

 

17.159.070 EXEMPTIONS FROM PARK DEDICATION REQUIREMENTS
A.     On-Campus Undergraduate Housing

Park fee or land dedication requirements shall not be required for any on-campus undergraduate housing projects.

B.     On-Campus Graduate Student Housing

All or part of the park fee or land dedication requirements for graduate student housing projects may be waived by the City Council where the college provides open space for recreational purposes in excess of what is required in Chapter 16.013 for multiple-family development projects. In determining the amount of park fee or land dedication requirements to be waived, the Council shall make an assessment of how the college’s open space for recreational purposes will meet the recreational needs of the residents of the housing project, paying particular attention to the needs of children and families.

All open space for which credit is given shall be restricted to recreation purposes, and improved and maintained as such as a condition of approval for the project. The open space shall be shown as restricted to recreational purposes. Such open space for recreational purposes shall not be eliminated without the approval of the City Council and payment of park fees in effect at the time approval is given to eliminate the open space.

C.    Senior Citizen Housing

Park fee or land dedication requirements shall not be required for any senior citizen housing projects having at least 25 percent of the dwelling units set aside and affordable for low-income households.

D.    Affordable Senior Citizen Housing

Park fee or land dedication requirements may be waived by the City Council for any senior citizen housing project having at least 25 percent of the dwelling units set aside and affordable for moderate-income households if the Council finds that such a waiver will further the implementation of the General Plan.

E.     Affordable Housing Projects

Park fee or land dedication requirements may be waived by the City Council for housing projects with at least 25 percent of the dwelling units set aside and affordable for low- and/or moderate-income households if the Council finds that such a waiver will further the implementation of the General Plan. (08-05)

Chapter 17.162 STORM DRAINAGE FEES
17.162.000 DRAINAGE FEES ESTABLISHED BY ZONING DISTRICT
A.     Establishment of Fees

In addition to the on-site drainage facilities required to be constructed under Chapter 17.016, drainage fees shall be paid in conjunction with subdivision or development in order to help defray the cost of off-site drainage facilities required to accommodate the additional water runoff created by development. Such fees shall be placed in the drainage fund account and used to implement the City’s drainage construction plan or reimburse the City for expenditures previously made.

B.     Fees by Zoning District

Such fees shall be apportioned by zoning districts, as shown on the City’s Official Zoning Map. The fees established for each zoning district are based on the estimated contribution of storm flows created by the improvement of property within each such district.

C.    Basis of Fee Structure

The fee structure adopted by the City shall be computed so that the drainage fee for the development of any property will not exceed the pro-rata share of the total cost of all needed drainage facilities within the City, were such costs apportioned uniformly on a contributory basis. In addition, a discount from the standard drainage fee is offered for the reduction of runoff, by means of on-site retention measures, which would otherwise occur from the development. (08-05)

 

17.162.010 DRAINAGE FACILITIES FUND
All fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in a special fund, to be known as the “Drainage Facilities Fund.” Monies in said fund shall be administered by the City and shall be expended solely for design and construction, or reimbursement for construction, of drainage facilities designated in the Drainage Master Plan. (08-05)

 

17.162.020 DRAINAGE FEE PAYMENT
No final tract or parcel map or final record of survey shall be approved until the fee provided per this chapter for the applicable zoning district has been paid in cash. However, the City reserves the right to waive payment of drainage fees for the dedication of rights-of-way, low income housing, or RDA economic benefits. (08-05)

 

17.162.030 DRAINAGE FEES SET BY ORDINANCE
The drainage fee to be paid for any land being subdivided or developed in each of the zoning districts shall be determined by formulas established by separate ordinance. The formulas to be used for the computation of drainage fees shall be based on the acreage of development, the applicable zoning district, and the cost-per-unit drainage outflow figures specified in said ordinance, and amended from time to time. (08-05)

 

17.162.040 EFFECT OF ZONE CHANGES
When a zone change is adopted to change the current zoning of an area, expand a zoning area, or create a new zone district and such amendment has been in effect for a period of 60 days in the case of residential development or 30 days in the case of all other types of development, all of the provisions of this chapter shall apply to said area as though it was in the new zoning district when this chapter first became effective. (08-05)

Chapter 17.165 TRANSPORTATION IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS
17.165.000 TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEE
As a condition of approval of a tentative tract or parcel map for new residential dwelling(s), the subdivider shall pay a transportation impact fee pursuant to Chapter 16.200 of Title 16. (08-05)

 

17.165.010 PAYMENT OF FEES
The subdivider shall, as provided in Chapter 16.200, pay transportation impact fees prior to the recordation of a residential parcel or tract map. (08-05)

Chapter 17.168 GENERAL FEES AND DEPOSITS
17.168.000 FEES SET BY COUNCIL
The following fees and deposits shall be set by ordinance or resolution of the City Council:

A.     Tentative and final map filing and review fees.

B.     Plan check fees.

C.    Inspection fees.

D.    Cash deposits and other sureties to insure completion of monumentation, street trees, and subdivision improvements.

E.     Pavement cut fee.

F.     Street sign installation fee.

G.    Merger of existing lots filing fee.

H.    Reversion to acreage filing fee.

I.      Lot line adjustments filing fee.

J.     Certificate of compliance filing fee.

K.     Waiver of parcel map filing fee.

L.     Environmental review fees.

M.    Other fees determined by the City Council as required to defray costs associated with the processing and improvement of subdivisions. (08-05)

 

17.168.010 PAYMENT OF INSPECTION FEES
At the time of filing of the final map for a subdivision requiring improvements or before commencement of improvement construction, the subdivider shall pay fees for the inspection of the required improvements as established by resolution of the City Council. Such fees shall be based on reasonable improvement cost estimates as determined by the City Engineer. (08-05)

 

17.168.020 CASH DEPOSITS (66495)
A.     Monuments

When required by the City, the subdivider shall submit a cash deposit with the City to cover the cost of installation of monuments. Deposit amounts shall be based on cost estimates of monument installation as determined by the City Engineer. Such deposits shall be refunded upon installation of the monuments to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.

B.     When required by the City, the subdivider shall submit a deposit for the installation of street trees. Deposit amounts shall be based on cost estimates of street tree installation as determined by the Director of Community Services. Street tree deposits shall be refunded if street trees are installed by the subdivider and accepted by the City. However, street tree deposits shall not be refunded if the City elects to install the street trees. (14-07; 12-04; 08-05)

Chapter 17.200 APPLICATION FOR FINAL MAP APPROVAL
17.200.000 FINAL TRACT MAP FILING
After the approval or conditional approval of a tentative tract map, the subdivider may cause the real property included within the map, or any part thereof, to be surveyed and a final tract map thereof prepared and filed with the City Engineer in accordance with the approved or conditionally-approved tentative tract map. (08-05)

 

17.200.010 FINAL PARCEL MAP FILING
The procedures for filing and processing of final parcel maps shall be the same as those set forth in this chapter for a final tract map. As used in this title, the term “final map” shall encompass both final tract maps and final parcel maps. (08-05)

 

17.200.020 FINAL MAP CONTENT AND FORM
The content and form of final maps shall be as specified in the Subdivision Map Act, as administered and interpreted by the City Engineer. The filing of maps compiled from record data is prohibited and all maps shall represent a survey of the land being subdivided. (08-05)

 

17.200.030 FINAL MAP APPLICATION
Prior to submittal of the original final map for City Council consideration, a complete final map application must filed and accepted. A complete application shall include, but not be limited to: approved improvement plans, signed improvement agreement, proof of tax clearance, security deposit(s), statements from applicable utilities of ability to serve the subdivision, and proof of compliance with conditions specified in the tentative map approval resolution. In accordance with Chapter 17.010, the Department of Community Development shall determine whether the application is complete within 30 days of filing, and shall transmit said determination in writing to the subdivider. If the application is determined to be incomplete, the department’s notification shall indicate the manner in which it can be made complete. (08-05)

 

17.200.040 MULTIPLE FINAL MAPS
Multiple final maps within a subdivision may be filed prior to the expiration of a tentative map subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.010. (08-05)

Chapter 17.203 IMPROVEMENT PLANS
17.203.000 PREPARATION AND SUBMISSION OF IMPROVEMENT PLANS
Plans, profiles, and details for proposed subdivision improvements shall be prepared under the direction and signed by a civil engineer registered in the State of California. Such improvement plans shall contain information and shall be in a format as specified by the City Engineer. A written listing of required improvement plan information and format shall be provided by the City Engineer on request.

Improvement plans shall be submitted to the City Engineer at least 60 days prior to submission of a final map. Plan check, inspection, and other improvement plan fees shall be paid as required in Chapters 17.150 through 17.168. (08-05)

 

17.203.010 REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF IMPROVEMENT PLANS
The City Engineer shall review and act upon improvement plans in accordance with the time limits specified in the Subdivision Map Act. After review of submitted improvement plans, the City Engineer shall indicate any required revisions to the plans. Subsequently, upon finding that all required revisions have been completed and that the improvement plans are consistent with all tentative map conditions of approval, the General Plan, any applicable specific plans, and this Code, the City Engineer shall sign and date the plans. (08-05)

 

17.203.020 SUBDIVIDER’S RESPONSIBILITY
Approval of improvement plans shall in no way relieve the subdivider or the subdivider’s engineer of responsibility for the design of the improvements or from any deficiencies resulting from the design, nor from compliance with any tentative map condition of approval. (08-05)

Chapter 17.206 FINAL MAP REVIEW AND RECORDATION
17.206.000 PREFILING REVIEW OF FINAL MAPS (66457)
The subdivider shall submit preliminary prints of the final map to the City Engineer prior to review by the City Council. Said preliminary prints shall be accompanied by such reports, technical data, documents, and other information as may be required by the City Engineer for determination of conformance with the tentative map, the tentative map conditions of approval, and the requirements of this Code and the Subdivision Map Act. (08-05)

 

17.206.010 CITY COUNCIL ACTION ON FINAL MAPS (66458, 66463)
A.     Council Determination

If the City Engineer determines that the final map conforms to the applicable tentative map and its conditions of approval, the final map shall be forwarded to the City Council. Upon receipt of the final map, the Council shall determine if the final map conforms to all requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and City subdivision regulations applicable at the time of approval or conditional approval of the tentative map. If the Council determines that the final map does so conform, the Council shall approve the map. If the Council determines that the final map does not conform, it shall disapprove the map. Such final map disapproval shall be accompanied by a finding identifying the requirements that have not been met.

B.     Approval of Final Map by Inaction

If the City Council does not approve or disapprove the final map within the prescribed time or any authorized extension thereof and the map conforms to all requirements and rulings, it shall be deemed approved and the City Clerk shall certify or state its approval thereon. The meeting at which the City Council receives the map shall be the date on which the City Clerk receives the map. (08-05)

 

17.206.020 NO RECORDATION WITHOUT PAYMENT OF TAXES AND ASSESSMENTS (66493, 66494)
Whenever any part of a subdivision is subject to a lien for taxes or special assessments collected as taxes which are not yet payable, the final tract or parcel map shall not be recorded until the owner or subdivider complies with the Subdivision Map Act (SMA). If such taxes or special assessments are allowed to become delinquent, the County shall recover same from the security required in accordance with the provisions of the SMA. (08-05)

 

17.206.030 SUBDIVISION GUARANTEE FROM TITLE COMPANY
Prior to the recordation of a final map, the subdivider shall provide the City with a subdivision guarantee, issued by a title company authorized to write such guarantees by California law, issued for the benefit and protection of the City and covering all lands to be dedicated for public use. Said guarantee shall be in the amount of at least $1000. (08-05)

 

17.206.040 RECORDATION OF FINAL MAPS (66464, 66493)
Upon City Council approval of a final map, the proper signatures and certificates shall be affixed thereto and the map shall be transmitted to the County Recorder. After recordation, the subdivider shall supply originals and prints of the map to the City as required by the City Engineer. (08-05)

 

17.206.050 ADDITIONAL INFORMATION TO BE RECORDED WITH FINAL MAP (66434.2)
The City may require additional information to be filed or recorded simultaneously with a final map. The additional information shall be in the form of a separate document or an additional map sheet which shall indicate its relationship to the final map, and shall contain a statement that the additional information is for informational purposes, describing conditions as of the date of filing and is not intended to affect record title interest. The document or additional map sheet may also contain a notation that the additional information is derived from public records or reports and does not imply the correctness or sufficiency of those records or reports by the preparer of the document or additional map sheet. (08-05)

Chapter 17.209 DEDICATION, IMPROVEMENT, AND SURVEY REQUIREMENT
17.209.000 DEDICATION REQUIREMENTS (66439, 66447)
All streets, highways, rights-of-way, easements, or land shown on the final map for public use shall be offered for dedication to the City or to other appropriate public agencies. Streets or portions of streets may be offered for future dedication where the immediate opening and/or improvement is not required but where the City determines it is necessary to provide for future street dedication to serve further development of the area or adjacent areas. (08-05)

 

17.209.010 IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS
Subdivision improvements shall be completed in accordance with Chapter 17.212. (08-05)

 

17.209.020 MODIFICATION OF DESIGN OR IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS
Prior to approval of a final map and upon written request by the subdivider and payment of the required review fee, the City Council, after a public hearing may determine that, due to unusual circumstances and imposition of a design or improvement requirement required by this chapter would be infeasible, would create results contrary to the purposes of subdivision design or improvement requirements, or would impose a burden on the subdivider not imposed on comparable subdivisions. The Council may then waive such requirement for an individual subdivision. In so doing, the Council shall find that the resulting subdivision design and improvements are consistent with the General Plan, and any applicable specific plan would conform to the Subdivision Map Act and all other provisions of this Code, and would not be detrimental to public health or safety. (08-05)

 

17.209.030 SURVEY REQUIREMENTS (66434, 66495 et seq.)
Survey and monumentation for final tract and parcel maps shall be carried out in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act and the requirements of the City Engineer. (08-05)

Chapter 17.212 COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS
17.212.000 IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENTS (66462)
No final map shall be signed by the City Engineer or recorded until required improvements are completed or an improvement agreement is executed and all required securities are received and approved by the City in accordance with this chapter. (08-05)

 

17.212.010 ACQUISITION OF LAND FOR OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS (66462.5)
If a subdivider is required to construct off-site improvements on land in which neither the subdivider nor the City has sufficient title or interest to allow construction, acquisition of land or right-of-way for such improvements shall be carried out in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act. (08-05)

 

17.212.020 IMPROVEMENT SECURITY (66499, 66499.3, 66499.4)
Improvement security shall be in a form as prescribed by the Subdivision Map Act. The amount of security shall include all of the following:

A.     One hundred percent of the total estimated improvement construction cost to guarantee the construction or installation of all improvements.

B.     An additional amount of 100 percent of the total estimated improvement construction cost to guarantee payment to the subdivider’s contractor, subcontractors, and persons supplying material, labor, or equipment for the construction or installation of improvements.

C.    An additional amount as determined by the City Council necessary to warranty the improvement construction for a period of one year following City acceptance thereof against any defective work or materials.

D.    If the improvement security is other than a bond or bonds furnished by a duly-authorized corporate surety, an additional security amount shall be provided as determined by the City Council necessary to cover the cost and reasonable expenses and fees, including reasonable attorneys’ fees, which may be incurred by the City in successfully enforcing the obligation secured. (08-05)

 

17.212.030 REDUCTION OF SECURITY WITH SPECIAL ASSESSMENT PROCEEDINGS (66499.5)
In the event that the required subdivision improvements are financed and installed pursuant to special assessment proceedings, the subdivider may apply to the City Council for a reduction in the amount of the improvement security required by this chapter up to an amount corresponding to the amount of faithful performance and labor and material bonds required by the special assessment act being used. The City Council may grant such reduction if it finds that such bonds have been in fact provided and that the obligations secured thereby are substantially equivalent to that required by this chapter. (08-05)

 

17.212.040 INSPECTION AND ACCEPTANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS
A.     Construction Commencement and Inspection

Improvement construction shall not commence until all required improvement plans have been approved by the City Engineer and all required permits have been issued. All improvements are subject to inspection by the City Engineer or other authorized City personnel. Construction methods and materials for all improvements shall conform to accepted engineering practice and the City’s standard engineering specifications.

B.     Acceptance of Improvements

Subdivision improvements shall be accepted by the City only upon the City Engineer’s determination that such improvements have been constructed satisfactorily in accordance with approved plans. When requested by the subdivider in writing, the City Engineer may consider acceptance of a portion of the subdivision improvements. Such improvements shall be accepted only if the City Engineer finds that such improvements are necessary for public use. Acceptance of a portion of improvements shall not relieve the subdivider from completing the full subdivision improvements nor from satisfying any other requirements of this chapter. (08-05)

 

17.212.050 RELEASE OF SECURITY (66499.7)
A.     Performance Security

Performance security shall be released upon acceptance of improvements by the City and acceptance of a warranty security by the City Engineer.

B.     Material and Labor Security

After acceptance of subdivision improvements by the City, the City Engineer may reduce the security submitted to secure payments to contractors, subcontractors, and suppliers to an amount equal to the amount of all claims therefor filed and for which notice has been given to the City Council.

C.    Warranty Security

Warranty security shall be released upon completion of the 12-month warranty period provided all deficiencies identified by the City have been corrected to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. (08-05)

 

17.212.060 FORFEITURE OF SECURITY
Upon the failure of a subdivider to complete all improvements within the time specified in an improvement agreement or extension thereof, the City Council may, upon notice in writing of not less than 20 days served by registered or certified mail, determine that the subdivider is in default. The Council may then determine that the improvement security or such portion thereof necessary to complete the work or any other obligation of the subdivider shall be forfeited to the City. (08-05)

Chapter 17.250 VOLUNTARY MERGER AND CONTIGUOUS PARCELS
17.250.000 APPLICABILITY
Parcel merger is the formal combination of contiguous parcels under common ownership in order to conform to minimum zoning standards, for tax purposes, for construction purposes, or for similar reasons. (08-05)

 

17.250.010 CONDITIONS FOR PARCEL MERGER
A parcel may be merged with one or more contiguous parcels held by the same owner if any of the following conditions exists and the merger is approved by the Director of Community Development:

A.     Any one of the contiguous parcels does not conform to minimum parcel size or dimension standards specified in the applicable zone district; or

B.     The parcel contains less than 5000 square feet in area at the time of the determination of merger; or

C.    The parcel was not created in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances in effect at the time of its creation; or

D.    The parcel does not meet current standards for sewage disposal and domestic water supply; or

E.     The parcel does not meet slope stability and/or slope density standards as specified in the General Plan or this Code; or

F.     The parcel has no legal access adequate for vehicular and/or safety equipment entry, exit, or maneuverability; or

G.    The development of the parcel would create a health or safety hazard; or

H.    The parcel is not consistent with the General Plan or any applicable specific plan other than minimum parcel size or density standards; or

I.      The consolidation of contiguous parcels would aid orderly development. (08-05)

 

17.250.020 FILING REQUIREMENTS
Application for voluntary merger of contiguous parcels shall be made on forms provided by the Director of Community Development and shall include such items as may reasonably be required to make the necessary findings. A filing fee shall be paid as established by resolution of the City Council. (08-05)

 

17.250.030 REVIEW PROCESS AND FINDINGS
A.     Approval by Director of Community Development

Parcel mergers shall be approved by the Director of Community Development.

B.     Required Findings

All of the following findings shall be made prior to approval of any parcel merger:

1.     The parcels to be merged are under common ownership at the time of the merger.

2.     The parcels as merged will be consistent with or will be more closely compatible with the applicable zone district regulations, other requirements of this title, and applicable planning policies relating to the subject property and parcel configuration. Parcel mergers in the HC District shall be subject to maximum lot size standards set forth in Chapter 16.004.

3.     The parcels as merged will not be deprived of legal access as a result of the merger, and access to the adjoining parcels will not be restricted by the merger.

4.     All current and delinquent taxes have been paid on all affected parcels.

C.    No Parcel Map Requirement

No parcel map shall be required for parcel mergers provided the Director finds that the parcel merger complies with requirements as to area, improvement and design, flood water drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, environmental protection, and other requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, this title, and the General Plan.

D.    Certificate of Compliance Required

For a merger involving the elimination of one or more parcels, a certificate of compliance with a site map in a form as approved by the City Engineer shall be required and recorded with the County Recorder. The certificate of compliance shall identify the real property and shall state the division thereof complies with applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter. The documents necessary to reflect the merger’s ownership changes, such as grant deeds and similar documents arising from the boundary changes, shall be recorded concurrently with the legal description of the merged parcels. (14-04; 08-05)

Chapter 17.253 REVERSIONS TO ACREAGE
17.253.000 APPLICABILITY
A reversion to acreage is the abandonment of a recorded subdivision, which was created by either a final tract or a final parcel map. This action constitutes a merger of the separate parcels within the subdivision into a single parcel, excluding any dedications, easements, or rights-of-way necessary for present or prospective public road purposes. (08-05)

 

17.253.010 INITIATION AND FILING REQUIREMENTS
A.     Initiation

Reversions to acreage may be initiated by the City Council on its own motion or by petition of all of the parcel owners within the subdivision.

B.     Filing Procedures

Application for a reversion to acreage shall be made on forms provided by the Director of Community Development and shall include such items as may reasonably be required to make the necessary findings. A filing fee shall be paid as established by resolution of the City Council. (08-05)

 

17.253.020 REVIEW PROCESS AND FINDINGS
The City Council shall review reversions to acreage at a noticed public hearing. In approving a reversion to acreage, the Council shall make the following findings:

A.     Dedications or offers of dedication to be vacated or abandoned by the reversion to acreage are unnecessary for present or prospective public purposes; and

B.     One or more of the following conditions exist:

1.     All owners of an interest in the real property within the subdivision have consented to the reversion; or

2.     None of the improvements required to be made have been completed within two years from the date the final tract or parcel map was recorded or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is the latter; or

3.     No parcels shown on the final tract or parcel map have been sold within five years from the date such map was recorded. (08-05)

 

17.253.030 CONDITIONS IMPOSED ON REVERSIONS TO ACREAGE
As conditions of approval of a reversion to acreage, the City Council shall require:

A.     Any dedications or offers of dedication deemed necessary by the Council for present and/or prospective future public purposes; and

B.     Retention of all previously-paid fees deemed necessary by the Council to accomplish the purpose of the provisions of this chapter; and

C.    Retention of any portion of required improvement security or deposits deemed necessary by the Council to accomplish the purposes of this chapter. (08-05)

 

17.253.040 RECORDATION OF REVERSIONS TO ACREAGE
A.     Dedications

If dedications are required that are not shown on the original final tract or parcel map, the final map shall be corrected prior to recordation of the reversion to acreage to accurately reflect the required change. This change shall be confirmed by the City Council and the County Surveyor prior to release for recordation.

B.     Tax Bonds

No tax bond shall be required for reversions to acreage.

C.    Reversions Effective Upon Recordation

Reversions to acreage shall become effective upon recordation of the reversion final map. All dedications, offers of dedication, and easements not shown on said final map shall no longer be in force or effect. Upon the recordation of the reversion final map, all fees and deposits shall be returned and all improvement securities released except those retained pursuant to this chapter. (08-05)

Chapter 17.256 LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS
17.256.000 APPLICABILITY
A lot line adjustment is a minor boundary adjustment between four or fewer existing adjoining parcels, where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjoining parcel, and where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not thereby created. (08-05)

 

17.256.010 FILING AND TITLE REPORT REQUIREMENTS
A.     Filing Requirements

Application for a lot line adjustment shall be made on forms provided by the Director of Community Development and shall include such items as may reasonably be required to make the necessary findings. A filing fee shall be paid as established by resolution by the City Council.

B.     Title Report

In conjunction with a lot line adjustment application, the applicant shall submit a preliminary title report to ensure that the subject parcels are not encumbered with liens, delinquent taxes, trust deeds, and/or utility easements which would conflict with the requested lot line adjustment. If the Director of Community Development determines that the boundaries described within the encumbering document conflict with the boundaries described in the requested lot line adjustment, the Director shall require that such conflict be resolved prior to action on the adjustment application. (08-05)

 

17.256.020 REVIEW PROCESS AND FINDINGS
A.     City Council Findings

The City Council shall review and approve lot line adjustments. In approving a lot line adjustment, the Council shall make the following findings:

The lot line adjustment is consistent with the General Plan, any applicable specific plans, this title, the building codes of the City, and the Subdivision Map Act.

B.     Relocation of Infrastructure or Easements

Approval of a lot line adjustment may be conditioned so as to facilitate the relocation of existing utilities, infrastructure, or easements.

C.    No Maps or Records of Survey Required

No tentative map, parcel map, final map, or record of survey shall be required as a condition of approval of a lot line adjustment by the City Council.

D.    Recordation

After City Council approval, the applicant shall file for recordation the new legal descriptions along with the site map prepared by a registered civil engineer and/or licensed land surveyor. All documents necessary to identify and reflect the ownership changes, such as grant or reconveyance deeds arising from the boundary change(s), shall be recorded concurrently with the legal descriptions.

E.     The City Council may require on its approval of a lot line adjustment the payment of real property taxes (Gov. Code 66412). (08-05)

Chapter 17.259 CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE
17.259.000 APPLICABILITY
A certificate of compliance may be obtained for those parcels whose boundaries of record are not documented by a recorded final map, parcel map, official map, or certificate of exception. (08-05)

 

17.259.010 FILING REQUIREMENTS
Application for a certificate of compliance shall be made on forms provided by the Director of Community Development and shall include such items as may reasonably be required to make the necessary findings. A filing fee shall be paid as established by resolution of the City Council. (08-05)

 

17.259.020 REVIEW PROCESS AND FINDINGS
The Director of Community Development shall review certificates of compliance. Prior to approval of a certificate of compliance, the Director shall make both of the following findings:

A.     The parcel is consistent with the zoning and General Plan requirements which were in effect at the time the lot was created.

B.     The proposed certificate of compliance conforms with applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title. (08-05)

 

17.259.030 CONDITIONS IMPOSED ON CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE
The conditions that were in effect at the time of creation of a parcel shall be imposed with approval of a certificate of compliance and shall be met prior to recordation of the certificate. If the parcel was created lawfully within City boundaries prior to May 1, 1958, no requirements shall be applied. If the parcel was created lawfully within Los Angeles County prior to September 22, 1967, no requirements shall be applied. (08-05)

 

17.259.040 RECORDATION OF CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE
Upon approval of a certificate of compliance and completion of any conditions imposed, the applicant shall file for recordation the certificate of compliance, which identifies the real property and state that the parcel complies with the applicable provisions of this title, the Subdivision Map Act, and the associated site map. (08-05)

Chapter 17.261 WAIVER OF PARCEL MAP REQUIREMENT (66428)
17.261.000 APPLICABILITY
The City Council may waive all or part of the requirement for a tentative and final parcel map in the following cases:

A.     Division of real property or interests therein created by probate, eminent domain procedures, partition, or other civil judgments or decrees; or

B.     Division of real property resulting from the conveyance of land or any interest therein to or from the City or other public entity for public purposes, such as school sites, public building sites, or rights-of-way or easements for streets, sewers, utilities, drainage, and similar facilities.

C.    Construction of a condominium project with four or fewer dwelling units on a single parcel.

D.    Voluntary mergers resulting in the net elimination of no more than one parcel. (08-05)

 

17.261.010 FILING REQUIREMENTS
Application for a parcel map waiver shall be made on forms provided by the Director of Community Development and shall include such items as may reasonably be required to make the necessary findings. A filing fee shall be paid as established by resolution of the City Council. (08-05)

 

17.261.020 REQUIRED FINDINGS
In waiving a parcel map requirement, the City Council shall make findings that the proposed division of land complies with requirements as to area, improvements and design, flood water drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, environmental protection, and other requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, this title, and the General Plan. (08-05)

 

17.261.030 CONDITIONS ON PARCEL MAP WAIVER
The City Council may condition the waiver of parcel map requirements to provide for, among other things, payment of parkland, drainage, and other fees required for subdivisions by this title. (08-05)

 

17.261.040 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE UPON PARCEL MAP WAIVER
Upon City Council waiver of the parcel map requirement, the applicant shall file a certificate of compliance with a site map for recordation with the County Recorder. (08-05)

TITLE 18 SIGNS
Note
Chapter 18.000 TITLE AND INTENT
Chapter 18.001 ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 18.005 GENERAL STANDARDS
Chapter 18.010 PROHIBITED FORM OF SIGNS
Chapter 18.015 SIGNS ALLOWED IN ALL DISTRICTS WITHOUT SIGN PERMITS
Chapter 18.020 SIGNS PERMITTED IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Chapter 18.025 SIGNS PERMITTED IN COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
Chapter 18.030 SIGNS PERMITTED IN SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Chapter 18.035 SIGNS PERMITTED IN CONNECTION WITH SPECIFIC USES
Chapter 18.900 GLOSSARY OF DEFINITIONS

Note
*      Prior history: Included in the Claremont Land and Use Development Code, Ordinance No. 599, adopted April 1958, and amended through January 9, 2007, and codified as part of the Claremont Municipal Code, Ordinance No. 2008-05, May 8, 2008.

 
Chapter 18.000 TITLE AND INTENT
18.000.000 TITLE
Title 18 of the Municipal Code shall be known as the “Sign Ordinance of the City of Claremont.” (08-05)

 

18.000.010 INTENT
The City of Claremont possesses a beautiful natural setting and an attractive manmade environment. However, those physical advantages and the economic benefits that flow from them can be threatened by the uncontrolled proliferation of signs within the community. At the same time, carefully designed and regulated signing can contribute to the visual quality of the community, increase economic activity, and provide for a desirable environment.

The purpose and intent of this title is to regulate signs in the City in order to protect Claremont’s physical and economic environment, support the policies of the General Plan, and promote the public health, safety, and general welfare.

The City Council finds that commercial and non-commercial signing in excess of the standards set within this title contributes to visual blight and conflict with the City’s zoning goals and General Plan aesthetic goals.

A.     The City Council finds that the above goals are served by the following specific objectives of the regulations set forth in this title:

1.     To ensure that signs serve primarily to identify the establishment on the site.

2.     To ensure that signs harmonize with their buildings and neighborhoods and with other signs in the area.

3.     To invite artistry and innovation in signs so as to maintain and improve the appearance of the buildings and neighborhoods in which they are placed.

4.     To require signs that are carefully designed and professional in appearance.

5.     To avoid traffic hazards by minimizing visual competition among signs and by providing clear identification of businesses.

6.     To tailor sign size, height, and placement to the characteristics of the street from which signs are viewed (e.g. traffic speeds, street width, pedestrian activity, etc.).

The Council also finds that flags with commercial messages contribute to visual blight and conflict with the City’s zoning goals and General Plan aesthetic goals.

B.     Design Criteria

The sign design criteria set forth in this section were developed in order to encourage signs which provide clear identification for businesses and other land uses, while promoting quality, creativity, artistry, innovation, and variety in sign design and materials, and to insure that signs harmonize with surrounding architecture. These design criteria shall be used by the staff and the Architectural Commission to determine if a proposed sign is consistent with the Intent of this title and with the policies of the General Plan. The design criteria are as follows:

1.     Identification

Major identification signs shall serve primarily to identify the name or type of business or other land use.

2.     Architectural Context

Sign design shall harmonize with the architectural design and details of the building it serves, with other signs on the building, with the building’s surroundings, and with the business or other activity that the sign identifies. Further, signs shall not cover or obstruct important architectural elements.

3.     Design Elements

The following important design elements shall be addressed:

a.     Materials. Creativity in use of materials is encouraged. Durable materials which are compatible in appearance to the building supporting or identified by the sign shall be used. Internally lighted plastic-faced signs are discouraged except for individually mounted or “cutout” letters. Where internally lighted plastic-faced canister signs are approved, light colored letters on a dark or opaque background shall be used.

b.     Colors. Colors of signs should harmonize with the building it serves, adjacent landscaping and buildings, and signs of adjacent businesses.

c.     Size. Sign size and height shall be in harmony with the building it serves, with other nearby buildings, and with adjacent streets. Size and height shall also be appropriate to the distance from which the sign is normally viewed.

d.     Letter Style. Simple lettering styles shall be used for ease of identification. Legibility shall take priority over complexity in the design of the sign face.

e.     Placement. Signs in the Claremont Village (CV) District shall be building-mounted whenever possible unless the Architectural Commission determines that visibility or site considerations dictate the use of a freestanding sign.

f.      Illumination. Illuminated signs shall be lighted to the minimum level required to ensure nighttime readability. Specific illumination levels shall be in accordance with Chapter 18.005 (General Standards).

4.     Impact on Surroundings

Signs shall not detract from the visibility of other signs, nor shall they have adverse safety or visual impacts on the streetscape or other nearby properties. (14-04; 10-04; 08-05)

Chapter 18.001 ADMINISTRATION
18.001.000 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED
Within the City, no person shall place, construct, erect, re-erect, alter, enlarge, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or equip any sign or sign structure, or paint any new wall sign, or cause or permit any of the foregoing to be done contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this title. Any sign not expressly permitted by this title shall be prohibited.

Any sign which is being displayed or is being poorly maintained in violation of the provisions of this title, shall be taken down, removed, or altered so as to comply with this title. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, or person having the beneficial use of the building or structure or land upon which such sign may be found to take down, remove, or alter the sign so as to comply with this title. (08-05)

 

18.001.010 SIGN PERMITS AND REVIEW
A.     Permits Required

No sign shall be erected or placed within the City without the prior issuance of a sign permit unless such sign is specifically exempted in this title. Building and electrical permits may also be required. Sign permits shall be required for structural alterations to existing signs or changes in copy, color, or logos on existing signs. Sign permits are not required for minor maintenance or minor repairs to existing legally erected signs. Signs erected without a permit and not exempted in this title, shall be deemed illegal.

B.     Permit Applications

Applications for sign permits or for approval of planned sign programs shall be made on forms provided by the Director of Community Development and shall be accompanied by plans and exhibits as required by the Director.

C.    Application Screening

Within 30 days of receipt of a sign application, the Community Development Department shall inform the applicant as to the completeness of the submittal and of additional materials required, if any. Department staff shall also determine:

1.     If the proposed sign(s) is to be reviewed by staff or by the Architectural Commission in accordance with the sign review responsibilities specified in this chapter.

2.     Whether modifications to the sign, a sign adjustment, or a sign variance would be required for sign approval under the provisions of this title.

D.    Review and Decision

Within 180 days of receipt of a complete sign application, the reviewing person or body shall determine if the proposed sign or planned sign program conforms to the provisions of this title and shall accordingly approve, approve subject to modifications and/or conditions, or deny the sign application.

E.     Sign Removal

As a condition of issuance of any sign permit, the City may require written authorization for City personnel or the City’s designated agents to enter the property to remove the sign upon City determination that the sign, after erection or alteration, does not conform to approved plans, to other permit conditions, or to the provisions of this title.

F.     Signs Allowed In Lieu of Commercial Message

In each instance and under the same conditions to which this title permits any sign, a sign containing any ideological, political, or other non-commercial message shall be permitted in lieu of a commercial message, to the same physical dimensions and character as the permitted sign. (14-04; 08-05)

 

18.001.020 FEES REQUIRED
Sign permit and related fees shall be established by resolution of the City Council. (08-05)

 

18.001.030 REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF SIGNS
A.     General

The Architectural Commission and staff have authority under this title to approve signs. All signs require review and approval except those signs listed in this title as exempt from sign permit review. Signs not exempt from review shall be reviewed as provided in this section, except if otherwise specified or required as a condition of approval by the Architectural Commission or Planning Commission.

B.     Staff Review Responsibilities

Staff shall generally review and approve all compliant building-mounted signs, freestanding directional signs, temporary signs, and all signs conforming to a sign program previously approved by the Architectural Commission. Staff shall also review and approve all compliant changes/replacements of sign faces that do not involve modifications to existing sign cabinets and/or supporting sign structures. The Director of Community Development may choose to refer any sign that would normally be subject to staff review and approval to the Architectural Commission for review and approval.

C.    Architectural Commission Review Responsibilities

The Architectural Commission shall review and approve all compliant freestanding identification signs, proposed new sign programs, neighborhood identification signs, other signs not generally reviewed by staff, and any sign the Director has referred to the Architectural Commission for review and approval. The Architectural Commission shall also review and approve or deny requests for sign variances and sign adjustments pursuant to this title. All sign programs approved by the Architectural Commission shall be maintained in the City’s Department of Community Development and made available to the public. (14-04; 12-01)

 

18.001.040 INTERPRETATIONS
In all sign applications, where a matter of interpretation arises, the more specific definition or more rigorous standard shall prevail. Whenever the Director determines that the application of any provision of this title is uncertain, the issue shall be referred to the Architectural Commission for determination. (08-05)

 

18.001.050 APPEALS, ADJUSTMENTS, AND VARIANCES
A.     General

If it is determined that a proposed sign does not conform to the provisions of this title, the applicant shall be notified of the options of appealing the determination, or of applying for a sign adjustment or a sign variance. Upon receiving an application for an appeal, sign adjustment or sign variance, staff shall inform the applicant as to the completeness of the submittal and of additional materials required, if any.

As an alternative to the standard sign regulations contained in this title, the applicant may submit a planned sign program pursuant to Section 18.025.120. Signs within a planned sign program may be permitted although not conforming to all of the requirements of this title. The use of planned sign programs may allow some flexibility in number and size and in the placement of signs. However, the total aggregate area of the signs permitted by the sign program shall not be greater than the total aggregate area of all signs otherwise permitted by this title.

B.     Appeals and Call-Up Review

Any decision regarding signs made by City staff or the Architectural Commission may be appealed or called-up for review pursuant to Chapter 16.321 of Title 16, entitled Appeals and Council Review. When an appeal is filed or called-up for review, it shall suspend the effective date of the decision until action has been taken on the appeal or review.

C.    Sign Adjustments

1.     Intent

Sign adjustments may be approved by the Architectural Commission in those cases where the Commission determines that physical circumstances are such that, without such sign adjustment, adequate sign identification could not be effected or results would be created contrary to the intent of this title.

2.     Scope

Sign adjustments may allow up to a 20 percent increase in the maximum size or height of signs permitted in this title.

3.     Required Findings

The Architectural Commission may approve a sign adjustment only if it makes all of the following findings:

a.     That there are special circumstances applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings which cause the strict application of these sign regulations to deprive such property owner of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and under identical zoning classification.

b.     That the adjustment authorized shall not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone in which such property is located.

c.     That the adjustment does not authorize signing which is expressly prohibited in this title.

d.     That the adjustment will not create a negative impact on other nearby properties.

D.    Variances

Any proposed sign which does not conform to this title and is not eligible for consideration of a sign adjustment as provided hereinabove may be submitted to the Architectural Commission for consideration of a variance. Sign variances shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16.309 of Title 16. In the case of sign variances, the Planning Commission’s variance review responsibilities shall be delegated to the Architectural Commission. (11-04; 08-05)

 

18.001.060 SIGNS PREVIOUSLY APPROVED
Signs which have been erected pursuant to a permit lawfully issued by the City prior to June 22, 1990, shall be treated as conforming signs. All such signs may be continued, maintained, and repaired so long as the sign is not expanded or structurally altered. A permit may be issued for any such sign destroyed by earthquake, fire or other misadventure if any application for a permit to re-erect the sign is made within 180 days of its destruction. (08-05)

 

18.001.070 ILLEGAL SIGNS
A.     The following signs shall be considered illegal:

1.     Unsafe Signs

An unsafe sign shall be a sign determined by the Director to be a danger to the public or which could create a potential hazard.

2.     Abandoned Signs

An abandoned sign shall be a sign remaining in place or not maintained for a period of 90 days which no longer advertises or identifies an ongoing business, product, or service available on the premises where the sign is located.

3.     Illegally Erected Signs

An illegal sign shall be a sign not permitted by this title or a sign otherwise permitted by this title but erected without first obtaining all approvals required by this title.

All illegal signs are hereby deemed to be nuisances.

B.     No business on the same property where there is signing determined by the Director to be illegal shall be granted a permit for additional signing until illegal signing is removed, excepting when both the following apply:

1.     The signing determined to be illegal is located at a different business location from that for which the permit for additional signing is sought even though they may be located in the same commercial complex.

2.     The signing determined to be illegal is not owned or controlled by the permit applicant and the permit applicant is not the agent of the person who owns or controls the illegal sign(s).

C.    Inventory of Illegal and Abandoned Signs

As often as may be desirable, but no less frequently than required by State law, the Director of Community Development shall authorize an identification and inventory of all illegal and abandoned signs within the City in accordance with the requirements of State law. The City may commence abatement of the identified illegal and abandoned signs within six months of performing all actions required by State law. (14-04; 08-05)

 

18.001.080 ENFORCEMENT
A.     Responsibility

It shall be the duty and authority of the Director of Community Development, the Director’s designees, and the code enforcement officers of the Community Development Department to enforce the provisions of this title.

B.     Legal Action

Every act prohibited or declared unlawful and every failure to perform an act made mandatory by this title shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 16.206 of Title 16. (08-05)

Chapter 18.005 GENERAL STANDARDS
18.005.010 APPLICATION OF STANDARDS
A.     Staff Review Procedure

If the Director determines that a staff reviewed sign does not conform to one or more of the general standards set forth in this chapter, the applicant shall be given the option of modifying the sign, applying for a sign adjustment or variance, or appealing the staff determination to the Architectural Commission.

B.     Commission Review Procedure

If the Architectural Commission determines that a sign does not conform to one or more of the general standards set forth in this chapter, the Commission may approve the sign only if it also approves a sign adjustment or variance in accordance with Section 18.001.050 (Appeals, Adjustments, and Variances) and Chapter 16.309 of Title 16. (08-05)

 

18.005.020 SIGN AREA MEASUREMENT
For the purposes of this title, sign size shall mean the area of a sign. Such area shall be more specifically defined as follows:

A.     Basic Rule of Sign Size

Sign size or area shall be defined as the entire area of the sign face, including non-structural perimeter trim but excluding structures or uprights on which the sign is supported.

B.     Window Signs

Window sign area shall be considered to be the aggregate area within a maximum of 3 rectangular figures which enclose and connect the extreme limits of up to three message areas consisting of any writing representation, emblem or any figure or similar character. Window sign area shall include area of window signs composed of individual letters painted on or otherwise affixed to a window and the entire area of any sign placed on or within 5 feet of any window and visible from off the subject building’s site.

C.    Building-Mounted and Wall Signs with Individual Letters

The area of building-mounted or wall signs composed of individual letters painted on or otherwise affixed to a building or wall shall be considered to be the aggregate area within a maximum of 3 rectangular figures which enclose and connect the extreme limits of up to 3 message areas consisting of any writing, representation, emblem, or any figure or similar character.

D.    Wall Sign Panel

If a sign panel is inserted into a wall, the area of the panel shall be considered to be the sign area.

E.     Double-Faced Signs

If a sign has sign faces which are placed back to back, no more than two feet from one another, its sign area shall be considered to be the area of one face if the two faces are of equal area or as the area of the larger face if the two faces are of unequal area. Thus, if the maximum permitted sign area is 20 square feet, a double-faced sign may have an area of 20 square feet on each face. If the sign faces are not placed back to back within two feet of one another, the sum of all sign faces shall be included in determining the area of the sign.

F.     Three-Dimensional Signs

If a sign has 3 or more faces, its sign area shall be considered to be the sum of the areas of each individual face. Thus, if a sign has 4 faces and the maximum permitted sign area is 20 square feet, the maximum allowable area for each face is 5 square feet.

G.    V-Shaped Signs

If a sign is “V”-shaped, with an angle between the 2 adjoining faces, its sign area shall be the sum of the areas of the two sign faces.

H.    Separated-Panel Signs

The sign area of separated panel signs (i.e., those signs having empty spaces between copy panels), shall be considered to be the entire area encompassed by the sign face, including the empty spaces between panels. (08-05)

 

18.005.030 SIGN HEIGHT MEASUREMENT
For the purposes of this title, the height of signs shall be measured as follows:

A.     Building-Mounted Signs

The height of a building-mounted sign shall be measured from the average finish grade directly beneath the sign.

B.     Freestanding Signs

The height of a freestanding sign shall be measured from the top of curb of the nearest street or from the edge of pavement of such street where there is no curb. However, in cases where the Director determines that a freestanding sign is not oriented to any particular street or is too far from such a street to reasonably apply the foregoing standard, sign height shall be measured from the average finish grade at the base of the sign.

C.    Signs on Walls

The height of a sign on a wall shall be measured from the top of the sign panel inserted into or placed on the wall and the top of the curb of the nearest street or the edge of pavement of such street where there is no curb. If there is no sign panel, the height of the sign shall be measured from the top of the sign letters. If the Director or the Architectural Commission determine that a freestanding sign is not oriented to any particular street or is too far from such a street to reasonably apply the foregoing standard, sign height shall be measured from the average finish grade at the base of the sign. (08-05)

 

18.005.040 SIGN LOCATION
A.     By District

Signs shall be located in accordance with the provisions set forth for each district in Chapter 18.015.

B.     No Off-Premises Signs

All signs shall be located on the same premises as the land use or activity identified by the sign, unless specifically permitted to be off-premises in this title.

C.    Utility Lines

No sign shall be located closer to overhead utility lines than the distance prescribed by California law or by the rules duly promulgated by agencies of the state or by the applicable public utility.

D.    Traffic Safety

No sign shall be located in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision of pedestrian and vehicular traffic.

E.     Public Right-of-Way

No sign shall be located within, over, or across a public right-of-way unless specifically permitted in this title. (08-05)

 

18.005.050 SIGN ILLUMINATION
A.     Review Required

Final approval of a permit for any illuminated sign shall not become effective until after erection of the sign and evaluation and adjustment, if necessary, of the sign’s level of illumination. Upon energizing the sign, the permittee shall notify the Director. Such notification shall begin a 30-day review period, during which time illumination levels shall be evaluated by City staff and the Architectural Commission.

B.     Illumination Levels

The sign permittee shall be required to adjust a sign’s illumination level if it is determined to be excessive as the result of the City’s evaluation. Illumination shall be considered excessive if it is substantially greater than the illumination of other nearby signs, if it interferes with the visibility of other signs or with the perception of objects or buildings in the vicinity of the sign, if it directs glare toward streets or motorists, if it adversely impacts nearby residences or neighborhoods, or if the illumination reduces the nighttime readability of the sign. No permit for an illuminated sign shall become valid unless and until the sign’s illumination level has been adjusted to the satisfaction of the Architectural Commission or the Commission’s designated staff representative.

C.    Externally Illuminated Signs

The light source for externally illuminated signs shall be arranged and shielded to substantially confine all direct light rays to the sign face and away from streets and adjacent properties. Externally illuminated signs shall be subject to illumination level review. (08-05)

 

18.005.060 SIGN MAINTENANCE
Every sign displayed within the City, including but not limited to those signs for which permits or for which no permits are required, shall be maintained in good physical condition. All signs, together with supports, braces, guys, anchors, and electrical components, shall be kept in safe, presentable and good structural condition. All defective or broken parts shall be replaced. Exposed surfaces shall be kept clean, in good repair, and painted where paint is required. The Director may order the repair or removal of any sign determined by the Director to be unsafe, defective, damaged, or substantially deteriorated. (08-05)

Chapter 18.010 PROHIBITED FORM OF SIGNS
18.010.010 PROHIBITED FORM OF SIGNS
The following types of signs are prohibited within the City of Claremont:

A.     Flashing or otherwise light-animated signs which contain or are illuminated by flashing or moving lights or lights which are intermittently on and off, change in intensity, or which create the illusion of flashing in any manner, excepting electronic message center displays in the CF District as specifically permitted in this title.

B.     Rotating, revolving, or otherwise moving signs designed to attract attention by visual means through the movement or semblance of movement of the whole or any part of the sign, including rotation, special lighting or wind actuated devices.

C.    Signs which, by color, wording, design, location, or illustration, resemble or conflict with any traffic control device.

D.    Signs that create a potential safety hazard by obstructing clear view of pedestrian or vehicular traffic.

E.     Building-mounted signs placed on or above the eave line of a pitched or mansard roof, or above the top of wall of a building with a flat or parapet roof.

F.     Off-premises signs, including billboards, except those specifically permitted in this title.

G.    Balloon signs, inflatable animal or other figures, or other inflatable displays, whether tethered or not, unless specifically permitted in this title.

H.    Flags, pennants, streamers, spinners, festoons, windsocks, valances, or similar displays, unless specifically permitted in this title.

I.      Signs placed within, on, or over public rights-of-way, on public land, or on utility poles, except as specifically permitted in this title.

J.     Signs located closer to overhead utility lines than the minimum distance prescribed by California law, or by the rules duly promulgated by agencies of the state or by the applicable public utility.

K.     Trailer signs and other signs affixed to vehicles which include directional arrows or other instructions which direct potential customers to a business or other enterprise.

L.     For Sale signs affixed to vehicles parked on any vacant property.

M.    Portable signs, such as A-frame type, except as specifically permitted in this title.

N.    Neon signs, except as specifically permitted in this title.

O.    Signs drawn or painted onto or otherwise affixed to trees or rocks.

P.     Advertising statuary.

Q.    Any temporary sign or banner unless specifically permitted in this title.

R.    Commercial signs on bus stop benches and similar structures, or on bench enclosures in the public right-of-way.

S.     Any sign not specifically permitted in this title. (08-05)

Chapter 18.015 SIGNS ALLOWED IN ALL DISTRICTS WITHOUT SIGN PERMITS
18.015.010 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
The signs listed in this chapter shall be permitted in all districts and shall be exempt from the requirement for a sign permit. However, such signs shall not be exempt from building and/or electrical permit requirements. Also, such signs shall not be illuminated nor placed within any public right-of-way unless specifically permitted hereinbelow. (08-05)

 

18.015.020 NUMBER, SIZE, HEIGHT, PLACEMENT, AND ILLUMINATION
All signs permitted within this chapter shall conform to the following:

A.     One sign per premises unless otherwise specified.

B.     Maximum sizes shall be as specified for each sign.

C.    All signs shall be on-premises unless otherwise specified.

D.    All signs shall be building-mounted and shall be placed below the eave line of a pitched or mansard roof, or below the top of wall of a building with a flat or parapet roof unless otherwise specified or unless specifically permitted as freestanding (with the maximum freestanding height as specified).

E.     All building-mounted signs and sign faces shall be painted on or shall be parallel to and flush against the surface on which they are placed.

F.     All signs shall not restrict pedestrian or automobile traffic, impair motorist visibility or otherwise create a traffic hazard, or impair the visibility of signs on or off the premises.

G.    Illuminated signs (if allowed) shall be subject to the following restrictions:

1.     The illumination level of a sign shall be required to be adjusted if it is determined by the Director of Community Development or the Architectural Commission to be excessive. Illumination shall be considered excessive if it is substantially greater than the illumination of other nearby signs, if it interferes with the visibility of other signs or with the perception of objects or buildings in the vicinity of the sign, if it directs glare toward streets or motorists, or if it adversely impacts nearby residences or neighborhoods.

2.     The light source for externally illuminated signs shall be arranged and shielded to substantially confine all direct light rays to the sign face and away from streets and adjacent properties. Externally illuminated signs shall be subject to illumination level review. (08-05)

 

18.015.030 NON-ILLUMINATED SIGNS
The following signs are exempt from sign permit requirements but shall not be illuminated:

A.     Non-commercial flags, subject to the following restrictions:

1.     Flags may be attached to either freestanding or building-mounted flagpoles or other supports.

2.     Maximum two flags and one flagpole per premises.

3.     Maximum 15 square feet per flag.

4.     Building-mounted flagpoles shall not extend above the top of the building’s roof. Freestanding flagpoles shall be a maximum of 20 feet in height.

5.     Freestanding flagpoles shall not be placed within any required yard setback. However, in the event that there is no feasible location to place a flagpole outside the required yard setback, the Director of Community Development may approve placement of a flagpole inside the required yard setback.

6.     Flags larger in size than 15 square feet and flags on freestanding flagpoles higher than 20 feet, illuminated or not, may be permitted in accordance with the applicable district regulations of this title if a sign permit is approved. Commercial flags or pennants are prohibited unless specifically permitted within the applicable zoning district pursuant to this title.

B.     Non-commercial decorative building-mounted or freestanding pennants and windsocks provided:

1.     Such display items do not exceed four square feet each in size; and

2.     Such display items do not extend above the top of the building roof where mounted; and

3.     No more than two such display items are displayed per residence or business.

C.    Real estate signs up to a maximum of six square feet in area, and, if freestanding, a maximum of five feet in height. One real estate sign shall be permitted per street frontage of a lot. Such signs shall be permitted to remain while the property is in escrow, but shall be removed when the property referred to is no longer for sale, rent, or lease. No real estate signs shall be permitted in the public right-of-way. (Real estate signs larger than six square feet may be permitted in each district pursuant to Section 18.035.020 if a sign permit is approved.)

1.     Riders which provide additional information about the property, such as “Sale Pending” may be attached to the primary sign or sign post as long as the total sign area does not exceed the maximum area allowed.

2.     One freestanding, on-site “Open House” sign with a maximum area of three square feet shall be permitted on Saturdays and Sundays between the hours of 12:00 and 6:00 p.m.

3.     Two freestanding, off-premises, directional “Open House” signs, with a maximum area of three square feet, shall be permitted on Saturdays and Sundays between the hours of 12:00 and 6:00 p.m. No “Open House” signs shall be permitted in the public right-of-way. Prior to placing a sign on any property, authorization is required from the owner of the property where the sign is to be located.

D.    Construction announcement signs, including names of architect, contractor, etc., up to a maximum of six square feet in area, and if freestanding, five feet in height. No more than three signs shall be permitted per parcel. Such signs shall be removed upon issuance of the first occupancy certificate for the project referred to on the sign or when construction work is completed, whichever occurs first. (Larger size construction announcement signs may be permitted in each district pursuant to Section 18.035.020 if a sign permit is approved.)

E.     Signs used to enforce private property rights such as “No Trespassing” or “No Parking,” up to a maximum of four square feet in area, and if freestanding, a maximum of four feet in height.

F.     Temporary Political Signs

Such signs of no more than four square feet in area and four feet in height are encouraged. Signs of a maximum 16 square feet in area and, if freestanding, a maximum of six feet in height are permitted. More than one such sign is permitted per premises. Political signs may not be placed on public property or within public rights-of way.

G.    Off-premises temporary posters pertaining to future limited-term events which will be held within three months of the placement of such poster. Such posters shall be a maximum of six square feet in area, and placed only in windows, or on an easel located directly adjacent to a building. Such easel shall have a maximum height of five feet. Only one easel is permitted per business, and no easel may be placed within the public right-of-way or on other property without the prior consent of the property or business owner.

1.     Temporary posters attached to windows or placed within five feet of any window and legible from off the site shall be considered accessory window signs and included in accessory window sign area calculations.

2.     If temporary posters are placed on an easel, no other freestanding chalkboard, marker board or restaurant menu (Section 18.015.030.N) shall be permitted.

H.    Occupant, office, or home occupation nameplates, maximum of one square foot per sign and maximum one sign per home, office, or other use.

I.      Temporary garage sale signs, one per street frontage, maximum of four square feet in area, and if freestanding, up to five feet in height. Such signs may be placed only on the premises where the garage sale is being held and shall not be placed on public property, within a public right-of-way, or on street trees.

J.     Bulletin boards, maximum of four square feet in area.

K.     Tombstones for human or animal graves.

L.     Non-commercial decorative, non-metallic balloons, maximum of 12 per premises and maximum of one foot in diameter each, provided such balloons do not extend above the roof line of adjacent buildings.

M.    Pavement markings for directing motorists.

N.    Chalkboards, marker boards or restaurant menus, maximum of one per business and maximum of six square feet in size. If freestanding, such boards shall not exceed four feet in height and shall not be placed in the public right-of-way. (Illuminated restaurant menus are allowed under Section 18.015.040 following.) (14-04; 08-05)

 

18.015.040 ILLUMINATED AND NON-ILLUMINATED SIGNS
The following signs are exempt from sign permit requirements and may be illuminated except by neon:

A.     Any sign, flag, banner, notice, or other display erected by the City of Claremont associated with holidays or special community events such as: Fourth of July, Halloween, Carnival, Claremont Anniversary Celebration, Winter Holidays, Spring Festival and similar holidays and events. Such displays may be placed either within or outside the public right-of-way.

B.     Any informational, directional, safety, traffic or similar signs erected by a governmental agency or a public utility or by their authorized agents or contractors. Such signs may be placed either within or outside the public right-of-way.

C.    Signs warning of building, electrical, mechanical, or other physical hazards, such as “High Voltage,” maximum of four square feet or such size as required by law.

D.    Signs required by law for public safety or access, such as “Exit” or “Fire Escape,” maximum of two square feet or such size as required by law.

E.     Street number signs, maximum of two square feet per sign and two signs per address. Such signs need not be building-mounted, however, they shall not be placed on structures which exceed three feet in height within required front or street side setbacks.

F.     Building-mounted restaurant menus, maximum of four square feet aggregate area per restaurant. (Larger permanent menu boards are permitted in specific zoning districts pursuant to this title if a sign permit is approved.)

G.    Identification signs affixed to motor vehicles which are regularly used for delivery, transportation, sales, or services in connection with the business or activity identified on the vehicle, provided the vehicle is not parked to serve as an auxiliary sign for a business. Identification signs may contain business address and phone number, however, such vehicle signs shall not include directional arrows or other advertising instructions which direct potential customers to a business or other enterprise.

H.    Permanent memorial tablets or memorial plaques, maximum of four square feet in area.

I.      Vending machine signs provided that, if visible from a public right-of-way, such signs shall be limited to a maximum of four square feet per sign and two signs per host business. (Signs for recycling collection facilities are permitted and are regulated separately per Section 16.306.030 in Title 16.)

J.     Display cases and merchandise, provided such displays are permitted within the district in question. Any illumination of such displays shall be indirect. No internally-lighted signs shall be permitted within such displays.

K.     On-premises directional signs identifying “office,” “manager,” “rest rooms,” or similar persons or facilities, maximum of one square foot in area per sign.

L.     Building-mounted on-premises directory signs for residential or business complexes identifying occupants within the complex, maximum of four square feet in area per sign. Sign shall be pedestrian-oriented. Any map or floor plan portion of such a directory sign shall not be counted against the four square feet size allowance.

M.    Window signs indicating that an establishment is “OPEN” or “CLOSED” subject to the provisions in Chapter 18.025. (08-05)

Chapter 18.020 SIGNS PERMITTED IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
18.020.010 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
A.     No sign shall be erected within any residential district which does not comply with this chapter. The sign sizes, heights, and numbers in this section are maximums. The City may require smaller sizes, heights, and/or numbers of signs if it determines that such restrictions are required to ensure that an individual sign will harmonize with other nearby signs, with surrounding buildings and setbacks, with the sign’s overall physical setting, and with the intent of this title.

B.     Proposed signs which do not conform to the provisions of this chapter, or to the illumination, location, or other General Standards of Chapter 18.005, are prohibited unless an adjustment or variance is approved by the Architectural Commission pursuant to Section 18.001.050 and Chapter 16.309 of Title 16.

C.    All signs permitted within this chapter shall conform to the following:

1.     All signs shall be on-premises unless otherwise specified.

2.     Maximum sizes shall be as specified for each sign.

3.     All building-mounted signs shall be placed below the eave line of a pitched or mansard roof, or below the top of wall of a building with a flat or parapet roof unless otherwise specified or unless specifically permitted as freestanding (with the maximum freestanding height as specified).

4.     All building-mounted signs and sign faces shall be painted on or shall be parallel to and flush against the surface on which they are placed.

5.     The placement of all freestanding signs shall be as approved by the City.

6.     Illuminated signs shall only be permitted in accordance with Chapter 18.005 (General Standards) and if approved by the Architectural Commission.

7.     No sign, flag or pennant permitted by this chapter shall: (i) restrict pedestrian or automobile traffic; (ii) impair motorist visibility or otherwise create a traffic hazard; or (iii) impair the visibility of signs on or off the premises. (08-05)

 

18.020.020 SIGNS LISTED ELSEWHERE IN CODE
The following signs, not specifically listed in this chapter, are permitted within residential districts in accordance with the following:

A.     Signs Allowed in All Districts without Sign Permits – Chapter 18.015.

B.     Real Estate and Construction Signs – Section 18.035.020.

C.    Signs for Churches and Other Institutional Uses – Section 18.035.030.

D.    Signs within the Public Right-of-Way – Section 18.035.070. (08-05)

 

18.020.030 FLAGS AND PENNANTS
A.     Small Flags, Pennants, and Windsocks

Small flags, and decorative pennants and windsocks conforming to Chapter 18.015 are permitted and are exempt from sign permit requirements.

B.     Flags and Banners

Noncommercial flags, other than those exempt from sign permits and review pursuant to Chapter 18.015, are permitted, illuminated or not, provided the following:

1.     A sign permit is approved by the Director of Community Development; and

2.     The flags are of a size and height that are compatible with the architecture and use of the surrounding development as determined by the Director of Community Development. (14-04; 12-01; 08-05)

 

18.020.040 DIRECTORY SIGNS
Building-mounted on-premises directory signs for residential complexes identifying occupants within the complex, are permitted and exempt from sign permit requirements in accordance with Section 18.015.040.L.

In addition to the above exempt signs, freestanding directory signs may be permitted provided a sign permit is approved by the Architectural Commission and the following standards are met:

A.     Maximum of four square feet in area per sign.

B.     Sign shall be pedestrian-oriented.

C.    Maximum of four feet in height.

D.    One such sign may be permitted at each public entrance to the building or complex if so approved by the Commission. (08-05)

 

18.020.050 NEIGHBORHOOD IDENTIFICATION SIGNS
Permanent signs identifying apartment buildings, condominium complexes, neighborhoods, subdivisions, or other residential developments are permitted upon approval of a sign permit provided such developments have at least five lots or dwelling units.

A.     Maximum Number

1.     For Apartment or Condominium Complexes – one identification sign per street frontage, either building-mounted or freestanding.

2.     Neighborhoods or Subdivisions – two identification signs per project entry, either building-mounted or freestanding.

B.     Maximum Size

1.     Developments of less than one acre – 20 square feet per sign.

2.     Developments of one acre or larger – 32 square feet per sign.

C.    Maximum Height

Maximum height of freestanding signs shall be five feet.

D.    Review

Neighborhood identification signs shall be reviewed by the Architectural Commission. (08-05)

 

18.020.060 DIRECTIONAL SIGNS
Freestanding on-premises parking lot or other direction signs, denoting “entry,” “exit,” etc., maximum of four square feet in size and four feet in height, are permitted as determined necessary by the Director of Community Development. Signs shall be reviewed pursuant to Chapter 18.001. (12-01)

 

18.020.070 MODEL HOME SIGNS
Temporary on-premises signs identifying model home complexes, either building-mounted or freestanding, are permitted upon approval of a sign permit provided such signs do not exceed 20 square feet in size. Sign height, placement, and illumination shall be as approved by the staff. (08-05)

 

18.020.080 SIGNS FOR OTHER LAND USES
The City shall determine sign standards for land uses other than those listed in this chapter by applying the standards for similar uses from the most applicable chapter of this title. (08-05)

Chapter 18.025 SIGNS PERMITTED IN COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
18.025.010 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
Signs shall be permitted in the CP – Commercial Professional, CN – Commercial Neighborhood, CL – Commercial Limited, CH – Commercial Highway, CF – Commercial Freeway, CV – Claremont Village, MU – Mixed Use, and BP/I – Business Park/Industrial Districts as follows:

A.     No sign shall be erected within commercial or industrial districts which does not comply with this chapter. The sign sizes, heights, and numbers in this chapter are maximums. The City may require smaller sizes, heights, and/or numbers of signs if it determines that such restrictions are required to ensure that an individual sign will harmonize with other nearby signs, with surrounding buildings and setbacks, with the sign’s overall physical setting, and with the intent of this title.

B.     Proposed signs which do not conform to the provisions of this chapter, or to the illumination, location, or other general standards of Chapter 18.005 are prohibited unless a variance or adjustment is approved by the Architectural Commission pursuant to Section 18.001.040 of this title and Chapter 16.309 of Title 16; however, the establishment of a planned sign program shall be an alternative to the standard sign regulations. Signs within such a planned sign program may be permitted although not conforming to all of the signs requirements for the applicable zoning district in order to achieve aesthetic compatibility of signs within a project and simple review process for individual signs, and to allow design creativity. The use of planned sign programs may allow some flexibility in number and size and in the placement of signs. However, the total aggregate area of the signs permitted by the sign program shall not be greater than the total aggregate area of all signs otherwise permitted.

C.    If a building is part of a development for which a sign program has been approved pursuant to Section 18.025.120, all signs for the business occupying such building shall be in compliance with the approved sign program. A file of all approved sign programs shall be maintained in the City’s Department of Community Development and made available to the public for their information.

D.    All signs permitted within this chapter shall conform to the following:

1.     All signs shall be on-premises unless otherwise specified.

2.     Maximum sizes shall be as specified for each sign.

3.     All building-mounted signs shall be placed below the eave line of a pitched or mansard roof, or below the top of wall of a building with a flat or parapet roof unless otherwise specified or unless specifically permitted as freestanding (with the maximum freestanding height as specified).

4.     All building-mounted signs and sign faces other than under-canopy signs shall be painted on or shall be parallel to and flush against the surface on which they are placed.

5.     The placement of all freestanding signs shall be as approved by the City.

6.     Illuminated signs shall only be permitted in accordance with Chapter 18.005 (General Standards). In the CV and MU2 Districts, all building-mounted signs, if illuminated, shall be externally illuminated, except that major identification signs may be neon if approved by the Architectural Commission.

7.     No sign, flag or pennant permitted by this chapter shall: (i) restrict pedestrian or automobile traffic; (ii) impair motorist visibility or otherwise create a traffic hazard; or (iii) impair the visibility of signs on or off the premises.

E.     Sign Review

Signs permitted in this section shall be reviewed as follows:

1.     Except for those signs listed in Chapter 18.015 as exempt from sign permit review, the following signs shall be reviewed by staff:

a.     Temporary signs.

b.     Signs conforming to a sign program previously approved by the Architectural Commission.

c.     Freestanding, non-illuminated directional signs (e.g., parking lot entry signs) no greater than four square feet in area and four feet in height.

d.     Non-illuminated building-mounted signs in the CV and MU2 Districts.

e.     Illuminated and non-illuminated building-mounted signs in the CP, CN, CL, CH, CF, MU1, MU3, MU4, and BP/I Districts.

f.      Non-illuminated window signs in the CV and MU2 Districts.

g.     Illuminated and non-illuminated window signs in the CP, CN, CL, CH, CF, MU1, MU3, MU4, and BP/I Districts.

2.     All other signs not exempt from sign permit review shall be reviewed by the Architectural Commission. In addition, the Director may refer any sign application, including those normally reviewed by staff as set forth hereinabove, to the Commission if the Director determines that, due to unusual circumstances relating to sign location, colors, or design, Architectural Commission review is required in order to ensure consistency with the intent of this title.

3.     All planned sign programs shall be reviewed by the Architectural Commission regardless of sign sizes. (08-05)

 

18.025.020 SIGNS IN THE CV – CLAREMONT VILLAGE DISTRICT
As stated in the Claremont Village Design Plan, “...one is charmed by the pedestrian scale, storefront design, and the fact that [the village] is such a good walking place.” Consistent with this pedestrian character and the goals and policies of both the Village Design Plan and the General Plan, the permitted sign numbers and sizes set forth in this section for the CV District are less than those for other commercial districts in the City. (08-05)

 

18.025.030 SIGNS LISTED ELSEWHERE IN CODE
The following signs, not specifically listed in this section, are permitted in commercial and industrial districts in accordance with the following:

A.     Signs Allowed in All Districts without Sign Permits – Chapter 18.015.

B.     Real Estate and Construction Signs – Section 18.035.020.

C.    Signs for Churches and Other Institutions – Section 18.035.030.

D.    Signs for Service Stations – Section 18.035.040.

E.     Signs for Theaters – Section 18.035.050.

F.     Signs Within the Public Right-of-Way – Section 18.035.070.

G.    Signs for Recycling Collection Facilities – Section 16.306.010 of Title 16. (08-05)

 

18.025.040 BUILDING-MOUNTED SIGNS
The following building-mounted signs are permitted in commercial and industrial districts if a sign permit is approved:

A.     Building-Mounted Major Identification Signs

1.     Maximum Number

In CP, CN, CL, CH, CF, CV, MU, and BP/I Districts – one per business or other use, except that businesses having two building frontages facing streets shall be permitted two major identification signs.

2.     Maximum Size

In CP, CN, CL, and MU1 Districts – one square foot per each lineal foot of building frontage of a business up to a maximum of 32 square feet, except all businesses shall be permitted a 20 square feet sign.

In CH, CF, MU3, MU4, and BP/I Districts – one square foot per each linear foot of building frontage up to a maximum of 50 square feet, except that all businesses shall be permitted a 20 square feet sign.

In CV and MU2 Districts – 12 square feet plus one square foot per each lineal foot of building frontage over 20 feet, up to a maximum of 32 square feet.

3.     Maximum Length

No more than 75% of building frontage.

B.     Building-Mounted Secondary Identification Signs

One secondary identification sign, maximum of 12 square feet in area, shall be permitted for each building exposure which faces a street or parking area and on which there is no major identification sign.

C.    Under-Canopy or Other Pedestrian-Oriented Signs

1.     One under-canopy or other pedestrian-oriented sign, maximum area of three square feet, shall be permitted per business or other use. However, two pedestrian-oriented signs shall be permitted if such signs are located on the two end sides of an awning or if the business has two building frontages facing a street where pedestrian entrances are located.

2.     The minimum height for an under-canopy sign is eight feet above walkway.

3.     Under-canopy signs are permitted over a public right-of-way if an encroachment permit is issued.

D.    Window Signs

Window signs are permitted and are regulated separately per Section 18.025.060.

E.     Automatic Teller Machine Signs

Automatic teller machine signs shall be permitted in addition to any informational signing required for automatic teller machines. Automatic teller machine signs shall be limited to a maximum of two square feet and two signs per host business. Automatic teller machine signs shall be building-mounted and may be illuminated.

F.     Building Identification Signs on Buildings with Three Floors

No sign shall be permitted above the second floor of any building, except that in lieu of signing on the second and third floors, one sign per building frontage located as near the top of the building identifying the name of the building may be approved. The maximum size of the building identification sign shall be one square foot per linear foot of building frontage, up to a maximum of 50 square feet in the CH, CF, MU3, MU4, and BP/I Districts, and a maximum of 32 square feet in the CP, CN, CL, CV, MU1, and MU2 Districts.

G.    Building-Mounted Freeway-Oriented Signs (CF District Only)

1.     Building-mounted freeway-oriented signs shall be permitted in the CF Commercial Freeway District in addition to the non-freeway-oriented identification and accessory signs specified in the above subsections if a sign permit is approved.

2.     One building-mounted freeway-oriented sign shall be permitted per business.

3.     The maximum size of building-mounted freeway-oriented signs shall be one square foot per lineal foot of freeway building frontage, up to a maximum of 80 square feet. (08-05)

 

18.025.050 FREESTANDING SIGNS
The following freestanding signs may be permitted in commercial and industrial districts subject to approval and issuance of a sign permit pursuant to this title:

A.     Freestanding Identification Signs for Individual Businesses

1.     Individual businesses may be permitted non-freeway-oriented, freestanding identification signs, provided the businesses are located on a separate parcel and which do not share driveway access and parking with one or more adjacent businesses and are not located within a commercial center or complex. Such freestanding identification signs may be permitted as follows:

a.     In addition to building mounted sign(s), if the building is set back from the street or obscured from the street view by structures or vegetation such that building-mounted signs alone cannot provide adequate identification, or if building-mounted signs are such that the signs are not clearly visible to motorists on adjacent streets, or

b.     In lieu of building mounted sign(s) when the architectural style, materials, or other design elements of the development are such that a building-mounted sign is not feasible, would detract from the building’s appearance, or would conflict with the General Plan or with the intent of this title.

2.     Maximum Number

In the CP, CN, CL, CH, CF, CV, MU, and BP/I Districts only one freestanding identification sign shall be permitted per street frontage of business.

3.     Maximum size of freestanding identification signs shall be as follows:

a.     In CP, CN, CL, MU1, and MU2 Districts – one-half square foot per 1,000 square foot of site area up to a maximum of 32 square feet per street frontage.

b.     In CH, CF, MU3, MU4, and BP/I Districts – one-half square foot per 1,000 square foot of site area up to a maximum of 50 square feet per street frontage.

c.     In CV District – one-half square foot per 1,000 square foot of site area, up to a maximum of 20 square feet per street frontage.

4.     Maximum height of freestanding signs shall be:

a.     In CP, CN, CL, MU1, and MU2 Districts – five feet.

b.     in CH, CF, MU3, MU4, and BP/I Districts – six feet.

c.     In CV District – five feet.

B.     Shared Freestanding Multi-Tenant Monument Signs

1.     For two or more businesses which are located on the same parcel, and/or which share parking or driveway access from a public street, and/or which are otherwise contained in a single development complex, non-freeway oriented, freestanding multi-tenant monument signs may be permitted provided multi-tenant signs are part of an approved planned sign program for the complex and/or signs comply with the Multi-Tenant Retail Center Sign Enhancement Program, adopted by separate resolution of the City Council.

2.     Freestanding multi-tenant monument signs are required to include the names of more than one tenant and are encouraged to include the name of the development complex in addition to the names of tenants. Such signs are not required to identify every tenant.

3.     Businesses with centers or complexes with a freestanding multi-tenant monument sign shall not be granted a permit for individual freestanding major identification signs.

4.     One shared multi-tenant monument sign may be permitted per non-freeway street frontage of the center/complex, and one additional multi-tenant monument sign may be permitted for every additional 500 feet of frontage, or a portion thereof, which exceed 500 feet. Excepting, flexibility may be given in the number of signs permitted per frontage if approved as part of a sign program that includes unique design characteristics, and a creative approach to multiple tenant identification.

5.     The maximum aggregate area of all freestanding center identification signs shall be determined based on the size of the center or complex. The maximum aggregate sign area shall be the sum of the following:

Sign Area per 1,000 Sq. Ft. of Property

Land Area of Center/Complex

2.5 sq. ft.

For first 40,000 sq. ft. of center

2.0 sq. ft.

For portion of center exceeding 40,000 sq. ft. up to a maximum of 80,000 sq. ft.

1.0 sq. ft.

Portion of property larger than 80,000 sq. ft.

 

Excepting that all centers and complexes shall be allowed at least the following signs:

a.     In the CP, CN, CL, MU1, and MU2 Districts – one 32 square foot sign per street frontage.

b.     In the CH, CF, MU3, MU4 and BP/I Districts – one 50 square foot sign per street frontage.

c.     In the CV District – one 20 square foot sign per street frontage.

6.     Multi-tenant monument signs shall be mounted at grade level or be part of a wall or sign assembly, the bottom of which is in contact with the ground. Non-freeway-oriented, multi-tenant signs shall not be mounted or elevated on poles.

7.     Multi-tenant signs in sign programs are subject to the provisions of Section 18.025.120, which allows for design creativity and flexibility in number and size and placement of signs.

C.    Center Identification Signs

A center identification sign identifies the name of the center and does not contain the names of tenants within the development. Center identification signs may be permitted as follows:

1.     In the CP, CN, CL, CH, CF, MU1, MU2, MU3, MU4, and BP/I Districts, centers or complexes containing two or more businesses are permitted non-freeway freestanding center identification sign(s) in addition to multi-tenant monument signs.

2.     In the CV District freestanding center identification signs are prohibited unless the Architectural Commission makes one of the following findings regarding the need for a freestanding center identification sign:

a.     A freestanding sign is the only feasible means of identifying the center or complex; or

b.     The building or buildings are set back from the street or obscured from street view by structures or vegetation such that building-mounted signs cannot provide adequate identification for the center; or

c.     The architectural style, materials, or other design elements are such that a building-mounted sign is not feasible, would detract from the building’s appearance, or would conflict with the General Plan or with the intent of this title.

3.     Center identification signs are subject to the following standards:

a.     Only one center identification sign may be permitted per street frontage of the center or complex.

b.     The freestanding center identification signs shall be included in calculating the aggregate sign area of a center’s freestanding identification signs, and together with any other freestanding signs in the center, shall be subject to the maximum aggregate sign area permitted for freestanding center signs as specified in subsection B of this section.

D.    Freestanding Identification Signs in Planned Sign Programs

Freestanding identification signs included in a planned sign program approved pursuant to Section 18.025.120 shall be permitted, although not conforming to all requirements of this title, as specified in Section 18.025.120.

E.     Freestanding Directional Signs

Parking lot or other directional signs, denoting “entry,” “exit,” etc., shall be permitted as needed per City determination subject to Section 18.025.110.

F.     Freestanding Freeway-Oriented Signs (CF District Only)

Freestanding freeway-oriented identification signs may be permitted in the CF District in addition to the non-freeway-oriented identification signs specified in the above sections. Consistent with the intent of this title and with the General Plan, the City desires to limit the number of freeway-oriented sign structures. In addition, freeway-oriented signing is viewed from a distance at high traveling speeds and is more effective if grouped together. Therefore, freestanding freeway-oriented signed shall meet the following requirements:

1.     Freestanding freeway-oriented signs shall be located on a parcel of three acres or more, or within a center or development complex or group of parcels totaling three acres or more.

2.     Only one freestanding freeway-oriented sign shall be permitted for businesses which are located on the same parcel, or which share parking or access from a public street, or which are otherwise grouped together within a development complex.

3.     After June 22, 1990, all new freestanding freeway-oriented signs shall be required to identify more than one business in accordance with a multi-business sign program approved by the Architectural Commission. However, the Architectural Commission may approve a freestanding freeway-oriented sign identifying only one business if the Architectural Commission determines that a multi-business sign program is infeasible in spite of a good-faith effort by the sign applicant to create such a program. In its review of a freestanding sign identifying only one business, the Commission may require the submission of documentary evidence of an attempt to create such a multi-business sign program. As part of the program to limit freestanding signs, freestanding signs identifying only businesses in the CF District are permitted to be off-premises if so approved by the Architectural Commission.

4.     Commercial freestanding freeway-oriented identification signs shall first list the name, if any, of the shopping center, auto mall, or other type of development sharing the sign structure. In addition, if approved by the Architectural Commission, such development identification signs may also contain the names of tenants within developments.

5.     Freestanding freeway-oriented identification signs shall be a maximum of one square foot per each linear foot of freeway lot frontage, up to a maximum of 300 square feet per sign structure.

6.     Freestanding freeway-oriented identification signs shall have a maximum height of 45 feet as measured from the adjacent freeway grade.

G.    Freestanding Freeway-Oriented Identification Signs for Large Development Complexes (CF – Commercial Freeway District Only)

1.     For development complexes of 10 acres or more, which also have freeway frontage of 500 feet or more, the Architectural Commission may approve a freestanding freeway-oriented identification sign that is larger than what is otherwise permitted by this title, that includes an electronic message center display or that otherwise meets the unique needs of large freeway development. Creativity, artistry and innovation in the design and materials of such sign are encouraged. Before approving a sign permit for a large development complex identification sign, the Commission shall make the following findings:

a.     The large development complex identification sign is necessary to provide adequate identification for the use(s) conducted in the development complex the sign will serve; and

b.     The large development complex identification sign at the proposed location will not be detrimental to adjacent properties or uses; and

c.     The large development complex identification sign, as compared to signs otherwise permitted under this title, at the proposed location will relate properly with adjacent streets and highways and will not constitute a potential safety hazard to motorists; and

d.     The large development complex identification sign will be compatible with the architectural design and details of the development complex the sign will serve and with other surrounding development; and

e.     The quality and design of the large development complex identification sign will be consistent with the Intent of this title and the general objectives and design criteria of Chapter 18.000.

2.     Standards and Revisions

a.     Only one large development complex identification sign shall be permitted for businesses which are located on the same parcel, or which share parking or access from a public street, or which are otherwise located within a single development complex.

b.     No sign containing an electronic message center display permitted pursuant to this chapter shall include any illumination which is in motion, or appears to be in motion, or changes in intensity, nor shall the display expose messages for less than four seconds or have intervals between messages of less than one second.

c.     Signs permitted pursuant to this chapter shall advertise only the businesses conducted, services rendered, or goods produced or sold within the development complex which the identification signs is intended to serve. Public service information, including, but not limited to, the time, date, temperature, weather, and similar information shall be permitted.

d.     No sign permitted by this chapter may be placed in violation of Section 5408 of the Business and Professions Code and Section 131 of Title 23 of the United States Code.

e.     Large development complex identification signs shall have a maximum height of 50 feet.

f.      A sign permitted pursuant to this chapter shall be required to be part of a planned sign program for the development complex where the sign will be located. Such sign program shall be reviewed and approved by the Architectural Commission pursuant to Section 18.025.120. If a development complex already has an existing sign program approved by the Architectural Commission, the sign program shall be amended to include the identification sign permitted by this chapter. In approving a new sign program, or an amendment to an existing sign program, the Architectural Commission may impose any conditions or restrictions that the Commission may determine are appropriate on other signs in the development complex in addition to the identification sign permitted by this chapter. (20-05; 14-04; 10-04)

 

18.025.060 WINDOW SIGNS
Window signs shall be considered building-mounted signs but shall be regulated separately from other such signs pursuant to this section. All interior signs within five feet of any window and legible from off the subject building’s site shall be considered window signs. The following window signs are permitted:

A.     Identification Window Signs

1.     Maximum Number

Identification signs are permitted to be window signs if a sign permit is approved. One identification window sign shall be permitted per building frontage, provided there is no other building-mounted or freestanding major identification sign on the same frontage.

2.     Size Standards

Standards shall be the same as those for other building-mounted identification signs in the applicable district as specified in this chapter. The area allowed for major or secondary identification signs shall be in addition to that of accessory window signing permitted by Section 18.025.060.B but shall not be in addition to other building-mounted identification signing.

3.     Illumination

a.     In CP, CN, CL, CH, CF, MU1, MU3, MU4, and BP/I Districts, major identification window signs may have neon or other internal illumination if approved.

b.     In CV and MU2 Districts, major identification signs may have neon if approved by the Architectural Commission.

c.     All illuminated signs shall be subject to 30-day review pursuant to Section 18.005.050.

4.     Review

a.     In CP, CN, CL, CH, CF, MU1, MU3, MU4, and BP/I Districts, illuminated and non-illuminated major identification window signs shall be reviewed by City staff.

b.     In CV and MU2 Districts, non-illuminated major identification window signs shall be reviewed by staff and illuminated major identification window signs shall be reviewed by the Architectural Commission.

B.     Accessory Signs

1.     Maximum Number

There is no limit on the number of window signs other than major identification window signs, provided such signing conforms to the other limitations of this section.

2.     Maximum Size

The total area of all accessory window signs for a business/lease space shall not exceed 25 percent of the exterior window area of the business/lease space, or six square feet, whichever is greater. The area of window signs shall be calculated as the aggregate area within three rectangular figures, which enclose and connect the extreme limits of up to three message areas consisting of any writing, representation, emblem or any figure or similar character.

3.     Illumination

Accessory window signs may have external illumination only.

4.     Review

Accessory window signs meeting the above limitations shall be exempt from sign permit requirements.

C.    Holiday Window Painting

Holiday window painting, such as for Christmas and Halloween, shall be permitted and shall be exempt from the window sign limitations of this chapter. However, such painting shall contain no reference to named goods or services. In addition, all such decorations shall be removed within 10 days after the applicable holiday.

D.    “OPEN” or “CLOSED” Window Signs

Window signs indicating that an establishment is “OPEN” or “CLOSED” for business, maximum of four square feet in area, and no more than one sign per business shall be permitted. Such signs are exempt from sign permit requirements. They shall not be considered accessory window signs and shall not be included in accessory window sign area calculations.

1.     In the CVO District, such signs may not be illuminated.

2.     In commercial and industrial districts other than the CVO District, such signs may be illuminated, provided the signs are neon signs with the translucent tubing limited to the letters O-P-E-N and a border. (10-04; 08-05)

 

18.025.070 DECORATIVE BALLOONS FOR AUTOMOBILE SALES USES
The display of decorative, non-metallic balloons, maximum one foot diameter each, and of unlimited number, is permitted for automobile sales uses located in the CF District, and is exempt from sign permit requirements. (08-05)

 

18.025.080 FLAGS, PENNANTS AND WINDSOCKS
A.     Small Flags, Banners, Pennants and Windsocks

Non-commercial flags, banners, pennants and windsocks conforming to Chapter 18.001 are permitted and are exempt from sign permit requirements.

B.     Large Flags

1.     Non-commercial flags which are larger in size, or displayed higher than allowed in Chapter 18.015 are permitted, illuminated or not, provided:

a.     Such flags do not exceed 32 square feet in area; and

b.     Such flags do not extend above the top of the building where mounted or freestanding flagpoles do not exceed 30 feet; and

c.     There are no more than two flags displayed and no more than one freestanding flagpole per business; and

d.     A sign permit is approved by the Director of Community Development.

2.     Non-commercial flags larger in size and flags on higher freestanding poles than specified above may be approved by the Director of Community Development if the Director determines the flags and flagpole will be compatible with the architecture and use of surrounding structures.

3.     The display of more than two non-commercial flags per business shall require the approval of a planned sign program pursuant to Section 18.025.120 by the Architectural Commission.

C.    Pennants and Windsocks

1.     Noncommercial decorative pennants and windsocks, larger in size than allowed in Chapter 18.015, or freestanding, are permitted, illuminated or not, provided:

a.     Such display items do not exceed 32 square feet in area; and

b.     Such flags do not extend above the top of the building where mounted or freestanding flagpoles do not exceed the roof of the nearest building; and

c.     There are no more than two display items (e.g., two pennants, one pennant and one windsock, etc.) per business; and

d.     A sign permit is approved by the Director of Community Development.

D.    Restrictions

No flag, pennant, or windsock permitted in this section shall: (1) restrict pedestrian or automobile traffic; (2) impair motorist visibility or otherwise create a traffic hazard; (3) impair the visibility of signs on or off the premises. (14-04; 08-05)

 

18.025.090 TEMPORARY SIGNS FOR NEW BUSINESSES
A.     The following temporary building-mounted signs are permitted if approved by City staff and sign permits are issued for the signs:

1.     New Business/Ownership Building-Mounted Banners/Signs

New businesses and/or existing businesses that have a change of ownership and/or management are allowed temporary building-mounted banners/signs subject to the following:

a.     Signs may be approved for an initial period of no more than 30 days; however, after the initial 30 days, City staff may grant an extension for an additional 30 days.

b.     No more than one temporary sign shall be installed per street frontage.

c.     Signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in size, except in the CV District signs shall be limited to 12 square feet.

2.     Temporary Advertising Signs for Special Events or Activities

Businesses may be allowed temporary A-frame signs or banners to advertise limited-time specials, sale events or special business activities subject to the following:

a.     A business may not display other types of temporary signs or banners concurrently with temporary advertising signs permitted by this subsection.

b.     No more than one temporary advertising sign is allowed per street frontage or building entrance. A business may not have both a banner and an A-frame on the same street frontage or building entrance.

c.     First floor tenants in the CV District are permitted A-frame signs only. In the CV District, temporary banners are allowed only for second floor tenants, or for new businesses and/or for changes in ownership/management as specified in subsection A.1 of this section.

d.     Banners are limited to 12 square feet in size.

e.     A-frame signs are limited to 12 square feet in size and may not exceed four feet in height. In the CV District A-frame signs are limited to eight square feet in size and may not exceed three feet in height. A-frame signs may be displayed during business hours only.

f.      A business may display a temporary advertising banner or A-frame sign for a maximum of 60 calendar days per year. The 60 days may be consecutive or spread throughout the calendar year.

B.     All temporary signs shall be subject to the following:

1.     Signs shall be made of durable, weather-resistant materials, have a professional looking appearance, and be continually maintained in good condition.

2.     Temporary signs may not include lighting.

3.     Signs shall be placed so as not to interfere with pedestrian and vehicular traffic or handicapped accessibility. It is encouraged that signs be placed adjacent to the building. Signs may not be located in the public right-of-way, unless the City Engineer approves the placement of the sign in the right-of-way and issues and encroachment permit. (10-04)

 

18.025.100 DIRECTORY SIGNS
Building-mounted on-premises directory signs for business complexes identifying occupants within the complex, are permitted and are exempt from sign permit requirements in accordance with Section 18.015.040.L.

In addition to the above exempt signs, freestanding directory signs may be permitted provided a sign permit is approved by the Architectural Commission and the following standards are met:

A.     Maximum of four square feet in area per sign.

B.     Sign shall be pedestrian-oriented.

C.    Maximum of six feet in height.

D.    One such sign may be permitted at each public entrance to the building or complex if so approved by the Commission. (08-05)

 

18.025.110 DIRECTIONAL SIGNS
On-premises parking lot or other direction signs, denoting “entry,” “exit,” etc., maximum of four square feet in size and four feet in height, are permitted as determined necessary by the Director of Community Development. Signs shall be reviewed pursuant to Chapter 18.001. Directional signs shall direct motorists or pedestrians to parking or building entries or provide similar directional information and shall not contain commercial copy. In the CV (Claremont Village) and MU2 Districts, freestanding directional signs shall not be permitted unless the Director of Community Development determines building-mounted directional signs are not feasible. (12-01)

 

18.025.120 PLANNED SIGN PROGRAMS
Submission of a planned sign program for a building, business park, shopping center, or other development within a commercial or industrial district may be required by the City in conjunction with review of a new development or with review of any proposed new sign within an existing development. In addition, planned sign programs may be voluntarily submitted for review to the City by the owner of an existing development. All signs for developments for which a sign program has been approved shall be in compliance with such sign program.

A.     Intent

The establishment of a planned sign program in accordance with this section shall be an alternative to the standard sign regulations contained in this title. Signs within such a planned sign program may be permitted although not conforming to all of the requirements of this title for the applicable zoning district in order to achieve aesthetic compatibility of signs within a project, and simple review process for individual signs, and to allow design creativity. The use of planned sign programs may allow some flexibility in number and size and in the placement of signs. However, the total aggregate area of the signs permitted by the sign program shall not be greater than the total aggregate area of all signs otherwise permitted by this title.

B.     Standards

Planned sign programs shall conform to all of the following standards:

1.     Eligibility

Any building, business park, shopping center or other contiguous group of businesses is eligible for consideration of a planned sign program.

2.     Minimum Project Size

No minimum frontage or site size requirements.

3.     Design Elements

Signs within the sign program shall have one or more common design elements, such as colors, materials, illumination, sign type, sign shape, letter size and letter type.

4.     Building Context

The sign program shall specify signs in harmony with the materials, colors, architecture, and other design features of the buildings they identify.

C.    Review

Planned sign programs shall be reviewed by the Architectural Commission in accordance with Chapter 18.001. Signs within a previously approved planned sign program shall be reviewed by staff.

D.    Sign Program Findings

The Architectural Commission shall approve a planned sign program only upon finding that:

1.     It is consistent with the intent of these sign regulations as set forth in Chapter 18.000.

2.     It meets the sign design criteria of Section 18.000.010.B.

3.     It meets the design standards of Section 18.025.120.B.

4.     It will not permit signs which adversely affect other nearby properties.

5.     It is consistent with the General Plan.

6.     It will not constitute a grant of special privilege nor provide more visibility or exposure than is available to similarly situated properties.

E.     Signs Not Addressed in Development’s Approved Planned Sign Program

A proposed sign not specified in a development’s approved sign program may be permitted if:

1.     The director or Architectural Commission determines that the approved planned sign program does not address the type of sign proposed.

2.     The proposed sign is in compliance with the restrictions and standards for signs in the district in which the development is located.

3.     The proposed sign is consistent with the intent of the approved sign program and this title.

F.     Amendments to Planned Sign Programs

Amendments to a planned sign program for an existing development may be required by the City in conjunction with review of any proposed new construction or new signs in the development. Amendments may also be voluntarily submitted for review by the owner of the development. Following the submittal of an application to amend a sign program, the Director of Community Development shall determine if the amendment constitutes a substantial change to the existing sign program. If the proposed amendment is determined to be substantial, then the Director shall forward the application to the Architectural Commission for consideration. If the proposed amendment is determined to not be substantial, then the Director may approve or deny the application. Amendments to planned sign programs shall be reviewed pursuant to Chapter 18.001 and shall only be approved if the findings in Section 18.025.120 can be made. In approving an amendment to a planned sign program, the Architectural Commission or Director may place conditions or restrictions on any signs within the development in addition to the new signs. (14-04; 08-05)

 

18.025.130 SIGNS FOR OTHER LAND USES
The City shall determine sign standards for land uses other than those listed in this section by applying the standards for similar uses from the most applicable chapter of this title. (08-05)

 

18.025.140 SIGNS IN THE VILLAGE EXPANSION SPECIFIC PLAN (VESP) AREA
The sign standards for land uses in the VESP area shall be the sign standards that are applicable to similar uses in the CV District, except that retail businesses located in the CMX district and occupying more than 3,500 gross square feet in first floor area may be permitted to have building-mounted primary identification signs with signs up to 50 square feet in area and building-mounted secondary identification signs up to 32 square feet in area.

Sign programs that are approved by the Architectural Commission for developments in the VESP area may permit the following types of signs in the VESP area:

A.     Building-mounted, major identification signs mounted perpendicular to the building façade, if they relate to the architectural design of the building.

B.     Freestanding, major identification signs extending into the public right-of-way, if necessary, to provide identification to one or more businesses that lack adequate visibility from the street. The approval of the City Engineer shall be required for signs extending into the public right-of-way.

C.    Exposed neon major identification signs, if tastefully designed and reflective of the style of the building and the type of business.

D.    Shared freestanding, major identification signs for uses within a single development complex where businesses within the complex lack adequate visibility from the street; such shared signs may list more than three tenants. (08-05)

Chapter 18.030 SIGNS PERMITTED IN SPECIAL DISTRICTS
18.030.010 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
A.     No sign shall be erected within any special district which does not comply with this chapter. The sign sizes, heights, and numbers in this chapter are maximums. The City may require smaller sizes, heights, and/or numbers of signs if it determines that such restrictions are required to ensure that an individual sign will harmonize with other nearby signs, with surrounding buildings and setbacks, with the sign’s overall physical setting, and with the intent of this title.

B.     Proposed signs which do not conform to the provisions of this chapter, or to the illumination, location, or other general standards of Chapter 18.030 are prohibited unless a sign adjustment or variance is approved by the Architectural Commission pursuant to Section 18.001.050. However, the establishment of a planned sign program in accordance with Section 18.025.120 shall be an alternative to the standard sign regulations. Signs within such a planned sign program may be permitted although not conforming to all of the sign requirements for the applicable zoning district in order to achieve aesthetic compatibility of signs within a project and simple review process for individual signs, and to allow design creativity. The use of planned sign programs may allow some flexibility in number and size and in the placement of signs. However, the total aggregate area of the signs permitted by the sign program shall not be greater than the total aggregate area of all signs otherwise permitted.

C.    All signs permitted within this chapter shall conform to the following:

1.     All signs shall be on-premises unless otherwise specified.

2.     Maximum sizes shall be as specified for each sign.

3.     All building-mounted signs shall be placed below the eave line of a pitched or mansard roof, or below the top of wall of a building with a flat or parapet roof unless otherwise specified or unless specifically permitted as freestanding (with the maximum freestanding height as specified).

4.     All building-mounted signs and sign faces shall be painted on or shall be parallel to and flush against the surface on which they are placed.

5.     The placement of all freestanding signs shall be as approved by the City.

6.     Illuminated signs shall only be permitted in accordance with Chapter 18.005 (General Standards).

7.     No sign, flag or pennant permitted by this section shall: (i) restrict pedestrian or automobile traffic; (ii) impair motorist visibility or otherwise create a traffic hazard; or (iii) impair the visibility of signs on or off the premises. (08-05)

 

18.030.020 I – Institutional Districts
Signs shall be permitted in the I Districts as follows:

A.     Exempt Signs

1.     Signs listed in Chapter 18.015 are permitted in the I Districts and are exempt from sign permit requirements.

2.     Signs, banners, flags, or pennants placed within a campus and not visible from a public street or other public right-of-way or from any property located outside the Institutional Districts are permitted and exempt from sign permit requirements. However, signs which are exempt from sign permit requirements are not exempt from building or electrical permit requirements.

B.     Identification Signs Requiring Sign Permits

In addition to the exempt I-Districts signs specified in Section 18.030.020.A, signs visible from a public street, other public right-of-way, or from any property located outside the Institutional Districts, which identify a school, college, or other institution, are permitted upon approval of a sign permit provided such signs do not exceed the following maximum numbers, sizes, heights, and other restrictions:

1.     Major Institutional Identification Signs

a.     Maximum Number

Two major identification signs per institution entry, either building-mounted or freestanding. For purposes of this chapter, entry shall be any piercing of an institutional border by a street or major pedestrian way.

b.     Maximum Size

i.      Institutions occupying less than 1 acre – 20 square feet per sign.

ii.     Institutions occupying more than 1 acre and less than 2 acres – 32 square feet per sign.

iii.     Institutions occupying more than 2 acres – 50 square feet per sign.

c.     Maximum height of freestanding signs is 6 feet.

2.     Building Identification Signs

a.     Maximum Number

One building identification sign per institutional building, either building-mounted or freestanding.

b.     Maximum Size

i.      Building-mounted signs shall be a maximum 1/2 square foot per each linear foot of building frontage up to a maximum of 50 square feet.

ii.     Freestanding signs shall be a maximum of 12 square feet.

c.     Maximum height of freestanding signs is 4 feet.

3.     Illuminated and non-illuminated building-mounted signs shall be reviewed by staff. Freestanding signs shall be reviewed by the Architectural Commission.

C.    Directional Signs

Freestanding on-premises parking lot or other direction signs, denoting “entry,” “exit,” etc., maximum of four square feet in size and four feet in height, are permitted as determined necessary by the Director of Community Development. Signs shall be reviewed pursuant to Chapter 18.001. Such signs shall not contain commercial copy.

D.    Attraction Boards Requiring Sign Permits

In addition to the exempt I Districts signs specified in Section 18.030.020.A, illuminated attraction boards which are visible from a public street, other public right-of-way, or any property located outside the Institutional Districts are permitted, one per institution upon approval of a sign permit. Attraction boards shall be a maximum of 20 square feet in size and, if freestanding, a maximum of five feet in height. Building-mounted attraction boards shall be reviewed by staff. Freestanding attraction boards shall be reviewed by the Architectural Commission and placement of such signs shall be as approved by the Architectural Commission.

E.     Real Estate and Construction Signs Requiring Sign Permits

In addition to the exempt I Districts signs specified in Section 18.030.020.A, real estate and construction signs which are visible from a public street, other public right-of-way, or from any property located outside the Institutional Districts are permitted in accordance with Section 18.035.020.

F.     Flags and Pennants Requiring Sign Permits

Flags, pennants, and windsocks which are visible from a public street, other public right-of-way, or from any property located outside the Institutional Districts are permitted in accordance with Chapter 18.015 and Section 18.025.080.

G.    Temporary Signs

Temporary signs directing the public to civic or charitable events sponsored by a non-profit organization and open to the public shall be permitted.

1.     Temporary signs with a maximum size of not more than 12 square feet, a maximum height of 5 feet, and displayed a maximum of four days shall be exempt from sign permit requirements.

2.     Temporary signs larger than 12 square feet or signs displayed for more than four days shall be permitted if a sign permit is approved by staff in conjunction with a special use and development permit or special event permit.

Signs may be erected on a parkway or median within the public right-of-way pursuant to Section 18.035.070.

H.    Planned Sign Programs

Submission of a planned sign program, pursuant to Section 18.025.120 for an institutional use may be required by the City in conjunction with review of a new building or with review of any proposed new sign for an existing building. In addition, planned sign programs may be voluntarily submitted to the City by the owner of an institutional building. (12-01; 08-05)

 

18.030.030 P/RC – PARK/RESOURCE CONSERVATION DISTRICT
Signs shall be permitted in the P/RC District as follows:

A.     Park/Resource Conservation Uses

Signs identifying public parks and other public open space uses are permitted and exempt from sign permit requirements in accordance with Chapter 18.015.

B.     Private Recreational Uses

Signs identifying private stables and similar private recreational uses are permitted upon approval of a sign permit provided such signs do not exceed 20 square feet in size. Sign height, placement, and illumination shall be as approved by the Architectural Commission.

C.    Real Estate and Construction Signs

Real estate and construction signs are permitted in the Park/Resource Conservation District in accordance with Section 18.015.020.

D.    Flags and Pennants

Flags, pennants, and windsocks are permitted in accordance with Sections 18.001.020 and 18.005.060. (08-05)

 

18.030.040 SP SPECIFIC PLAN DISTRICTS
Signs shall be permitted in the SP Districts as follows:

A.     Signs by Use

The City shall determine sign standards for land uses within the SP Districts by applying the standards for similar uses from the most applicable chapter of this title. Such standards shall be adopted as part of the specific plan for each SP District.

B.     Real Estate and Construction Signs

Real estate and construction signs are permitted in Specific Plan Districts in accordance with Chapter 18.015 and Section 18.035.070.C. (08-05)

 

18.030.050 SIGNS FOR OTHER LAND USES
The City shall determine sign standards for land uses other than those listed in this chapter by applying the standards for similar uses from the most applicable chapter of this title. (08-05)

Chapter 18.035 SIGNS PERMITTED IN CONNECTION WITH SPECIFIC USES
18.035.010 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
A.     No sign shall be erected for any use specified in this chapter which does not comply with this chapter. The sign sizes, heights, and numbers in this chapter are maximums. The City may require smaller sizes, heights, and/or numbers of signs if it determines that such restrictions are required to ensure that an individual sign will harmonize with other nearby signs, with surrounding buildings and setbacks, with the sign’s overall physical setting, and with the intent of this title.

B.     Proposed signs which do not conform to the provisions of this chapter, or to the illumination, location, or other general standards of Chapter 18.005, are prohibited unless an adjustment or variance is approved by the Architectural Commission pursuant to Section 18.001.050 and Chapter 16.309 of Title 16. However, the establishment of a planned sign program in accordance with Section 18.025.120 shall be an alternative to the standard sign regulations. Signs within such a planned sign program may be permitted although not conforming to all of the sign requirements for the applicable zoning district in order to achieve aesthetic compatibility of signs within a project and simple review process for individual signs, and to allow design creativity. The use of planned sign programs may allow some flexibility in number and size and in the placement of signs. However, the total aggregate area of the signs permitted by the sign program shall not be greater than the total aggregate area of all signs otherwise permitted.

C.    All signs permitted within this chapter shall conform to the following:

1.     All building-mounted signs shall be placed below the eave line of a pitched or mansard roof or below top of wall of a flat or parapet roof.

2.     All building-mounted signs and sign faces shall be painted on or shall be parallel to and flush against the surface on which they are placed.

3.     The placement of all freestanding signs requiring sign permits shall be as approved by the City.

4.     Illuminated signs shall only be permitted in accordance with Chapter 18.005 (General Standards). (08-05)

 

18.035.020 REAL ESTATE AND CONSTRUCTION SIGNS
Real estate and construction signs 6 square feet or smaller are exempt from sign permit requirements in accordance with Section 18.015.030. Real estate or construction signs, including names of architect, contractor, etc., larger than 6 square feet are permitted only upon approval of a sign permit, subject to the following restrictions.

Real estate signs with “sale pending” riders shall be permitted while the property is in escrow.

A.     Maximum Number

1.     Residential Developments

One temporary real estate sign and no more than three construction announcement signs shall be permitted per street frontage. Signs may be either building-mounted or freestanding. Temporary real estate signs and construction announcement signs shall not consist of flexible material such as cloth, paper, cardboard, or plastic.

B.     Maximum Size

Real estate and construction signs shall be of a size that is compatible with the project site and surrounding development, as determined by the Community Development Director.

C.    Maximum Height

Freestanding real estate signs shall be a maximum of five feet in height. Construction signs which are smaller than 20 square feet in size shall be a maximum of five feet in height. Freestanding construction signs which are 20 square feet in size or greater shall be a maximum of eight feet in height.

D.    Placement

All freestanding signs shall be placed on the premises to which they refer and in any case shall not be placed within the public right-of-way. Precise placement of signs larger than six square feet in size shall be approved by the Director.

E.     Illumination

Illumination of real estate and construction signs shall not be permitted.

F.     Review

All real estate and construction signs shall be review of City staff.

G.    Removal of Temporary Signs

Sign permits shall be valid for up to one year and may be renewed for up to one year at a time if approved by the Director. In any case, all signs shall be removed upon the earlier of the following events: (1) expiration of the sign permit; or (2) completion of sale or lease of the last lot or unit within the subject property in the case of real estate signs; or (3) issuance of the first occupancy certificate or completion of construction which is identified by the sign in the case of construction announcement signs. The Director may require a cash deposit or other financial surety to ensure sign removal. (12-01)

 

18.035.030 CHURCHES AND OTHER SPECIAL USES
The following signs for churches, day care centers, hospitals, nursing homes, and similar special uses are allowed if a sign permit is approved. (Signs for institutional uses in the Institutional Districts shall be permitted pursuant to Section 18.030.020.)

A.     Identification Signs and Attraction Boards

Unless determined infeasible by staff or the Architectural Commission, all identification signs and attraction boards shall be combined into one sign structure per street frontage.

1.     One major identification sign is permitted per street frontage. (Churches housing more than one congregation may be permitted one major identification sign per each congregation upon approval by the Architectural Commission.)

2.     One secondary identification sign is permitted per street frontage identifying accessory activities on the site, such as church day care centers.

3.     Attraction boards are permitted for churches only, one per church facility regardless of the number of congregations sharing the facility.

4.     All signs shall be building-mounted, excepting, the Architectural Commission may approve a freestanding sign structure for identification signs and attraction boards for a church or special use if the Commission makes at least one of the following findings:

a.     A freestanding structure is necessary to provide adequate identification of the institution to motorists.

b.     The building is set back from the street or obscured from street view by structures or vegetation such that building-mounted sign structures cannot provide adequate identification.

c.     The architectural style, materials, or other design elements are such that a building-mounted sign is not feasible, would detract from the building’s appearance, or would conflict with the General Plan or with the intent of this title.

5.     Maximum Size of Identification Signs and Attraction Boards

For sites less than one acre, the maximum permitted size is 20 square feet aggregate for major and secondary identification signs and 12 square feet for attraction boards.

For sites of one acre or more, the maximum permitted size is 32 square feet aggregate for major and secondary identification signs and 18 square feet for attraction boards.

6.     Maximum Height and Placement of Freestanding Signs

The maximum height of freestanding signs (if allowed) is five feet. The placement of all freestanding signs shall be as approved by the City.

7.     Illuminated and non-illuminated building-mounted signs and attraction boards shall be reviewed by staff. Freestanding identification signs and attraction boards shall be reviewed by the Architectural Commission.

B.     Directional Signs

Freestanding on-premises parking lot or other direction signs, denoting “entry,” “exit,” etc., maximum of four square feet in size and four feet in height, are permitted as determined necessary by the Director of Community Development. Signs shall be reviewed pursuant to Chapter 18.001. Such signs shall not contain commercial copy.

C.    Temporary Signs

1.     Upon issuance of a sign permit, temporary building-mounted identification signs may be utilized by the new occupant of a premises for no more than 30 days. Also, the Director may approve time extensions for such temporary signs up to an additional 30 days. No more than one temporary sign, not exceeding 12 square feet in size, shall be installed per street frontage. Such signs shall otherwise conform to the height and other requirements specified for major identification signs in this section. Temporary signs shall be reviewed by City staff.

2.     Temporary signs directing the public to civic or charitable events sponsored by a non-profit organization and open to the public shall be permitted.

a.     Temporary signs displayed a maximum of four days shall be exempt from sign permit requirements.

b.     Temporary signs displayed for more than four days shall be permitted if a sign permit is approved by staff.

c.     Such signs shall have a maximum size of not more 12 square feet and a maximum height of five feet if freestanding.

Signs may be erected on a parkway or median within the public right-of-way pursuant to Section 18.035.070.

3.     Temporary signs and banners for temporary uses permitted with a special use and development permit pursuant to Section 18.035.060. (12-01; 08-05)

 

18.035.040 SERVICE STATIONS
The following signs shall be permitted for automobile service stations if a sign permit is approved:

A.     Building-Mounted Identification Signs

One building-mounted identification sign, maximum of 18 square feet in size, shall be permitted per service station. Illuminated and non-illuminated building-mounted signs shall be reviewed by staff.

B.     Freestanding Identification and Fuel Price Signs

One freestanding identification sign shall be permitted per street frontage.

Fuel price signs, with information in accordance with state law, shall be combined with the preceding freestanding identification signing unless the Architectural Commission determines that such an identification-price signing combination is infeasible or would be contrary to the intent of this title. In such cases, one separate fuel price sign shall be permitted with a sign permit per street frontage.

1.     Maximum Size

The maximum size of identification and fuel price signs shall be 50 square feet aggregate per service station.

2.     Maximum Height

The maximum height of identification and fuel price signs shall be six feet.

3.     Review

Freestanding identification and fuel price signs shall be reviewed by the Architectural Commission.

C.    Accessory Signs

1.     The following informational and accessory signs for service stations shall be permitted:

a.     Small Signs Exempt from Permit Requirements: Warning signs, such as “No Smoking,” and signs on gas pumps identifying the brand, grade, and price of fuel for that pump and giving pumping or other directions are permitted and are exempt from the requirements for a sign permit if under two square feet in size. Such signs may be illuminated.

b.     Larger Accessory Signs: Upon approval of a sign permit, not more than two non-illuminated accessory signs identifying products or services available on the premises are permitted in addition to those exempt accessory signs allowed under Section 18.035.040.C.1.a. Such signs shall not exceed four square feet each and shall be building-mounted or shall be incorporated into displays placed against the building. Accessory signs shall be reviewed by City staff.

2.     Prohibited Signs for Service Stations

Notwithstanding any provision within this section, the following are not permitted on service station premises:

a.     Accessory signs or banners attached to poles, fuel pumps, pump islands, or canopies except those permitted under Section 18.035.040.C.

b.     Reader boards, A-frame signs, portable signs, or other freestanding signs except permitted identification and/or fuel price signs.

c.     Signs attached to or part of tire displays.

D.    Directional Signs

Freestanding on-premises parking lot or other direction signs, denoting “entry,” “exit,” etc., maximum of four square feet in size and four feet in height, are permitted as determined necessary by the Director of Community Development. Signs shall be reviewed pursuant to Chapter 18.001. Such signs shall not contain commercial copy.

E.     Window Signs

Window signs shall be permitted in accordance with Section 18.025.050.

F.     Temporary Signs

Upon approval of a sign permit, a temporary building-mounted identification sign may be utilized by the new occupant of a premises for no more than 30 days. Also, the Director may approve time extensions for such temporary signs up to an additional 30 days. No more than one temporary sign, not exceeding 32 square feet in size, shall be installed per service station. Such signs shall otherwise conform to the height and other requirements specified for major identification signs in this chapter. Temporary signs shall be reviewed by City staff.

G.    Planned Sign Programs

Submission of a planned sign program, pursuant to Section 18.025.120, for a service station may be required by the City in conjunction with review of a new service station or with review of any proposed new sign for an existing service station. In addition, planned sign programs may be voluntarily submitted to the City by the owner of an existing service station. (12-01; 08-05)

 

18.035.050 THEATERS/CINEMAS
The following signs shall be permitted for theaters (live stage or movie) that are located in commercial zoning districts and have been permitted with an approved conditional use permit (CUP).

A.     Building-Mounted Identification Signs

1.     One building-mounted identification sign shall be permitted per theater or cinema complex (single or multi-screen).

2.     The maximum sign area for building-mounted identification signs shall be 75 square feet for the first screen or stage plus 25 square feet per screen or stage over one, up to a maximum of 175 square feet in size.

3.     Signs must be architecturally compatible and appropriately sized for the building upon which they are mounted.

B.     Freestanding Identification

One freestanding identification sign may be permitted per theater complex if at least one of the findings contained in Section 18.025.050.A.1 can be made.

1.     The maximum size of freestanding identification signs shall be 80 square feet per theater complex.

2.     The maximum height of freestanding identification signs may be permitted to exceed the maximum height for freestanding signs of the underlying district, if approved as part of a sign program granted by the Architectural Commission.

3.     All freestanding identification signs shall be reviewed by the Architectural Commission.

C.    Attraction Boards

1.     One attraction board is permitted per frontage of theater, theater complex, or cabaret.

2.     For movie theaters, attraction boards shall be allowed a maximum of 20 square feet plus 10 square feet per screen over one, up to a maximum of 50 square feet of total area.

3.     For live theaters and cabarets, attraction boards shall be a maximum of 20 square feet plus 10 square feet per stage over one, up to a maximum of 40 square feet of total sign area.

4.     Attraction boards shall be building-mounted; however, the Architectural Commission may approve a freestanding attraction board if:

a.     It is combined with a freestanding major identification sign, and

b.     The Commission can make at least one of the findings in Section 18.025.050.A.1, and

c.     The resulting structure is in keeping with the intent of this chapter.

5.     The height of freestanding attraction boards (if approved) shall conform to the requirements of the district in which they are located.

6.     Attraction boards listing current performances or movies shall be combined with identification signs where possible.

D.    Coming Attraction Display Cases

1.     One coming attraction display case shall be permitted per screen for theaters or per stage for live theaters or cabarets.

2.     Coming attraction display cases shall only be large enough to display one maximum 8 square feet poster.

3.     Coming attraction display cases shall be building-mounted.

E.     Review Responsibilities

1.     Building-mounted identification signs, illuminated and non-illuminated, shall be reviewed by the Architectural Commission.

2.     Building-mounted attraction boards and coming attraction display cases shall be reviewed by staff.

3.     Freestanding attraction boards, including placement/location, shall be reviewed by the Architectural Commission. (08-05)

 

18.035.060 TEMPORARY USES PERMITTED WITH A SPECIAL USE AND DEVELOPMENT PERMIT OR SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT
Temporary signs and banners shall be permitted in conjunction with temporary uses and developments permitted with a special use and development permit or special event permit. Temporary signs shall be reviewed by staff at the time an application for a special use and development permit is submitted. Such signs shall be removed within the period prescribed in the permit. (08-05)

 

18.035.070 SIGNS IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
The following signs located in the public right-of-way shall be permitted in all districts.

A.     General

Only signs for the uses listed in this section are permitted within the public right-of-way.

B.     Signs Exempt from Sign Permit Requirements

The following signs may be placed within the public right-of-way and are exempt from sign permit requirements pursuant to Chapter 18.015:

1.     Any directional, safety, traffic, informational or similar signs erected by the City of Claremont or other governmental agency.

2.     Signs and banners erected by the City of Claremont associated with holidays or special community events such as: Fourth of July, Halloween, Carnival, Claremont Anniversary Celebration, Winter holidays, Spring Festival, and similar holidays and events.

3.     Temporary signs, maximum 12 square feet in size and maximum five feet in height if freestanding, for a civic or charitable event, sponsored by a non-profit organization and open to the public, erected on a parkway or median within the public right-of-way, provided signs are displayed a maximum of four days.

C.    Signs Requiring Sign Permits

1.     Temporary signs exceeding 12 square feet in size or signs displayed for more than four days for a civic or charitable event, sponsored by a non-profit organization and open to the public, erected on a parkway or median within the public right-of-way, if approved in conjunction with a special use and development permit or a special event permit by staff.

2.     Under-canopy or awning signs over a public sidewalk or other right-of-way, if permitted in the applicable district pursuant to this title. Such signs shall require both a sign permit and an encroachment permit. Under-canopy or awning signs shall be reviewed by staff. (08-05)

Chapter 18.900 GLOSSARY OF DEFINITIONS
18.900.000 PURPOSE OF CHAPTER
For the purposes of this title, the following terms, words, and phrases, and their derivations shall have the meanings as defined in this chapter.

 

18.900.005 ACCESSORY SIGN
Accessory sign shall mean a sign whose copy refers to the products, facilities, or services available on the premises. Accessory window signs shall also include temporary posters attached to windows or placed within five feet of any window and legible from off the site.

 

18.900.010 ADVERTISING STATUARY
Advertising statuary shall mean an imitation or representation of a person or thing which is sculptured, molded, modeled, or cast in any solid or plastic substance, material, or fabric and used to identify or advertise a product or service. Advertising statuaries shall be considered and regulated as signs.

 

18.900.015 ATTRACTION BOARD
Attraction board shall mean a sign capable of supporting copy which is readily changeable such as a theater marquee, and which refers to products, services, or coming events on the premises.

 

18.900.020 BANNER
Banner shall mean the same as “flag.”

 

18.900.025 BILLBOARD
Billboard shall mean an off-premises sign with changing advertising copy.

 

18.900.030 BULLETIN BOARD
Bulletin board shall mean a board, kiosk, or wall area on which are affixed personal notices, lost-and-found notices, business cards, and similar small informal notices referring to products, services, activities, or other items not offered on the same premises. The term bulletin board shall not include business identification signs or attraction boards.

 

18.900.035 BUILDING EXPOSURE
Building exposure shall mean the linear measurement of exterior building walls enclosing interior spaces that are facing an outdoor area.

 

18.900.040 BUILDING FRONTAGE
Building frontage shall mean the linear measurement of exterior building walls enclosing interior spaces that are facing or oriented to a street or parking area.

 

18.900.045 BUILDING-MOUNTED SIGN
Building-mounted sign shall mean a sign affixed to a building, including awnings and windows.

 

18.900.050 BUSINESS
Business shall mean a commercial, office, institutional, or industrial establishment.

 

18.900.055 CABARET
Cabaret shall mean a restaurant or cafe with live entertainment.

 

18.900.060 CANOPY
Canopy shall have the same meaning as in Chapter 16.900.

 

18.900.065 CONSTRUCTION SIGN
Construction sign shall mean a sign containing information pertaining to a future development on the site where the sign is located, including the name of the project, the developer, contractor, architect, financing source, future occupant(s), and other information directly related to the development.

 

18.900.070 DEVELOPMENT
Development shall mean a building or group of buildings which function as an integrated whole and which have common access and/or parking facilities.

 

18.900.075 DIRECTIONAL SIGN
Directional sign shall mean a sign directing motorists or pedestrians to parking or building entries or providing similar directional information.

 

18.900.080 DIRECTOR
Director shall mean the Director of Community Development of the City of Claremont or the Director’s authorized representative.

 

18.900.085 ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER DISPLAY
Electronic message center display shall mean a sign having the capability of presenting variable message displays by projecting an electronically controlled light pattern against a contrasting background, and which can be programmed to change messages by electronic processes, or by remote control.

 

18.900.090 EXEMPT SIGN
Exempt sign shall mean a sign which is designated in Title 18 as not subject to certain regulations in said title.

 

18.900.095 FLAG
Flag shall mean a visual display device, with or without copy, usually rectangular in shape and made of flexible material, usually cloth, paper, or plastic.

 

18.900.100 FLAT ROOF
Flat roof shall mean a roof which is horizontal without a sloping, pitched, or mansard portion above.

 

18.900.105 FREESTANDING SIGN
Freestanding sign shall mean a sign supported upon the ground and not attached to any building. Freestanding sign shall include signs mounted on walls, which do not enclose any building.

 

18.900.110 FREEWAY BUILDING FRONTAGE
Freeway building frontage shall mean a building wall parallel or nearly parallel to a freeway.

 

18.900.115 FREEWAY LOT FRONTAGE
Freeway lot frontage shall mean a property line abutting a freeway right-of-way.

 

18.900.120 FREEWAY-ORIENTED SIGN
Freeway-oriented sign shall mean any sign whose primary purpose, as determined by the City, is to identify the business to motorists on the freeway.

 

18.900.125 IDENTIFICATION SIGN
Identification sign shall mean a sign whose commercial copy is limited to the name, type of business, and the address of the building, business, office, establishment, person, or activity.

 

18.900.130 ILLUMINATED SIGN
Illuminated sign shall mean a sign in which a source of light is used in order to make readable the message or attract attention to the sign. This definition shall include internally and externally lighted signs and reflectorized, glowing, or radiating signs.

 

18.900.135 LOGO
Logo shall mean a trademark or symbol of an organization.

 

18.900.140 MAJOR IDENTIFICATION SIGN
Major identification sign shall mean an identification sign facing the public street, streets or pedestrian paths providing primary access to the premises identified by the sign.

 

18.900.145 MANSARD ROOF
Mansard roof shall mean a sloped roof or roof-like facade above and architecturally comparable to a building wall.

 

18.900.150 NEON SIGN
Neon sign shall mean a sign which utilizes neon or other gases within translucent tubing in or on any part of the sign structure.

 

18.900.155 OFF-PREMISES SIGN
Off-premises sign shall mean a sign referring to a person, establishment, merchandise, service, event, or entertainment which is not located, sold, produced, manufactured, provided, or furnished on the premises where the sign is located.

 

18.900.160 ON-PREMISES SIGN
On-premises sign shall mean a sign referring to a person, establishment, merchandise, service, event, or entertainment which is located, sold, produced, manufactured, provided, or furnished on the premises where the sign is located.

 

18.900.165 OUTSIDE CORNER
Outside corner shall mean that portion of a building having both an exterior front and side wall adjacent to public rights-of-way.

 

18.900.170 PARAPET
Parapet shall mean the extension of a false front or building wall above a flat roof.

 

18.900.175 PEDESTRIAN-ORIENTED SIGN
Pedestrian-oriented sign shall mean a small sign readable primarily from the abutting sidewalk or other walkway but not generally from the street.

 

18.900.180 PENNANT
Pennant shall mean a visual display device, with or without copy, usually triangular in shape and made of flexible material, usually cloth, paper, or plastic.

 

18.900.185 PLANNED SIGN PROGRAM
Planned sign program shall mean a plan providing coordinated signing for a business or a contiguous group of businesses and utilizing one or more common design elements such as colors, materials, lettering, illumination, sign type, and sign shape.

 

18.900.190 PITCHED ROOF
Pitched or gabled roof shall mean a ridge roof with sloping ends over the building walls.

 

18.900.195 POLITICAL SIGN
Political sign shall mean a sign whose text is limited to non-commercial speech, including speech pertaining to a forthcoming public election.

 

18.900.200 PORTABLE SIGN
Portable sign shall mean any sign designed to be moved easily and which is not permanently affixed to either the ground, a structure, or a building.

 

18.900.205 POSTER
Poster shall mean a sign, temporary in nature and usually on paper or cardboard, used to advertise a coming event or attraction.

 

18.900.210 REAL ESTATE SIGN
Real estate sign shall mean a sign indicating that the premises on which the sign is located is for sale, lease, or rent.

 

18.900.215 SECONDARY IDENTIFICATION SIGN
Secondary identification sign shall mean any identification sign other than a major identification sign.

 

18.900.220 SIGN
Sign shall mean any medium for visual communication, including copy, structure, and component parts, which is used or intended to be used to attract attention to, identify, or advertise an establishment, product, service, activity or location, or to provide information. Interior window displays of products sold on the premises shall not be considered signs.

 

18.900.225 SIGN COPY
Sign copy shall mean any words, letters, numbers, figures, designs, or other symbolic representations incorporated onto the face of a sign.

 

18.900.230 SIGN FACE
Sign face shall mean the exterior surface of a sign, exclusive of structural supports, on which is placed the sign copy.

 

18.900.235 SIGN HEIGHT, BUILDING-MOUNTED
Sign height for building-mounted signs shall mean the distance between the top of the sign and the average finish grade directly beneath the sign.

 

18.900.240 SIGN HEIGHT, FREESTANDING SIGNS
Sign height for freestanding signs shall mean the distance between the top of the sign and the top of curb of the nearest street or the edge of pavement of such street where there is no curb. However, in cases where the Director or Architectural Commission determines that a freestanding sign is not oriented to any particular street or is too far from such a street to reasonably apply the foregoing standard, sign height shall be measured from the average finish grade at the base of the sign.

 

18.900.245 SIGN HEIGHT, SIGNS ON WALLS
Sign height for signs on walls shall mean the distance between the top of the sign panel inserted into or placed on the wall and the top of the curb of the nearest street or the edge of pavement of such street where there is no curb.

If there is no sign panel, the height of the sign shall be measured from the top of the sign letters. If the Director determines that a freestanding sign is not oriented to any particular street or is too far from such a street to reasonably apply the foregoing standard, sign height shall be measured from the average finish grade at the base of the sign. (Refer to Section 18.005.020.)

 

18.900.250 SIGN PERMIT
Sign permit shall mean an entitlement from the City to place or erect a sign.

 

18.900.255 SIGN SIZE OR AREA
Sign size or sign area shall generally mean the entire area of the sign face, including non-structural perimeter trim but excluding structures or uprights on which the sign is supported. (Refer to Section 18.005.020 for complete description of how sign area shall be measured.)

 

18.900.260 SIGN STRUCTURE
Sign structure shall mean the structural supports, uprights, and bracing for a sign.

 

18.900.265 TEMPORARY SIGN
Temporary sign shall mean a sign utilized to identify a business or other activity for an interim period.

 

18.900.270 UNDER CANOPY SIGN
Under canopy sign shall mean a sign suspended beneath a projecting canopy, walkway cover, awning, ceiling, or marquee.

 

18.900.275 WINDOW SIGN
Window sign shall mean any written representation, emblem or other figure or similar character painted on or otherwise affixed to a window and any interior sign within 5 feet of any window and visible from off the subject building’s site.

 

18.900.280 WALKWAY
Walkway shall mean a sidewalk or other pathway for pedestrians. (08-05)
