 
ARTICLE I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapters:

1    Adoption of Code

2    Penalty Provisions

2.5    Administrative Citations

3    Rules of Construction

4    Miscellaneous

CHAPTER 1
ADOPTION OF CODE
Sections:

§ 1100    Short Title – Reference to Code.

§ 1101    Codification Authority.

§ 1102    Effective Date.

§ 1103    Severability and Validity of Code.

§ 1104    Distribution of Code.

§ 1105    Notation of Amendments.

§ 1106    Amendments.

1100 Short Title – Reference to Code.
This Code shall be known as the “Carson Municipal Code,” and it shall be sufficient to refer to said Code as the “Carson Municipal Code” in any prosecution for the violation of any provisions thereof. It shall also be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, or repealing, said Code, or portions thereof, as an addition or amendment to, or a repeal of, the “Carson Municipal Code,” or a portion thereof. (Ord. 2, § 1100)

1101 Codification Authority.
This Code consists of all of the regulatory and penal and of certain of the administrative ordinances of the City of Carson. (Ord. 2, § 1101)

1102 Effective Date.
This Code takes effect upon the effective date of the Ordinance of the City Council of the City of Carson whereby this Code is adopted. (Ord. 2, § 1102)

1103 Severability and Validity of Code.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code. The City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted this Code and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, phrases, or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 2, § 1103)

1104 Distribution of Code.
Not less than three (3) copies of this Code shall be filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the City Clerk. At least three (3) copies duly certified to by the City Clerk shall be maintained on file in his office. Additional copies shall be prepared in loose-leaf form and mounted to withstand heavy usage in such binders as the City Clerk may prescribe. Copies thereof shall be distributed as determined by the City Clerk. (Ord. 2, § 1104)

1105 Notation of Amendments.
Upon the adoption of any amendment or addition to said Code, or upon the repeal of any of its provisions, the City Clerk shall certify thereto and shall make an appropriate notation in the volumes of said Code of the taking of such action, noting thereon the number of the ordinances pursuant to which such action is taken. Duly certified copies of every ordinance making changes in such Code shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk in books for such purpose, duly indexed for ready reference. (Ord. 2, § 1105)

1106 Amendments.
The City Clerk shall prepare copies of such changes in the Code for insertion in the loose-leaf copies thereof. Every section of the Code so changed shall have printed thereon a notation of the ordinance number pursuant to which such change is adopted. (Ord. 2, § 1106)

CHAPTER 2
PENALTY PROVISIONS
Sections:

§ 1200    Violations.

§ 1201    Penalties and Arrests for Violation of This Code and Other City Ordinances.

§ 1202    Seizure of Personal Property Used in Certain Violations of This Code.

1200 Violations.
(a) Misdemeanors. No person shall violate any provision, or fail to comply with any requirement, of this Code. Any person violating any provision or failing to comply with any mandatory requirement of this Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor unless such violation or failure to comply is expressly stated by this Code to be an infraction. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this Code shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which violation of any provision of this Code is committed, continued, or permitted by such person and shall be punishable accordingly.

(b) Infractions. Any person violating any provision or failing to comply with any mandatory requirement of this Code expressly stated by this Code to be an infraction shall be guilty of an infraction. Any person convicted of an infraction shall be punishable by:

(1) A fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation;

(2) A fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation of the same provision of the Code within one (1) year;

(3) A fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional violation of the same provision of this Code within one (1) year.

Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this Code is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall be punishable accordingly.

In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be, by this City, summarily abated as such. (Ord. 79-479, § 1; Ord. 76-373, § 1; Ord. 2, § 1200; Ord. 87-803, § 1)

1201 Penalties and Arrests for Violation of This Code and Other City Ordinances.
If any person is arrested for the violation of this Code or any ordinance of this City, and such person is not immediately taken before a magistrate, as is more fully set forth in the Penal Code of the State of California, the arresting officer shall prepare, in duplicate, a written notice to appear in court, containing the name and address of such person, the offense charged, and the time and place where and when such person shall appear in court.

1. Time Specified. The time specified in the notice to appear shall be not less than five (5) days after such arrest.

2. Place Specified. The place specified in the notice to appear shall be either:

a. Before a judge of a justice court, or municipal court judge within this County who has jurisdiction of the offense and who is nearest and most accessible with reference to the place where the arrest is made; or

b. Upon demand of the person arrested, before a judge of the municipal court of the Los Angeles judicial district, or before a judge of a justice court, or municipal court in the judicial district in which the offense is alleged to have been committed; or

c. Before an officer authorized to receive a deposit of bail.

3. Written Promise. The officer shall deliver one (1) copy of the notice to appear to the arrested person and the arrested person, in order to secure a release, must give his written promise so to appear in court by signing the duplicate notice, which shall be retained by the officer. Thereupon, the arresting officer shall forthwith release the person arrested from custody.

4. Duplicate Notice. The officer shall, as soon as practicable, file a duplicate notice with the magistrate specified in such notice. The defendant may, prior to the date upon which he promised to appear in court, deposit with the magistrate the amount of bail set by such magistrate. Thereafter, at the time when the case is called for arraignment before the magistrate, if the defendant does not appear, either in person or by counsel, the magistrate may declare the bail forfeited and may at his discretion order that no further proceedings shall be had in such case. Upon the making of such order that no further proceedings be had, all sums deposited as bail shall forthwith be paid into the City Treasury.

5. Warrants. A warrant shall not issue on such charge for the arrest of a person who pursuant to the provisions of this Section has given such written promise to appear in court unless and until he has violated such promise, or has failed to deposit bail, to appear for arraignment, trial or judgment, or to comply with the terms and provisions of the judgment as required by law.

6. Misdemeanors. Every person willfully violating his written promise to appear in court is guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he was originally arrested.

7. Failure to Appear. When a person signs a written promise to appear at the time and place specified in the written promise to appear and has not posted bail as provided in subsection 4 of this Section, the magistrate shall issue and have delivered for execution a warrant for his arrest within twenty (20) days after his failure to appear as promised. If a person promises to appear before an officer authorized to accept bail other than a magistrate and fails to do so on or before the date which he promised to appear, then within twenty (20) days after the delivery of such written promise to appear by this officer to a magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense, such magistrate shall issue and have delivered for execution a warrant for his arrest. When such person violates his promise to appear before an officer authorized to receive bail other than a magistrate, the officer shall immediately deliver to the magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense charged the written promise to appear and the complaint, if any, filed by the arresting officer.

8. Authority. The provisions of this Section, except this subsection 8 hereof, have been enacted pursuant to the provisions of Sections 853.1, 853.2, 853.3 and 853.4 of the Penal Code of the State of California. (Ord. 2, § 1201)

1202 Seizure of Personal Property Used in Certain Violations of This Code.
An arresting officer, in connection with making an arrest, or a City of Carson Code Enforcement Officer, in connection with issuing a citation to any person for violation of CMC 4118, 4118.1, 4118.2, 4125, 4126 or 4147, may seize and take into possession personal property not to exceed $1,000 in value in the possession or control of such person and used or involved in the commission of the violation for which the arrest is made or citation issued, if the act or conduct for which such arrest is made or citation is issued has caused, or resulted in, or is causing or resulting in, or is in the immediate proximity of any vehicular or pedestrian traffic congestion, an automobile accident or other emergency situation, a parade, demonstration, or public or other event attended by an assembly or gathering of a large number of persons, or in the event of imminent danger to the person with respect to whom the citation is issued or arrest is made.

(a) The officer or Code Enforcement Officer seizing personal property pursuant to the provisions of this Section shall issue a receipt therefor to the person from whose possession or control such property is taken and cause such property to be stored in the control of the City for safekeeping. Said receipt shall contain a notice stating in substance that the person claiming ownership of said property may file a written claim therefor with the Director of Public Safety of the City of Carson, at the City Hall within ten (10) days after date of such seizure, and that in the absence of receipt of such a claim within said time said personal property shall escheat to and become the property of the City of Carson and may be disposed of by the City without further notice. One (1) copy of said receipt and notice shall be attached to the copy of the complaint or citation filed with the court. Such claim shall set forth the name, address and fact of ownership of such property.

(b) If a written claim is filed with the Director of Public Safety in accordance with the requirements of subsection (a), a hearing shall be held by the Director of Public Safety or his designee within ten (10) days after such claim is filed. If the ownership of such property is established by credible evidence as determined by the hearing officer, the property shall be released to the owner thereof. If the hearing officer shall find that the ownership of such property has not been so established, the hearing officer shall deny the claim. The claimant may file a written appeal from such denial with the City Administrator of the City. The City Administrator or his designee shall conduct a hearing or such appeal within seven (7) days after the filing of such appeal.

(c) The City may impose a reasonable storage fee to cover the cost of storing personal property seized pursuant to this Section. The release of said property shall be conditioned upon full payment of the applicable fee.

(d) The City is not liable for the deterioration or depreciation of seized personal property while in the City’s custody. (Ord. 90-908U, § 1; Ord. 90-908, § 1)

CHAPTER 2.5
ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
Sections:

§ 1203    Administrative Citations.

§ 1203.1    Legislative Findings and Statement of Purpose.

§ 1203.2    Definitions.

§ 1203.3    Authority and Fines.

§ 1203.4    Service Procedures.

§ 1203.5    Contents of Notice.

§ 1203.6    Satisfaction of Administrative Citation.

§ 1203.7    Appeal of Administrative Citation.

§ 1203.8    Hearing Officer/Hearing Panel.

§ 1203.9    Hearing Procedure.

§ 1203.10    Hearing Officer’s/Hearing Panel’s Decision.

§ 1203.11    Failure to Pay Fines.

§ 1203.12    Right to Judicial Review.

§ 1203.13    Notices.

1203 Administrative Citations.
CMC 1203, et seq., shall establish the City’s regulations for issuing administrative citations. (Ord. 06-1346, § 1; Ord. 13-1511, § 1)

1203.1 Legislative Findings and Statement of Purpose.
(a) The City Council finds that there is a need for an alternative method of enforcement for various violations of the Carson Municipal Code. The City Council also finds that an appropriate method for enforcement of various violations is an administrative citation program that will reduce the burden on the judicial system while providing full due process for those cited.

(b) The procedures established in this Chapter are in addition to criminal, civil or other legal remedies that may be available to the City to enforce violations of the Code or applicable State Codes.

(c) The City Council finds and determines that enforcement of the provisions of the Carson Municipal Code and conditions on entitlements or permits are municipal affairs as well as matters of purely local concern to the citizens of Carson.

(d) The City Council finds that the adoption and implementation of the administrative citation program is within the power and authority of the City of Carson and will achieve the following goals:

(i) To promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Carson;

(ii) To help ensure compliance with the Code and State Codes, ordinances and regulations in a timely and efficient manner;

(iii) To provide for an administrative process to appeal the imposition of administrative citations and fines that will fully comport with due process and provide those cited with the right to a fair hearing without the need for legal counsel;

(iv) To provide a method to hold parties responsible when they fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of the Code, ordinances, agreements or terms and conditions on entitlements in the City of Carson;

(v) To reduce the burden on the judicial system and minimize the time and expense of defending the citation on the part of the person cited.

(e) Use of this Chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the City and nothing in this Chapter shall preclude the City from enforcing City law through other civil, administrative and criminal remedies. (Ord. 06-1346, § 1; Ord. 13-1511, § 1)

1203.2 Definitions.
The following definitions apply to the use of these terms for the purposes of this Section:

“Citation” means an administrative citation issued pursuant to this Section to remedy a violation.

“Citee” means any person served with an administrative citation charging him or her as a responsible person for a violation.

“Code” means the Carson Municipal Code.

“Code Enforcement Officer” means any employee or agent of the City of Carson designated to enforce any provision of this Code.

“Department” means any department of the City of Carson that shall have issued an administrative citation.

“Hearing officer” or “hearing panel” means a person or a group of people up to and including the City of Carson Public Safety Commission designated by the City Manager to serve as the hearing officer or hearing panel for administrative hearings hereunder.

“Person” means a natural person or a legal entity that is also an owner, tenant, lessee or other person with any right to possession or control of the property where a violation of this Code exists.

“Responsible person” means a person who causes a Code violation to occur, or allows a violation to exist or continue, by his or her action or failure to act, or whose agent, employee, or independent contractor causes a violation to occur, or allows a violation to exist or continue. There is a rebuttable presumption that the record owner of a parcel, as shown on the County’s latest equalized property tax assessment rolls, and an occupant or lessee of a parcel has notice of any violation existing on said property. For the purposes of this Chapter, there may be more than one responsible person for a violation. (Ord. 06-1346, § 1; Ord. 13-1511, § 1)

1203.3 Authority and Fines.
(a) Any person violating any provision of the Carson Municipal Code may be issued an administrative citation by a Code Enforcement Officer as provided in this Chapter. A violation of this Code includes, but is not limited to, all violations of the Code, the Uniform Codes adopted by the City Council, or the failure to comply with any condition imposed by any entitlement, permit, agreement or environmental document issued or approved pursuant to this Code.

(b) Each and every day a violation of the Code exists constitutes a separate and distinct offense.

(c) A fine shall be assessed by means of an administrative citation issued by the Code Enforcement Officer and shall be payable directly to the City’s Finance Department.

(d) Fines shall be assessed in the amounts specified by resolution of the City Council, or where no amount is specified:

(i) A fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation;

(ii) A fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation of the same ordinance or permit within one (1) year from the date of the first violation;

(iii) A fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional violation of the same ordinance or permit within one (1) year from the date of the first violation. (Ord. 06-1346, § 1; Ord. 13-1511, § 1)

1203.4 Service Procedures.
(a) An administrative citation on a form approved by the City Manager may be issued to the responsible person by a Code Enforcement Officer for violations of the Code or applicable State Code in the following manner:

(i) Personal Service. In any case where an administrative citation is issued:

a. The Code Enforcement Officer shall attempt to locate and personally serve the responsible person and obtain the signature of the responsible person on the administrative citation.

b. If the responsible person served refuses or fails to sign the administrative citation, the failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the administrative citation or of subsequent proceedings.

(b) Service of Citation by Mail. If the Code Enforcement Officer is unable to locate the responsible person, the administrative citation shall be mailed to the responsible person by certified mail, postage prepaid with a requested return receipt. Simultaneously, the citation may be sent by first class mail. If the citation is sent by certified mail and returned unsigned, then service shall be deemed effective pursuant to first class mail, unless the citation sent by first class mail is returned.

(c) Service by Citation by Posting Notice. If the Code Enforcement Officer does not succeed in personally serving the responsible person, or by certified mail or regular mail, the Code Enforcement Officer shall post the administrative citation on any real property within the City in which the City has knowledge that the responsible person has an interest as an owner or tenant, and such posting shall be deemed effective service. (Ord. 06-1346, § 1; Ord. 13-1511, § 1)

1203.5 Contents of Notice.
Each administrative citation shall contain the following information:

(a) Date, approximate time, and address or definite description of the location where the violation(s) was observed;

(b) A description of the violation(s);

(c) An order to the responsible person to correct the violations within the time specified, and an explanation of the consequences of failure to correct the violation(s);

(d) The amount of the daily fine to be imposed for each of the violation(s) of this Code;

(e) The date or dates when the fine or fines will be imposed unless the violation or violations of this Code are corrected prior to the date or dates specified in the citation;

(f) A notice that each violation of the Code also constitutes a nuisance and that collection of any unpaid fines or nuisance abatement costs may be enforced as an assessment or lien against the real property where the Code violation occurred and that unpaid assessments can result in the property being sold after three (3) years by the County Assessor;

(g) Identification of the rights to an appeal, including the time within which the citation may be contested and the place to obtain a request for hearing form to contest the administrative citation;

(h) A statement advising the citee that he may request permission to pay the fine in as many as five (5) installments, if an installment plan is approved by the City’s Finance Officer pursuant to CMC 1203.6; and

(i) The name and signature of the Code Enforcement Officer. (Ord. 06-1346, § 1; Ord. 13-1511, § 1)

1203.6 Satisfaction of Administrative Citation.
Upon receipt of a citation, the responsible person must do the following:

(i) Unless an installment plan has been approved pursuant to subsection (ii) of this Section, pay the fine to the City within fifteen (15) days from the correction date of the administrative citation. All fines assessed shall be payable to the City of Carson via the Finance Office. Payment of a fine shall not excuse or discharge the failure to correct the violation(s), nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the City.

(ii) The citee of a fine of $500.00 or more may submit a request for permission to pay the fine in as many as five (5) monthly installments on a pre-approved form to the Finance Department within fifteen (15) calendar days of the date of issuance of the citation. The Finance Department shall notify the citee of the dates on which the installment payments shall be due, the procedure that citee must follow for submitting payments and the processing charge for setting up a payment plan, which charge shall be added to the first installment payment. The citee’s failure to make the agreed-upon payments on the specified dates will result in an additional $100.00 fee, suspension of the payment plan and immediate collection activity.

(iii) Remedy the violation(s), if the violation(s) is of such a nature that it can be remedied. If the violation(s) is corrected before the date provided on the citation, and at the discretion of the Code Enforcement Officer, no fine shall be imposed. If the responsible person fails to correct the violation(s), subsequent administrative citations may be issued for the same violation(s). The amount of the fine for failure to correct the violation shall increase at a rate specified in this Chapter or by ordinance. (Ord. 06-1346, § 1; Ord. 07-1372, § 1; Ord. 13-1511, § 1)

1203.7 Appeal of Administrative Citation.
Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest a citation by completing a request for hearing form and returning it to the City within fifteen (15) days from the correction date of the administrative citation, together with an advanced deposit of the fine and a statement of the grounds for contesting the citation. A citee may contest the citation and the proposed fine by denying that the citee owns, possesses, or controls the property where the violation exists, denying that the citee is responsible for the violation described in the citation, denying that a violation exists or existed, or proving that the violation was corrected within the period described in the citation or such further period granted by the Director. Any issue or defense at the hearing that was not included on the request form from the citee may be disregarded by the hearing officer.

Any administrative citation fine which has been deposited shall be refunded if it is determined, after a hearing, that the person charged in the administrative citation was not responsible for the violation(s) or that there was no violation(s) as charged in the administrative citation. (Ord. 06-1346, § 1; Ord. 13-1511, § 1)

1203.8 Hearing Officer/Hearing Panel.
The Carson City Manager shall designate the hearing officer/hearing panel for the administrative citation hearing. The hearing officer/hearing panel shall not be a direct City employee(s). The employment, performance evaluation, compensation and benefits of the hearing officer/hearing panel, if any, shall not be directly or indirectly conditioned upon the number of administrative citation fines upheld by the hearing officer/hearing panel. (Ord. 06-1346, § 1; Ord. 13-1511, § 1)

1203.9 Hearing Procedure.
(a) No hearing to contest an administrative citation before a hearing officer/hearing panel shall be held unless and until a request for hearing form has been completed and submitted, and the total amount of the fine has been deposited in advance.

(b) A hearing before the hearing officer/hearing panel shall be set for a date that is not less than fifteen (15) and not more than sixty (60) days from the date that the request for hearing is filed in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. The person requesting the hearing shall be notified of the time and place set for the hearing at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. The hearing shall proceed solely on the issues and defenses raised in the request for a hearing filed by the citee and may disregard any matter not contested in said request.

(c) The hearing officer/hearing panel shall only consider evidence that is relevant to whether the violation(s) occurred and whether the responsible person has caused or maintained the violation(s) of the Code on the date(s) specified in the administrative citation. The City shall have the burden to prove the facts of the citation by a preponderance of the evidence. The citation and other reports prepared by a Code Enforcement Officer concerning the violation or the attempted correction of the citation shall be admitted into evidence. In addition, the City may present such other evidence and reports as may be necessary or helpful to the hearing officer/hearing panel to resolve the issues raised by the citee.

(d) The responsible person contesting the administrative citation shall be given the opportunity to testify and present witnesses and evidence concerning the administrative citation.

(e) The failure of any person requesting a hearing to appear at the administrative citation hearing shall constitute a forfeiture of the fine and a failure to exhaust their administrative remedies.

(f) The administrative citation and any additional documents submitted by the Code Enforcement Officer shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents.

(g) If the Code Enforcement Officer submits an additional written report concerning the administrative citation to the hearing officer/hearing panel for consideration at the hearing, then a copy of this report also shall be served by mail on the person requesting the hearing at least five (5) days prior to the date of the hearing.

(h) At least ten (10) days prior to the hearing, the recipient of an administrative citation shall be provided with copies of the citations, reports and other documents submitted or relied upon by the Code Enforcement Officer. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply.

(i) The hearing officer/hearing panel may continue the hearing and request additional information from the Code Enforcement Officer or the recipient of the administrative citation prior to issuing a written decision. All continuance requests must be made in person at the hearing. When a continuance is granted, a new hearing date shall be set by the hearing officer/hearing panel.

(j) The hearing officer/hearing panel shall have the authority to issue a subpoena. (Ord. 06-1346, § 1; Ord. 13-1511, § 1)

1203.10 Hearing Officer’s/Hearing Panel’s Decision.
(a) After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer/hearing panel shall issue a written decision within ten (10) days of the hearing to uphold or deny the administrative citation and shall list in the decision the reasons for that decision. The decision of the hearing officer/hearing panel shall be final.

(b) If the hearing officer/hearing panel determines that the administrative citation should be upheld, then the fine amount on deposit with the City shall be retained by the City.

(c) If the hearing officer/hearing panel determines that the administrative citation should be canceled and the fine was deposited with the City, then the City shall promptly refund the amount of the deposited fine.

(d) The recipient of the administrative citation shall be served with a copy of the hearing officer’s/hearing panel’s written decision in the manner prescribed by CMC 1307. (Ord. 06-1346, § 1; Ord. 13-1511, § 1)

1203.11 Failure to Pay Fines.
The failure of any person to pay the civil fines assessed by an administrative citation within the time specified on the citation may result in the matter being referred to the Finance Officer to file a claim with the Small Claims Court. Alternatively, the City may pursue any other legal remedy to collect the civil fines. The City may also recover its collections costs according to proof. (Ord. 06-1346, § 1; Ord. 13-1511, § 1)

1203.12 Right to Judicial Review.
Any person aggrieved by an administrative decision of a hearing officer/hearing panel on an administrative citation may obtain review of the administrative decision by filing a petition for review with the Los Angeles County Superior Court, in accordance with the timelines and provisions as set forth in California Government Code Section 53069.4. (Ord. 06-1346, § 1; Ord. 13-1511, § 1)

1203.13 Notices.
(a) The administrative citation and all notices to be given by this Chapter shall be served on the responsible person in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and CMC 1307, where applicable.

(b) Failure to receive any notice specified in this Chapter does not affect the validity of proceedings conducted hereunder. (Ord. 06-1346, § 1; Ord. 13-1511, § 1)

CHAPTER 3
RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
Sections:

§ 1300    Construction – Provisions Governing.

§ 1301    Headings – Effect of.

§ 1302    Reference to Acts or Omissions within This City.

§ 1303    Prohibited Acts, Including Causing, Permitting or Suffering.

§ 1304    Acts by Deputy.

§ 1305    Writing.

§ 1306    Reference Applies to Amendments.

§ 1307    Notices – Services of.

§ 1308    Proof of Notice.

§ 1309    Tenses.

§ 1310    Gender.

§ 1311    Number.

§ 1312    Shall and May.

§ 1313    Oath.

§ 1314    Person.

§ 1315    State.

§ 1316    County.

§ 1317    City.

§ 1318    Office.

§ 1319    Council.

§ 1320    Street.

§ 1321    Owner.

§ 1322    Tenant or Occupant.

§ 1323    Sale.

§ 1324    Goods.

§ 1325    Operate.

§ 1326    Interpretation.

§ 1327    Contracts with Los Angeles County.

1300 Construction – Provisions Governing.
Unless the provisions or the context otherwise require, these general provisions, rules of construction and definitions shall govern the construction of this Code. The provisions of this Code and all proceedings under it are to be construed with a view to effect its objects and to promote justice. (Ord. 2, § 1300)

1301 Headings – Effect of.
Article, Chapter, Section, and subsection headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any Article, Chapter, Section or subsection hereof. (Ord. 2, § 1301)

1302 Reference to Acts or Omissions within This City.
This Code shall refer only to the omission or commission of acts within the territorial limits of the City and to that territory outside of the City over which the City has jurisdiction or control by virtue of the Constitution, or any law, or by reason of ownership or control of property. (Ord. 2, § 1302)

1303 Prohibited Acts, Including Causing, Permitting or Suffering.
Whenever in this Code any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing such act or omission. (Ord. 2, § 1303)

1304 Acts by Deputy.
Whenever, in this Code, a power is granted to or duty is imposed upon a public officer or employee, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by a deputy of such officer or employee or by a person otherwise duly authorized pursuant to law or ordinance, or by an officer of the County of Los Angeles, or by a deputy or employee of such officer when by contract with the City of Carson such officer is obligated and has agreed to perform certain duties on behalf of the City, unless this Code expressly provides otherwise. (Ord. 2, § 1304)

1305 Writing.
“Writing” includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by this Code, it shall be made in writing in the English language unless it is expressly provided otherwise. (Ord. 2, § 1305)

1306 Reference Applies to Amendments.
Whenever a reference is made to any portion of this Code, or to any ordinances of this City, the reference applies to all amendments and additions now or hereafter made. (Ord. 2, § 1306)

1307 Notices – Services of.
Whenever a notice is required to be given under this Code, unless different provisions herein are otherwise specifically made, such notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified, at his last known business or residence address as the same appears in the public records of the City or other records pertaining to the matter to which such notice is directed. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the post office. (Ord. 2, § 1307)

1308 Proof of Notice.
Proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or employee of the City, or by affidavit or declaration under penalty of perjury as provided by the California Code of Civil Procedure, Section 2015.5, of any person over the age of eighteen (18) years, which shows service in conformity with this Code, or other provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned. (Ord. 2, § 1308)

1309 Tenses.
The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future, the present. (Ord. 2, § 1309)

1310 Gender.
The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. (Ord. 2, § 1310)

1311 Number.
The singular number includes the plural, and the plural, the singular. (Ord. 2, § 1311)

1312 Shall and May.
“Shall” is mandatory and “may” is permissive. (Ord. 2, § 1312)

1313 Oath.
“Oath” includes affirmation. (Ord. 2, § 1313)

1314 Person.
“Person” as used in this Code or in any Ordinance or Code adopted hereby, includes any person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business trust, company or corporation, and any municipal, political or governmental corporation, district, body or agency, other than the City of Carson. (Ord. 2, § 1314)

1315 State.
“State” is the State of California. (Ord. 2, § 1315)

1316 County.
“County” is the County of Los Angeles. (Ord. 2, § 1316)

1317 City.
“City” is the City of Carson. (Ord. 2, § 1317)

1318 Office.
The use of the title of any officer, employee, office or official shall mean such officer, employee, or official of the City of Carson, or his duly authorized representatives. (Ord. 2, § 1318; Ord. 72-246, § 1)

1319 Council.
“Council” is the City Council of the City of Carson. (Ord. 2, § 1319)

1320 Street.
“Street” includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, sidewalks, parkways, curbs, or other public ways in this City which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property as designated in any law of this State. (Ord. 2, § 1320)

1321 Owner.
“Owner” applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant, tenant in common, joint tenant, of the whole or a part of such building or land. (Ord. 2, § 1321)

1322 Tenant or Occupant.
“Tenant” or “occupant” as used in reference to a building or land shall include any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. (Ord. 2, § 1322)

1323 Sale.
“Sale” includes any sale, exchange, barter or offer for sale. (Ord. 2, § 1323)

1324 Goods.
“Goods” includes wares or merchandise. (Ord. 2, § 1324)

1325 Operate.
“Operate” includes carry on, keep, conduct or maintain. (Ord. 2, § 1325)

1326 Interpretation.
Whenever used in any ordinance, statute, or other matter which is adopted by reference unless the context requires otherwise, the following references shall be given the following meanings:

1. “County of Los Angeles” shall mean the City of Carson.

2. “Board of Supervisors” shall mean the City Council of the City of Carson.

3. “Unincorporated Territory” shall mean the incorporated territory of the City of Carson.

4. “County” shall mean the City of Carson.

5. “County Officer” shall mean the appropriate or designated officer of the City of Carson.

6. “Public Welfare Commission” shall mean the City Council of the City of Carson. (Ord. 2, § 1326)

7. “Tax Collector” shall mean the Director of Finance of the City of Carson. (Ord. 69-76, § 1)

8. “Director of Planning” or “Planning Director” shall mean the Director of Community Development of the City of Carson. (Ord. 71-151, § 1)

1327 Contracts with Los Angeles County.
The City Council shall have the right to contract with the County of Los Angeles pursuant to the laws of the State of California and the Charter of the County of Los Angeles, for the performance and execution by designated County officials of the rights, powers and duties of officers, officials and employees of the City of Carson. Whenever in this Code, whether set forth in full or by adoption by reference, any power or authority is granted to an officer, official or employee, the power or authority is conferred upon the appropriate officer, official or employee of the City of Carson or the appropriate officer, official or employee of the County of Los Angeles with whom a contract has been entered into. (Ord. 2, § 1327)

CHAPTER 4
MISCELLANEOUS
Sections:

§ 1400    Bonds – Alternate Security.

§ 1401    Collusion or Financial Interests.

1400 Bonds – Alternate Security.
In any case in which a bond in favor of the City is required of any permittee, licensee, subdivider, owner, or other person under any provision or provisions of this Code or in connection with any permit, license, subdivision, exception or other approval, action or regulation validly granted, made or issued by the City Council, Planning Commission or other duly constituted body, agency or officer of the City, such bond shall be issued by a surety company duly authorized to transact surety business in the State of California, and shall be subject to the approval of the City Attorney. Unless the applicable law, permit, license, exception, approval or other action shall otherwise provide, in lieu of such surety bond there may be deposited with the Finance Director savings and loan certificates or shares, or certificates, or other evidence of deposit of funds in an amount equal to the required bond, together with an assignment thereof to the City and an agreement containing substantially the same provisions in favor of the City as the required bond; provided, that any such alternate security, the assignment in favor of the City and such agreement shall in every case be subject to the approval of the City Attorney. Unless applicable law requires otherwise, when a bond is required in connection with a parcel or tract map, a promissory note or agreement secured by a deed of trust of which the City is the beneficiary may be accepted in lieu of such surety bond, subject to the prior approval of the City Attorney and City Council in every case. (Ord. 71-162, § 2; Ord. 93-1009, § 1)

1401 Collusion or Financial Interests.
Any proposal submitted to, and all contracts, agreements or entitlements entered into or granted by and between the City and any person, firm, or entity shall include a provision prohibiting collusion or financial interests in the following language:

Section _____. Warranty and Representation of Non-Collusion. No official, officer, or employee of the City has any financial interest, direct or indirect, in this ______________________ [insert appropriate terminology, e.g., RFP, proposal, bid, contract, agreement, memorandum of understanding], nor shall any official, officer, or employee of the City participate in any decision relating to this ______________________ [insert appropriate terminology, e.g., RFP, proposal, bid, contract, agreement, memorandum of understanding] which may affect his/her financial interest or the financial interest of any corporation, partnership, or association in which (s)he is directly or indirectly interested, or in violation of any corporation, partnership, or association in which (s)he is directly or indirectly interested, or in violation of any State or municipal statute or regulation. The determination of “financial interest” shall be consistent with State law and shall not include interests found to be “remote” or “noninterests” pursuant to Government Code Sections 1091 or 1091.5. [insert appropriate terminology, e.g., contractor, consultant, proposer] warrants and represents that (s)he/it has not paid or given, and will not pay or give, to any third party including, but not limited to, any City official, officer, or employee, any money, consideration, or other thing of value as a result or consequence of obtaining or being awarded any ______________________ [insert appropriate terminology, e.g., contract, agreement, entitlement, memorandum of understanding]. ______________________ [insert appropriate terminology, e.g., contractor, consultant, proposer] further warrants and represents that (s)he/it has not engaged in any act(s), omission(s), or other conduct or collusion that would result in the payment of any money, consideration, or other thing of value to any third party including, but not limited to, any City official, officer, or employee, as a result of consequence of obtaining or being awarded any __________ [insert appropriate terminology, e.g., contract, agreement, entitlement, memorandum of understanding]. ______________________ [insert appropriate terminology, e.g., contractor, consultant, proposer] is aware of and understands that any such act(s), omission(s) or other conduct resulting in the payment of money, consideration, or other thing of value will render this ______________________ [insert appropriate terminology, e.g., contract, agreement, entitlement, memorandum of understanding] void and of no force or effect.

______________________ [insert appropriate terminology, e.g., contractor, consultant, proposer] Initials _____

(Ord. 03-1300, § 1; Ord. 04-1310, § 1; Ord. 04-1310U, § 1)

ARTICLE II
ADMINISTRATION
Chapters:

1    City Administrative Organization

1.5    General Municipal Elections

2    Officers

2.5    Restrictions Pertaining to Former City Officials

3    Compensation and Expenses

3.5    Lobbyist Registration

4    City Offices – Council Chambers – Meetings

5    City Funds and Records

6    Purchasing System

7    Departments, Boards, Commissions

8    Notices and Filings

9    Personnel System

9.5    Fiscal Administration

10    Relocation Appeals Board

11    Discrimination and Harassment Prevention Policy

12    Term Limits for Mayor and City Council

CHAPTER 1
CITY ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION
Sections:

§ 2100    Office of City Manager Established.

§ 2101    Eligibility.

§ 2102    Bond.

§ 2103    Absence.

§ 2104    Removal.

§ 2105    Removal After Municipal Election.

§ 2106    Compensation.

§ 2107    Powers and Duties.

§ 2108    Ex Officio Member of Boards and Commissions.

§ 2109    Duty of Other Officers.

§ 2110    Repealed.

§ 2120    Position of Assistant City Manager Established.

§ 2121    Duties of the Assistant City Manager.

§ 2130    Economic Development Group.

§ 2131    Economic Development General Manager.

§ 2132    Duties of the Economic Development General Manager.

§ 2135    Administrative Services Group.

§ 2136    Administrative Services General Manager.

§ 2137    Duties of the Administrative Services General Manager.

§ 2140    Public Services Group.

§ 2141    Public Services General Manager.

§ 2142    Duties of the Public Services General Manager.

§ 2145    Development Services Group.

§ 2146    Development Services General Manager.

§ 2147    Duties of the Development Services General Manager.

2100 Office of City Manager Established.
The office of City Manager of the City of Carson is hereby created and established. The City Manager shall be appointed by the City Council solely on the basis of his or her executive and administrative qualifications and ability, and shall hold office at the pleasure of the City Council. All references in the Carson Municipal Code and in the ordinances, resolutions, policies, procedures, contracts, agreements, and other official promulgations of the City of Carson to the “City Administrator” shall be deemed to be references to the “City Manager” upon and after the effective date of this Section. (Ord. 2, § 2100; Ord. 96-1096, § 1)

2101 Eligibility.
The permanent City Manager shall, at a minimum, have the following qualifications:

(a) A college degree in Public Administration or related field; and

(b) Five (5) years’ experience as a City Manager or Chief Executive Officer of a County, or equivalent experience as determined by the City Council.

These qualification requirements shall not apply to an acting or interim City Manager.

No person elected to membership on the City Council shall, subsequent to such election, be eligible for appointment as acting, interim or permanent City Manager of the City of Carson until one (1) year has elapsed after such person has ceased to be a member of the City Council. (Ord. 2, § 2101; Ord. 87-789, § 1; Ord. 98-1131U, § 1; Ord. 98-1131, § 1; Ord. 00-1190, § 2)

2102 Bond.
The City Manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond to be approved by the City Council in such sum as may be approved by the City Council which bond shall be conditioned on the faithful performance of the duties imposed on the City Manager as herein prescribed. (Ord. 2, § 2102; Ord. 00-1190, § 2)

2103 Absence.
In case of the absence or disability of the City Manager, the City Council may designate some duly qualified person to perform the duties of the City Manager, during the period of absence or disability of said City Manager, subject, however, to said person’s furnishing a corporate surety bond and conditioned on faithful performance of the duties required to be performed, as set forth in CMC 2102. (Ord. 2, § 2103; Ord. 00-1190, § 2)

2104 Removal.
The City Council shall appoint the City Manager, and may remove him, subject to his contractual rights, if any, by a three (3) member vote. At least thirty (30) days before such removal shall become effective, the City Council shall by a three (3) member vote of its members adopt a preliminary resolution stating the reasons for his removal. By the preliminary resolution, the Council may suspend the Administrator from duty, but shall in any case cause to be paid to him forthwith any unpaid balance of his monthly salary and his monthly salary shall continue to be paid for the next one (1) calendar month following adoption of the preliminary resolution. (Ord. 2, § 2104; Ord. 00-1190, § 2)

2105 Removal After Municipal Election.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Code, the City Manager shall not be removed from office during or within a period of ninety (90) days next succeeding any general municipal election held in said City at which said election a member of the City Council is elected.

The purpose of this provision is to allow any newly elected member of the City Council or a reorganized City Council to observe the actions and ability of the City Manager in the performance of the powers and duties of his office. After the expiration of said ninety (90) days aforementioned, the provisions of the preceding Section as to the removal of the said City Manager shall apply and be effective. (Ord. 2, § 2105; Ord. 00-1190, § 2)

2106 Compensation.
The City Manager shall receive such compensation as the City Council shall from time to time determine and fix, and said compensation shall be a proper charge against such funds of the City as the City Council shall designate.

Said City Manager shall be reimbursed for all sums necessarily incurred or paid by him in the performance of his duties, or incurred when traveling on business pertaining to said City under direction of the City Council; reimbursement shall only be made, however, when a verified itemized claim, setting forth the sums expended for which reimbursement is requested, has been presented to the City Council, and by said City Council duly approved and allowed. (Ord. 2, § 2106; Ord. 00-1190, § 2)

2107 Powers and Duties.
The City Manager shall be the administrative head of the City government under the direction and control of the City Council, except as otherwise provided in this Code. He shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the City which are under the City Manager’s control. In addition to the City Manager’s general powers as administrative head and not as a limitation thereon, it shall be the City Manager’s duty and the City Manager shall have the power and duty:

(a) Enforcement. To see that the laws of the State of California pertaining to the City and all laws and ordinances of the City are duly enforced, and that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the City are faithfully observed.

(b) Groups, Divisions, and Employees.

(1) To control, order, give directions to, appoint, promote, discipline and demote or remove all heads of groups and divisions, except the City Clerk, the City Attorney, and the City Treasurer, and all subordinate officers and employees of the City; to recommend to the City Council the transfer of employees from one (1) group or division to another; and to consolidate or combine offices, positions, groups, divisions or units under his jurisdiction.

(2) The City Manager, upon written request from a City employee, may authorize transfer of said employee from one (1) group or division to another provided the affected group managers and directors consent to the transfer.

(c) Control and Supervise. To exercise control over and to supervise in general all groups and divisions of the City Government and all appointive officers and employees thereof except the City Clerk, the City Attorney, and the City Treasurer.

(d) Attend Meetings. To attend all meetings of the City Council and its committees unless excused therefrom by the City Council.

(e) Recommendations. To recommend to the City Council for adoption such measures and ordinances as he deems necessary or expedient.

(f) Inform and Advise. To keep the City Council at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the City.

(g) Annual Budget. To prepare and submit to the City Council the annual budget and to administer it after adoption.

(h) Salary Plan. To prepare and to recommend to the City Council a salary plan and personnel ordinance.

(i) Purchasing. To purchase or cause to be purchased all supplies for all of the groups or divisions of the City. No expenditure shall be submitted or recommended to the City Council except upon report or approval of the City Manager.

(j) Investigation of Affairs. To make investigations into the affairs of the City, and any group or division thereof, and any contract or the proper performance of any obligation running to the City.

(k) Investigation of Complaints. To investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the government of the City and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in the City, and to see that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the City are faithfully observed.

(l) Supervision of Public Property. To exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks, streets, and other public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of the City Council.

(m) Full-Time Duties. To devote his entire time to the duties and interests of the City.

(n) Reports and Recommendations. To make reports and recommendations as may be desirable or as requested by the City Council.

(o) Offices. To service any appointed office or as head of any group or division within the City Government for which he may be qualified when appointed thereto by the City Council, and to perform the duties thereof at the pleasure of the City Council.

(p) Temporary Employment Contracts. To execute contracts on behalf of the City of the temporary employment of persons to fill the vacant positions in the City service or to provide other temporary services in extraordinary situations. No such contract my be in excess of $6,000 nor for a duration of more than three (3) calendar months. Any extension of such a contract shall be considered as part of the original contract for the purposes of computing the cost and time limitations of this Section.

(q) Management Information Systems and Procedures.

(1) To develop, review, publish and audit City-wide management systems, policies and procedures.

(2) To develop, implement and manage the City computer system in support of City programs and operations. Organize, manage and operate City computing equipment and facilities.

(3) To provide City research and analysis in support of City groups, divisions, programs and functions.

(r) Other Powers and Duties. To perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to the City Manager from time to time by ordinance or resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 2, § 2107; Ord. 77-419, § 1; Ord. 87-816, § 1; Ord. 00-1190, § 2, 3)

2108 Ex Officio Member of Boards and Commissions.
The City Manager shall be an ex officio member of all Boards and Commissions appointed by the Mayor or City Council pursuant to law with a right to participate in all deliberations or actions by his voice but without vote. (Ord. 2, § 2108; Ord. 00-1190, § 2)

2109 Duty of Other Officers.
It shall be the duty of all other officers including the City Clerk, the City Treasurer, and the City Attorney, to cooperate with and assist the City Manager in administering the affairs of the City most efficiently, economically, and harmoniously so far as may be consistent with their duties as prescribed by law and this Code. (Ord. 2, § 2109; Ord. 00-1190, § 2)

2110 Repealed.
Repealed by Ord. 15-1548. (Ord. 2, § 2110; Ord. 00-1190, § 2)

2120 Position of Assistant City Manager Established.
The position of Assistant City Manager of the City of Carson is hereby created and established. The Assistant City Manager shall be appointed by the City Manager, with the approval of the City Council, on an at-will employment basis. (Ord. 00-1190, § 4)

2121 Duties of the Assistant City Manager.
The Assistant City Manager shall be responsible to the City Manager and perform the following duties:

(a) Assist the City Manager with those duties specified in CMC 2107.

(b) Serve as a General Manager as directed by the City Manager.

(c) To act as the City Manager in the absence of the City Manager.

(d) Perform such other duties as the City Manager may from time to time assign. (Ord. 00-1190, § 5)

2130 Economic Development Group.
There is hereby created and established an Economic Development Group which shall consist of such personnel as may be authorized by the City Council, and the following divisions:

(a) Redevelopment Division. This division shall be responsible for the administration of the City’s Redevelopment Agency programs.

(b) Business Development Division. This division shall be responsible for the administration of the City’s business attraction and retention programs.

(c) Employment Development Division. This division shall be responsible for the City’s programs enhancing employment opportunities in the City of Carson.

(d) Housing and Neighborhood Development Division. This division shall be responsible for the Housing and Community Development Block Grant, Mobile Home Rental Review Board, First Time Home Buyers Program, Residential and Commercial Rehabilitation and the Relocation Appeals Board. (Ord. 00-1190, § 6; Ord. 00-1210, § 1)

2131 Economic Development General Manager.
The Economic Development Group shall be headed by an Economic Development General Manager who shall be appointed by the City Manager, with the approval of the City Council, on an at-will employment basis. (Ord. 00-1190, § 7)

2132 Duties of the Economic Development General Manager.
The Economic Development General Manager shall be responsible to the City Manager and shall perform the following duties:

(a) Be administrative head of the Economic Development Group and shall have direct charge of all City personnel assigned to the Economic Development Group.

(b) Advise and assist the City Council, the Economic Development Commission, and the City Manager on all matters relating to economic development.

(c) Plan, organize, staff, direct and control all functions, operations, programs and responsibilities of the Economic Development Group.

(d) Perform such other duties as the City Manager may from time to time assign. (Ord. 00-1190, § 8)

2135 Administrative Services Group.
There is hereby created and established an Administrative Services Group which shall consist of such personnel as may be authorized by the City Council, and the following divisions:

(a) Finance Division (CMC 2720, 2721, 2723).

(b) Human Resources and Risk Management Division (CMC 2797.1, 2797.2, 2797.3). (Ord. 00-1190, § 9)

2136 Administrative Services General Manager.
The Administrative Services Group shall be headed by an Administrative Services General Manager appointed by the City Manager, with the approval of the City Council, on an at-will employment basis. (Ord. 00-1190, § 10)

2137 Duties of the Administrative Services General Manager.
The Administrative Service General Manager shall be responsible to the City Manager and shall perform the following duties:

(a) Be administrative head of the Administrative Services Group and shall have direct charge of all City personnel assigned to the Administrative Services Group.

(b) Advise and assist the City Council and the City Manager on all matters relating to finance and human resources and risk management.

(c) Plan, organize, staff, direct and control all functions, operations, programs and responsibilities of the Administrative Services Group.

(d) Perform such other duties as the City Manager may from time to time assign. (Ord. 00-1190, § 11)

2140 Public Services Group.
There is hereby created and established a Public Services Group which shall consist of such personnel as may be authorized by the City Council, and the following divisions:

(a) Parks and Recreation Division (CMC 2730, 2731, 2732, 2733).

(b) Public Safety Division (CMC 2780, 2781, 2782, 2783, 2784).

(c) Human Services and Fine Arts Division. This Section shall be responsible for the City’s programs dealing with seniors, early childhood, special interest classes, therapeutic recreation and fine arts programs and activities. (Ord. 00-1190, § 12)

2141 Public Services General Manager.
The Public Services Group shall be headed by a Public Services General Manager who shall be appointed by the City Manager, with the approval of the City Council, on an at-will employment basis. (Ord. 00-1190, § 13)

2142 Duties of the Public Services General Manager.
The Public Services General Manager shall be responsible to the City Manager and shall perform the following duties:

(a) Be administrative head of the Public Services Group and shall have direct charge of all City personnel assigned to the Public Services Group.

(b) Advise and assist the City Council and the City Manager on all matters relating to public services.

(c) Plan, organize, staff, direct and control all functions, operations, programs and responsibilities of the Public Services Group.

(d) Perform such other duties as the City Manager may from time to time assign. (Ord. 00-1190, § 14)

2145 Development Services Group.
There is hereby created and established a Development Services Group which shall consist of such personnel as may be authorized by the City Council, and the following divisions:

(a) Public Works Division (CMC 2793, 2794, 2795).

(b) Planning and Environmental Services Division. This division shall be responsible for all of the City’s planning activities, including staff support to the City’s Planning Commission. Environmental Services shall be responsible for the City’s environmental programs including waste management and support of the Environmental Commission.

(c) Building and Safety Division. This division shall be responsible for the review and approval of all building plans for new construction, reconstruction and structural modification; for building rehabilitation; for administration and enforcement of the Building, Plumbing, Electrical and Mechanical Codes. (Ord. 00-1190, § 15; Ord. 00-1210, § 2)

2146 Development Services General Manager.
The Development Services Group shall be headed by a Development Services General Manager appointed by the City Manager, with the approval of the City Council, on an at-will employment basis. (Ord. 00-1190, § 16)

2147 Duties of the Development Services General Manager.
The Development Services General Manager shall be responsible to the City Manager and shall perform the following duties:

(a) Be administrative head of the Development Services Group and shall have direct charge of all City personnel assigned to the Development Services Group.

(b) Advise and assist the City Council and the City Manager on all matters relating to Development Services.

(c) Plan, organize, staff, direct and control all functions, operations, programs and responsibilities of the Development Services Group.

(d) Advise and assist the City Council, the Planning Commission, and the City Manager on all matters relating to planning, zoning and subdivisions.

(e) Advise and assist the City Council, the Environmental Commission and the City Manager on all matters relating to environmental issues, CEQA guidelines, SCAQMD rules, etc.

(f) Coordinate the preparation and adoption of the Comprehensive or Master Plan along with the precise plan studies required to implement the City Policy as described in the Comprehensive or Master Plan.

(g) Be responsible for the administration and enforcement of the zoning and the subdivision ordinances and shall investigate and make recommendations to the Planning Commission and the City Council on all applications for changes of zoning and zoning regulations, variances, lot division maps and subdivision.

(h) Perform such other duties as the City Manager may from time to time assign. (Ord. 00-1190, § 17)

CHAPTER 1.5
GENERAL MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS
Sections:

§ 2150    Election Dates.

§ 2151    Consolidation with Other Elections.

2150 Election Dates.
The City shall hereafter hold its general municipal election on the first Tuesday after the first Monday of November in even-numbered years. (Ord. 16-1585, § 2)

2151 Consolidation with Other Elections.
If an election held pursuant to this Chapter occurs on the same date as any other regular statewide election, such election may be consolidated. In the event of consolidation of elections, the provisions contained in the Elections Code pertaining to the conduct of elections shall apply. (Ord. 16-1585, § 2)

CHAPTER 2
OFFICERS
Sections:

§ 2200    Assessor and Tax Collector.

§ 2201    City Clerk – Duties.

§ 2202    City Clerk – Bond.

§ 2203    City Treasurer – Bond.

§ 2204    Removal of Papers or Documents from the City Offices.

§ 2205    Restriction from Employment.

§ 2206    Enforcement Officer.

§ 2207    Repealed.

2200 Assessor and Tax Collector.
Pursuant to the authority granted by Section 51501 of the Government Code of the State of California, the assessment and tax collection duties performed by the City Assessor and Tax Collector hereby are transferred to the Assessor and Tax Collector of the County of Los Angeles.

1. Same. Abolishment of Offices. The Offices of City Assessor and Tax Collector hereby are abolished.

2. Same. Transfer of Duties. Pursuant to the authority granted by Section 51507 of the Government Code of the State of California, the duties of the City Assessor, other than the assessing of City property and the duties of the Tax Collector, other than the collection of taxes, hereby are transferred to and shall be performed by the City Clerk, or such officer of the County of Los Angeles as may by contract with the City be designated and authorized to perform such duties. (Ord. 2, § 2200)

2201 City Clerk – Duties.
Any application required to be filed with the City or fees required to be paid to the City, pursuant to the provisions of this Code, shall be filed with or paid to the City Clerk, unless otherwise by this Code provided. (Ord. 2, § 2201)

2202 City Clerk – Bond.
The City Clerk upon the entry to his duties of office shall execute a bond to the City in conformity with bonds of Public Officers, and in conformity with the provisions of the Government Code of the State of California relating thereto, in the amount of $50,000. (Ord. 2, § 2202)

2203 City Treasurer – Bond.
The City Treasurer upon the entry of office shall execute a bond to the City in conformity with bonds of Public Officers, and in conformity with the provisions of the Government Code of the State of California relating thereto, in the amount of $50,000. (Ord. 2, § 2203)

2204 Removal of Papers or Documents from the City Offices.
No person unless authorized by the City Clerk, Mayor or City Attorney, shall remove any papers or documents from the City Offices. (Ord. 2, § 2204)

2205 Restriction from Employment.
No person elected or appointed to membership on the City Council of the City of Carson shall, subsequent to such election or appointment, be eligible for employment, or for appointment to any position, with the City for which compensation is paid, until one (1) year has elapsed after such person has ceased to be a member of the City Council. (Ord. 2, § 2205)

2206 Enforcement Officer.
The office of Enforcement Officer of the City of Carson is hereby created and established. The Enforcement Officer shall be appointed by the City Administrator and shall meet the qualifications established for the position by the City Administrator. The Enforcement Officer shall have the authority and duty to enforce the provisions of the Municipal Code and Ordinances of the City of Carson as may be from time to time designated or assigned by the City Administrator. Pursuant to California Penal Code Section 836.5, the Enforcement Officer may make arrests for violations of such Municipal Code or ordinances, and may issue citations for misdemeanors pursuant to California Penal Code Chapter 5C (commencing with Section 853.6) and Carson Municipal Code Article I Chapter 2. The Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for the proper performance of his duties to, and shall be subject to removal by, the City Administrator. (Ord. 72-208, § 1)

2207 Repealed.
Repealed by Ord. 99-1183. (Ord. 90-902, § 1; Ord. 93-1020, § 1)

CHAPTER 2.5
RESTRICTIONS PERTAINING TO FORMER CITY OFFICIALS
Sections:

§ 2250    Findings and Intent.

§ 2251    Definitions.

§ 2252    Restrictions on Activities of Former City Officials.

§ 2253    Application of Requirements.

2250 Findings and Intent.
The City Council finds that one (1) of the ways to attract businesses, residents and talented people to the City is to assure the public that its government is respected for its honesty and integrity and that its decisions are made on the merits and not tainted by actual or potential conflict of interest. The City Council finds that injury to these goals can occur when City officers and other high-ranking employees, upon leaving office or employment, attempt to use that former position for compensation on behalf of private persons and entities in matters pending before the City. In enacting this Chapter, the City Council finds it necessary to impose reasonable restrictions on the ability of former officers and employees to influence the City, or its current officers and employees, for compensation on behalf of other persons and entities so as to avoid appearances of conflicts of interest. (Ord. 00-1198, § 1)

2251 Definitions.
The following words and phrases shall have the following meanings for purposes of this Chapter:

(a) “City administrative body” shall mean every City and Carson Redevelopment Agency Commission, committee and subcommittee, and every City and Carson Redevelopment Agency office, administrative group, division, and department.

(b) “City legislative body” shall mean the City Council and the Carson Redevelopment Agency Board of Directors.

(c) “City official” shall mean any elected official of the City of Carson, any member of the Planning Commission or Mobilehome Park Rental Review Board, every division manager, every department director and every officer or employee of the City or Carson Redevelopment Agency who is required to file a statement of economic interests pursuant to the City’s or Carson Redevelopment Agency’s conflict of interest code, except that the term “City official” shall not include any member of a City commission, committee or subcommittee other than members of the Planning Commission or Mobilehome Park Rental Review Board.

(d) “City proceeding” shall mean any City administrative body or City legislative body process or activity to review, act upon or make any recommendation upon an application or request to grant City or Carson Redevelopment Agency approval or action on any ordinance, rule, regulation, permit, subdivision map, license, franchise, grant, loan, contract, or any amendment or modification thereto.

(e) “Participated” shall mean to have taken part personally and substantially, during the City official’s term of office or employment, in the approval, disapproval, formal written recommendation, rendering advice, investigation, or otherwise in any City proceeding except those City proceedings that exclusively involve the exercise of the City’s legislative power to adopt an ordinance, rule, or regulation. A City official’s abstention from voting on a matter on the basis of a conflict of interest shall not constitute participation hereunder. (Ord. 00-1198, § 1)

2252 Restrictions on Activities of Former City Officials.
(a) Permanent Ban on Certain Activities. No former City official shall, for compensation, act as agent, representative, attorney or otherwise represent any person, as such term is defined in CMC 1314, before any City administrative body, City legislative body, or officers or employees thereof, by making formal or informal appearance, or by making any oral or written communication, if (1) the appearance or communication is for the purpose of affecting or influencing any City proceeding, and (2) the matter is one in which the former City official participated as an officer or employee of the City or Carson Redevelopment Agency.

(b) One (1) Year General Ban. No former City official shall, for one (1) year after leaving office or employment, act as agent, representative, attorney or otherwise represent any person, as such term is defined in CMC 1314, for compensation, before any City administrative body, City legislative body, or officers or employees thereof, by making formal or informal appearance, or by making any oral or written communication, if the appearance or communication is for the purpose of affecting or influencing any City proceeding.

(c) Restriction on Assistance in Representation. No former City official shall, for compensation, aid, advise, counsel, consult, or assist in representing any other person as such term is defined in CMC 1314 (except the City, the Carson Redevelopment Agency or other government entity), in any City proceeding in which the former City official would be prohibited from appearing under subsections (a) or (b) of this Section.

(d) Exceptions. The prohibitions contained in subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this Section shall not apply:

(1) To appearances or communications by former City officials concerning matters of a personal nature, such as obtaining a business license on their own behalf;

(2) To appearances or communications by former City officials at the request of, or on behalf of, the City, the Carson Redevelopment Agency or any other government entity; and

(3) To prevent a former City employee or official from giving testimony to or under oath, or from making statements required to be made under penalty of perjury, to any court. (Ord. 00-1198, § 1)

2253 Application of Requirements.
The requirements imposed by this Chapter shall apply to:

(a) Any City official employed or holding office on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter; and

(b) Any City official whose employment or term of office ended less than one (1) year prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter, except that nothing contained in this Chapter shall prohibit or apply to appearance or communications by such former City official pursuant to a written contract entered into prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter. (Ord. 00-1198, § 1)

CHAPTER 3
COMPENSATION AND EXPENSES
Sections:

§ 2300    Councilmembers – Expenses.

§ 2301    Councilmanic Salaries.

§ 2301.1    Mayoral Salary.

§ 2302    Repealed.

§ 2303    Clerk and Treasurer.

§ 2304    Other Officers and Employees.

2300 Councilmembers – Expenses.
The City Council having found and determined that the minimum expenses actually and necessarily incurred by each City Councilmember in performance of official duty at least equal the sum of $500.00 per month, effective July 1, 1999, reimbursement therefor shall be made by the City at the end of each calendar month without the necessity of presentation of an itemized accounting, receipts, vouchers or other documentation. Such reimbursement for regular actual and necessary expenses does not include expenditures which may be incurred in seminars, municipal officer meetings outside of the City, trips to Sacramento, Washington or other locations on City business, and in order to obtain reimbursement for expenses actually and necessarily incurred in connection with any such trips duly authorized by the City Council, or agency, receipts, vouchers or other itemized accountings shall be presented therefor. (Ord. 2, § 2300; Ord. 37, § 2; Ord. 72-251, § 2; Ord. 74-314, § 2; Ord. 86-764, § 1; Ord. 99-1179, § 2)

2301 Councilmanic Salaries.
A. All members of the City Council shall receive as total wages/compensation for their services a monthly salary which shall be set at the “Low Income Limits” for a family of four (4) as set forth by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development for the area including Los Angeles County for the year 2018, which amounts to $77,500. Total wages/compensation excludes total retirement and health contributions.

B. The City shall not provide any additional compensation to members of the City Council for attendance at other meetings of the City or City-affiliated commissions, committees, subcommittees, and boards of directors. Future adjustments to the salaries of City Council members shall be in accordance with, and limited by, the provisions of law as set forth in Government Code Section 36516 or any successor provision thereto.

C. The Council may, by resolution, establish in detail the total wages/compensation and any non-wage/compensation benefits including, but not limited to, retirement and health contributions. (Ord. 19-1921, § 2)

2301.1 Mayoral Salary.
A. In addition to the total wages/compensation afforded to City Council members in CMC 2301, the Mayor shall, for the performance of mayoral duties, receive an additional amount equal to ten (10) percent of Council member total wages/compensation. Total wages/compensation excludes total retirement and health contributions.

B. This Section shall only apply to a person elected as Mayor by the voters of the City of Carson. Any person serving as acting Mayor or appointed Mayor shall be compensated as described in CMC 2301.

C. The Council may, by resolution, establish in detail the Mayor’s salary discussed in this Section and any non-wage/compensation benefits including, but not limited to, retirement and health contributions. (Ord. 19-1921, § 2)

2302 Repealed.
Repealed by Ord. 73-273. (Ord. 37, § 3)

2303 Clerk and Treasurer.
The City Clerk and City Treasurer shall receive, at stated times, compensation to be fixed by ordinance or resolution of the City Council. Such compensation shall be payable at the same time and in the same manner as salaries are paid to other officers of the City of Carson. This Section shall not be construed so as to preclude compensation of persons holding the office of Clerk or Treasurer for performance of duties other than those of Clerk or Treasurer, in such amounts as the City Council may from time to time determine by resolution. (Ord. 2, § 2301; Ord. 37, § 1; Ord. 69-113, § 1; Ord. 72-210, § 1)

2304 Other Officers and Employees.
The salaries and compensation of other officers and employees of the City shall be fixed and determined by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 2, § 2302; Ord. 37, § 1)

CHAPTER 3.5
LOBBYIST REGISTRATION*
Sections:

§ 2350    Definitions.

§ 2351    Registration – Time.

§ 2352    Registration Fee.

§ 2353    Registration Requirements.

§ 2354    Renewal of Registration.

§ 2355    Registration Statement – Amendment – Termination.

§ 2356    Exemptions.

§ 2357    Duties of the City Clerk.

§ 2358    Enforcement.

§ 2359    Applicability of Other Laws.

*Code reviser’s note: Ordinance No. 04-1306 added these provisions as Chapter 2.5. They have been editorially renumbered to avoid duplication.

2350 Definitions.
Unless otherwise apparent from the context, the words and phrases used in this Chapter are defined as follows:

“City official” means any elected or appointed City officer, member, or employee of any agency, who, as part of his or her official duties, participates in the making of any municipal legislation other than in a purely clerical, secretarial or ministerial capacity. “City official” shall also mean any consultant who qualifies as a public official within the meaning of the Political Reform Act and is required to file a statement of economic interest.

“Lobbyist” means any person who is employed or contracts for economic consideration, other than reimbursement for reasonable travel expenses, to perform lobbying services which shall include communicating directly or through his or her agent with any city official for the purpose of influencing, supporting, promoting, modifying, opposing, delaying or advancing any municipal legislation.

“Municipal legislation” means a resolution, motion, appeal, application, entitlement, contract, petition, hearing, nomination, ordinance, amendment, and any other matter pending, proposed, or which is pending or expected to come before the City Council, a City commission or committee, or any City official, for a decision. However, “municipal legislation” does not include any of the following:

(a) A request for advice or for an interpretation of laws, regulations, City approvals or policies, or a direct response to an enforcement proceeding with the City;

(b) Any ministerial action.

“Person” means an individual, proprietorship, firm, syndicate, committee, labor organization, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, limited liability company, corporation, business trust, or any other organization or group of persons acting in concert. (Ord. 04-1306, § 1)

2351 Registration – Time.
Every lobbyist shall register by filing a registration statement with the City Clerk no later than ten (10) days after accepting employment or contracting to act as a lobbyist in the City. (Ord. 04-1306, § 1)

2352 Registration Fee.
Each lobbyist required to file a registration statement under this Chapter shall be charged a registration fee in the amount to be established by City Council resolution. The fee shall be reasonably related to the costs incurred by the City to administer and enforce the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 04-1306, § 1)

2353 Registration Requirements.
The registration statement of a lobbyist shall contain the following:

(a) If the filer is an individual, the full name, business address and telephone number of the filer and the name and address of the filer’s employer, if any;

(b) If the filer is a person other than an individual, the full name, business address and telephone number of the filer and of each person who will be providing lobbying services on behalf of the lobbyist;

(c) The name and address of each current client for whom lobbying is being or is to be performed;

(d) The existing or proposed municipal legislation the lobbyist is employed to support or oppose, and the client on whose behalf the lobbyist is employed for each lobbying effort;

(e) Any other information required by the City Clerk consistent with the purposes and provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 04-1306, § 1)

2354 Renewal of Registration.
Each registered lobbyist that will be conducting activities which require registration shall renew its registration annually by filing a registration statement with the City Clerk on or before April 1st of each year. Such lobbyist shall be charged a renewal registration fee in the amount of $25.00 or such other fee as may be designated by the Council from time to time, except that lobbyists who file their initial registration within thirty (30) days of April 1st shall not be required to renew their registration. (Ord. 04-1306, § 1)

2355 Registration Statement – Amendment – Termination.
If any changes occur in any of the information contained in a registration statement, an appropriate amendment should be filed with the City Clerk by the tenth day of the month following the month in which the change occurred. However, if the change includes the addition of the name of a client, the registration statement of the lobbyist shall be amended and filed to show that change prior to the lobbyist engaging in lobbying services as set forth in this Chapter. Lobbyists which cease all activity which required registration shall file a notice of termination within twenty (20) days after such cessation. (Ord. 04-1306, § 1)

2356 Exemptions.
The provisions of this Chapter are not applicable to:

(a) Any public official acting in his or her official capacity, and any government employee acting within the scope of his or her employment;

(b) Any newspaper or other periodical of general circulation, book publisher, radio or television station (including any individual who owns, publishes, or is employed by any such newspaper or periodical, radio or television station) which in the ordinary course of business publishes news items, editorials, or other comments, or paid advertisement, which directly or indirectly urge action upon municipal legislation;

(c) A person when representing a bona fide church or religious society solely for the purpose of protecting the public’s right to practice the doctrines of such church;

(d) A person when representing a not-for-profit charitable, religious, civic, patriotic or community service organization, granted tax exempt status under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code;

(e) A person whose activity is limited to meeting with City staff or appearing at public hearings on behalf of an application for a permit or license to provide translation services or to present architectural or engineering plans or drawings. (Ord. 04-1306, § 1)

2357 Duties of the City Clerk.
The information provided in registration statements filed pursuant to this Chapter shall be compiled by the City Clerk and shall be forwarded to the City Council and City Manager within ten (10) days of receipt of the statements.

In May of each year, the City Clerk shall file an annual report with the City Council, compiling the information filed by lobbyists who reregister before April 1st of each year.

All reports and statements filed with the City Clerk under this Chapter shall be preserved by the City Clerk for a period of five (5) years from the date of filing. Such reports and statements shall constitute part of the public records of the Clerk’s office and shall be open to public inspection. (Ord. 04-1306, § 1)

2358 Enforcement.
The City Attorney may institute such legal action at such time as he or she deems necessary to prosecute, enjoin, or to redress a violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 04-1306, § 1)

2359 Applicability of Other Laws.
Nothing in this Chapter shall exempt any person from, or excuse such person’s noncompliance with, applicable provisions of any other laws of the State or any other jurisdiction. (Ord. 04-1306, § 1)

CHAPTER 4
CITY OFFICES – COUNCIL
CHAMBERS – MEETINGS
Sections:

§ 2400    Council Chambers.

§ 2401    City Offices.

§ 2402    City Offices – Hours.

§ 2403    Council Meetings.

§ 2404    Presenting Matters to Council – Agendas.

§ 2405    Order of Business.

§ 2406    Presiding Officer.

§ 2407    Duties of Presiding Officer.

§ 2408    Quorum.

§ 2409    Rules of Debate and Procedure.

§ 2410    Addressing the Council.

§ 2411    Addressing Council After Motion Is Made.

§ 2412    Manner of Addressing Council.

§ 2413    Decorum.

§ 2414    Voting Required – Disqualification.

§ 2415    Roll Call Vote.

§ 2416    Councilmembers to Avoid Improper Consideration of Pending or Contemplated Matters.

§ 2417    Preparation and Introduction of Ordinances, Resolutions and Other Matters.

§ 2418    Robert’s Rules of Order.

§ 2419    Prohibited Mass Mailings by Councilmembers.

§ 2450    Code of Ethics.

§ 2460    Incompatible Office.

2400 Council Chambers.
The Council Chambers of the City Council of the City of Carson shall be located at 701 East Carson Street. Meetings of the City Council shall be held in the Council Chambers, except that meetings, after commencement in said Council Chambers, may be recessed by majority vote of the Council and public announcement then and there given to continue at a specified place within the City limits when necessary or convenient for the transaction of Council business; provided, that any such meeting shall be concluded, or any adjournment ordered, in said Council Chambers. (Ord. 2, § 2400; Ord. 14, § 1; Ord. 69-63, § 1; Ord. 76-376U, § 1)

2401 City Offices.
The offices of all agencies, departments, officers and employees of the City shall be located at 701 East Carson Street in the City of Carson. The location of City offices may be changed by resolution of the City Council or by amendment of this Section. (Ord. 2, § 2401; Ord. 41, § 1; Ord. 69-105, § 1; Ord. 69-108, § 1; Ord. 76-367U, § 1)

2402 City Offices – Hours.
The City offices of the City of Carson shall be closed on all official State holidays as listed in Section 6700 of the California Government Code. Said City offices shall be open to the public for business on all other days of the year except Fridays, Saturdays, and any other days established by Resolution of the City Council. The City office hours shall be from 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. (Ord. 2, § 2402; Ord. 69-108, § 2; Ord. 90-930, § 1; Ord. 91-960U, § 1; Ord. 91-960, § 1)

2403 Council Meetings.
A. Regular Meetings. Regular meetings of the City Council shall be held on the first and third Tuesdays of each month during the months of February through November. For the month of January, regular meetings shall be held on the second and fourth Tuesdays of the month. For the month of December, only one regular meeting shall be held, on the first Tuesday of the month. All regular meetings are to be held at the hour of 5:00 p.m. If any such day is on a holiday, then the meeting shall be held on the next succeeding day which is not a holiday. If any such day is a Statewide election day or a regular or special municipal election day, then the meeting shall be held on the next succeeding day or on such other day as determined by the City Council. During the second City Council meeting of January of each year the City Council shall select one of its members to serve as Mayor Pro Tempore. The Mayor Pro Tempore shall serve for a term of one (1) year from the date of selection, shall not serve consecutive terms of office, and shall be selected on a rotating basis with each succeeding Mayor Pro Tempore being selected on the basis of the Councilmember with the longest continuous service on the City Council.

B. Special Meetings. The Council shall hold special meetings when called by order of the Mayor, or in the absence of the Mayor by the Mayor Pro Tempore, or by a majority of the Council. All meetings shall be in the Council Chambers or the adjacent Council Conference Room in the City Hall unless otherwise determined by the Council; any other place of meeting shall be shown in the notice of meeting.

C. Closed Sessions. Closed sessions held pursuant to law shall be subject to the provisions of CMC 2407, 2408, 2409, 2413(A), 2414, and all other applicable provisions of this Chapter. Prior to holding a closed session regarding pending litigation, a statement shall be made as to which subdivision of Government Code Section 54956.9 it is pursuant. Upon the Council’s return to the open meeting following the closed session, the presiding officer or designee shall publicly announce the action taken in the closed session terminating or disposing of the matter acted upon in accordance with the action and direction of the Council, except closed sessions regarding pending litigation after which the City Attorney shall prepare and submit a memorandum pursuant to Government Code 54956.9.

D. Notice of Meeting. Notice of all special meetings shall be given by the City Clerk to all members of the Council, to the City Attorney, to the City Administrator and to representatives of all newspapers and radio stations which have so requested in writing, and a copy thereof shall be posted in one (1) public place designated by the City Council that is freely accessible to members of the public. All such notices shall be given in writing at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the time of such meeting and shall specify the time and place of the special meeting and the business to be transacted. Any such notice may be waived by a member of the City Council, by filing with the City Clerk a written waiver of notice at or prior to the time of the meeting. Such waiver may be given by telegram. Attendance at the time and place specified shall be deemed a waiver of notice of such meeting. (Ord. 2, § 2403; Ord. 36, § 1; Ord. 69-63, § 2; Ord. 70-131; Ord. 72-236, §§ 1, 2; Ord. 77-400, § 1; Ord. 77-415, § 1; Ord. 79-462, § 1; Ord. 87-818, § 1; Ord. 95-1053, § 1; Ord. 98-1144, § 1; Ord. 01-1226, § 1; Ord. 07-1394, § 4; Ord. 17-1641, § 1; Ord. 18-1802*, §§ 1, 2)

*Code reviser’s note: Ord. 18-1802 inadvertently omitted revisions from Ordinance 17-1641. The code has been updated to include the intended amendments from both Ordinances 17-1641 and 18-1802.

2404 Presenting Matters to Council – Agendas.
(a) City Manager and Mayor generally have the authority to set the agenda subject to relevant provisions of the Ralph M. Brown Act and this Section.

(i) Any Councilmember or department head may request that the City Manager place an item on the agenda by making such request in writing to the City Manager before 4:00 p.m. on the Monday of the week preceding the Council meeting.

(ii) The City Manager shall meet and confer with the Mayor to discuss the items proposed for the Council meeting agenda. The Mayor shall review and finalize the agenda by 12:00 p.m. on the Tuesday of the week preceding the Council meeting. In the Mayor’s absence, the Mayor Pro Tem may proceed pursuant to this subsection (a)(ii).

(iii) If significant staff work is involved with the proposed item, or for any other reason the City Manager or Mayor does not deem appropriate the placement of an item on a requested agenda, the City Manager shall, by 6:00 p.m. on the Tuesday of the week preceding the Council meeting, consult the Councilmember or department head who requested the proposed item as to whether a modification can be made to the request, or as to whether the item may be placed on a subsequent agenda.

After such consultation, if agreement cannot be reached, the City Manager shall bring the proposed item to an agenda under “Council Member Requests to Add Items to Future Agendas.” If the Council decides by a two-thirds (2/3) majority vote of Councilmembers present at that meeting to add such item to the agenda, then the City Manager shall add such item to the agenda for either the next regular meeting, or at a meeting determined by a majority vote of Councilmembers present at that meeting.

(b) City Manager shall prepare an agenda in compliance with all relevant provisions of the Ralph M. Brown Act, and the City Manager shall also:

(i) Distribute a preliminary draft of the agenda to each member of the Council by 9:00 a.m. on Wednesday of the week preceding the Council meeting.

(ii) Deliver to members of the Council a complete copy of such final agenda no later than 6:00 p.m. on the Thursday preceding the Council meeting.

(c) At a Council meeting, any member of the Council may, when an agenda item is reached during the meeting, request that such item be continued to the next regular meeting or to an adjourned regular meeting, so as to allow additional evaluation, study and staff discussion. As a matter of courtesy to that Councilmember, the Council has traditionally honored that request. However, a majority of the members of the entire Council may, when deemed to be in the interest of the majority, act on any item listed on an agenda notwithstanding the request for continuance by an individual Councilmember. (Ord. 15-1562, § 1; Ord. 18-1832, § 2)

2405 Order of Business.
A. Attendance at Council Meetings and Order of Business. All meetings of the City Council shall be open to the public except as otherwise provided by law. Promptly at the hour set on the day of each regular or special meeting, the members of the Council, and unless excused by the City Council, the City Manager, the City Clerk, and the City Attorney, shall take their assigned stations in the Council Chambers and on the day of each regular meeting, the business of the Council shall be taken up for consideration and disposition in the order established by resolution of the City Council.

B. Meetings to Conclude by 11:00 P.M.

i. All regular or adjourned meetings of the City Council shall conclude not later than 11:00 p.m.

ii. The order of business for the regular or adjourned meetings of the City Council shall be as established by resolution, as discussed in subsection (A) of this Section, except that, during that portion of each City Council meeting that includes an item to approve the agenda, the City Manager shall, at that point in the agenda, orally advise the City Council of any time-sensitive item(s) included on such agenda, and the City Council shall advance any such item(s) deemed to be time-sensitive and requiring a decision that night, to that place on such agenda immediately following the “consent calendar” items on such agenda.

iii. Except by majority vote of the entire City Council, agenda items not concluded before 10:45 p.m. shall be automatically continued to the next regular or adjourned City Council meeting or a special City Council meeting called in accordance with this Code or State law.

iv. Commencing not later than 10:45 p.m. of every regular or adjourned City Council meeting, the City Council shall commence those agenda items calling for oral communications from Councilmembers, City staff, and memorial adjournments, which communications shall conclude not later than 11:00 p.m.

v. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as affecting the right any member of the public may have to speak on an item in accordance with this Code or State law.

C. Oral Communications. The oral communications portion of the agenda is the point in the Council meeting where individuals or groups may make brief comments regarding items that are not on the agenda but are within the subject matter jurisdiction of the Council. Although individual Councilmembers may provide brief responses to the oral communications, the Council may not discuss or take any action on matters raised during oral communications except as provided by State law and CMC 2404(c). (Ord. 72-236, § 2; Ord. 87-818, § 1; Ord. 90-920U, § 2; Ord. 90-920, § 2; Ord. 01-1226, § 2; Ord. 01-1234, § 1; Ord. 07-1390, § 1; Ord. 12-1489, § 1)

2406 Presiding Officer.
The Mayor, or in his absence the Mayor Pro Tempore, shall take the chair precisely at the hour appointed for the meeting, and shall immediately call the Council to order. In the absence of the Mayor and the Mayor Pro Tempore, the City Clerk or Deputy City Clerk shall call the Council to order, whereupon a temporary chairman shall be selected by the members of the Council present. Upon the arrival of the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tempore, the temporary chairman shall immediately relinquish the chair upon the conclusion of the business immediately before the Council. (Ord. 72-236, § 2)

2407 Duties of Presiding Officer.
The Presiding Officer shall open all regular and special meetings of the Council by taking the chair and calling the members to order. He shall state each question before the Council in the order in which it is to be acted upon, recognize members entitled to the floor, state and put to vote all questions which are regularly moved or which arise in the course of the proceedings and announce the decision of the Council on all subjects. He shall decide all questions of order, subject, however, to an appeal to the Council, in which event a majority vote of the Council shall govern and conclusively determine such question of order. The Presiding Officer shall authenticate, by his signature, when necessary, all the acts, orders, and proceedings of the Council. (Ord. 72-236, § 2)

2408 Quorum.
A majority of all the members elected to the Council shall constitute a quorum at any regular or special meeting of the Council. When there is no quorum, the Mayor Pro Tempore or any member of the Council shall adjourn such meeting, or if no member of the Council is present, the City Clerk shall adjourn the meeting. (Ord. 72-236, § 2)

2409 Rules of Debate and Procedure.
A. The Presiding Officer or such other member of the Council as may be presiding may move, second and debate from the chair subject only to such limitations of debate as are by these rules imposed on all members and shall not be deprived of any of the rights and privileges of a Councilman by reason of his acting as the Presiding Officer. A Councilmember may not speak more than once or for more than five (5) minutes during the consideration of any question during the debate thereon, except for a motion for reconsideration. If a proper motion for reconsideration is before the Council, each Councilmember shall be granted an additional five (5) minutes to address the motion for reconsideration and, if approved, the motion shall then be immediately reconsidered. Upon reconsideration, a new period of five (5) minutes will be afforded each Councilmember to speak on the motion being reconsidered. A Councilmember may not yield to any other member the time for which he or she is entitled to speak. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if a request is made for the maker of a motion to repeat or clarify the motion, the Councilmember may speak briefly and only for the purpose of repeating or clarifying the motion.

B. Getting the Floor. Every Councilmember desiring to speak shall request recognition by means of the electronic queuing system provided in the Council chambers, and every Councilmember shall be recognized to speak in the exact order in which they have indicated their request to speak on the electronic queuing system. Upon recognition by the Presiding Officer, every Councilmember shall confine himself to the question under debate, avoiding all personalities and indecorous language.

C. Interruptions. A member, once recognized, shall not be interrupted when speaking, unless it be to call him to order, or as herein otherwise provided. If a member, while speaking, be called to order, he shall cease speaking until the question of order be determined, and, if in order, he shall be permitted to proceed.

D. Closing Debate. Debate shall be closed by a motion calling for the “previous question.” When seconded, such motion is undebatable and shall be immediately put to a vote. If the motion fails, debate may be reopened. If the motion is approved by a majority of those present and voting, there shall be no more debate on that subject.

E. Motion. A motion shall have a second before it is properly before the City Council for debate.

F. Motion to Reconsider. A motion to reconsider any action taken by the Council may be made on the day the vote to be considered was taken or at the next succeeding meeting or at a recessed or adjourned meeting thereof. Such motion must be made by one (1) of the prevailing side, but may be seconded by any member; it may be made at any time and have precedence over all other motions; it shall be debatable. After a motion for a reconsideration has once been acted on, no other motion for a reconsideration thereof shall be made without unanimous consent of the Council.

G. Motions to Be Stated by Presiding Officer. When a motion is made, it shall be stated by the Presiding Officer before debate. Any member may demand that it be put in writing.

H. Withdrawal of Motion. A motion may be withdrawn by the mover with the consent of the seconder of the motion.

I. Amendments. It shall be in order to amend a motion at any time that it is properly before the Council but not after a call for the previous question has been moved. A motion to amend an amendment is in order, but one to amend an amendment to an amendment shall not be in order. One (1) amendment modifying the intention of a motion shall be in order, but an amendment on a different matter shall not be in order. One (1) substitute motion on the same subject is acceptable; provided, that a substitute motion which merely states the converse of the main motion shall not be in order. There shall be only one (1) amendment or one (1) substitute motion to a main motion pending at any time. If an amended or substitute motion fails, the main motion shall then be considered by the Council. If the main motion fails, a new main motion may be made to which only one (1) amendment or substitute motion shall be permitted.

J. Motion to Lay on Table. A motion to lay on the table shall preclude all amendments or debate of the subject under consideration. If the motion shall prevail, the consideration of the subject may be resumed during the Council meeting in which the motion was adopted only upon a motion of a member voting with the majority and with the consent of two-thirds (2/3) of the members present. Notwithstanding CMC 2404, if a motion to lay on the table is adopted and a motion to resume is not adopted during the Council meeting in which the motion to lay on the table was adopted, the matter may not be placed on a future agenda unless a member of the Council places an item on an agenda to remove the matter from the table, and a majority of the Council approve placing the matter on the agenda at a duly noticed public meeting in compliance with all laws.

K. Motion to Postpone. A motion to postpone indefinitely is fully debatable and if the same is adopted, the principal question shall be declared lost. Notwithstanding CMC 2404, if a motion to postpone indefinitely is adopted, the matter may not be placed on a future agenda unless a member of the Council places an item on an agenda to take up the matter postponed, and a majority of the Council approve placing the matter on the agenda at a duly noticed public meeting in compliance with all laws. A motion to postpone to a definite time is amendable and debatable as to propriety and time set.

L. Motion to Refer. A motion to refer is not debatable except as to time or place of the referral.

M. Motion to Rescind. A motion to rescind an action if permissible pursuant to law may be made at any time, is debatable, and may be amended. Such motion must be made by one (1) of the prevailing side, but may be seconded by any member.

N. Motion to Adjourn. A motion to adjourn is not debatable and is in order at any time except as follows:

a. When repeated without intervening business or discussion.

b. When made as an interruption of a member while speaking.

c. When the previous question has been ordered.

d. While a vote is being taken.

A motion to adjourn is debatable only as to the time to which the meeting is to be adjourned.

O. Remarks of Councilmembers. Unless otherwise directed by the Presiding Officer, remarks and/or debate shall not be entered into the minutes. A Councilmember may request the privilege of having an abstract of his or her statement on any subject under consideration by the Council entered into the minutes. If the Council consents thereto by a majority vote, such abstract shall be entered into the minutes.

P. Council Action on Certain Routine, Procedural and Unanimous Consent Matters. When a motion has been duly made and seconded on a matter which is routine or procedural, the Council unanimously concurs therein and a roll call vote is not required by law or this Code nor requested by any member of the Council, the Presiding Officer may state in substance: “There be no objection, it is so ordered.” No objection being stated, the action shall be deemed to have been taken by unanimous voice vote of the Council and the City Clerk shall record such action in the minutes of the meeting.

Q. Brief Explanation. The Presiding Officer may explain the order of business when the motion pending before the Council is not debatable. The explanation may not consume more than two (2) minutes.

R. Councilmember Oral Communications. Oral communications by members of the City Council to report on their intergovernmental committee, board, or commission assignments or other oral reports on their activities as a member of the City Council shall be limited to no more than five (5) minutes per Council meeting. (Ord. 72-236, § 2; Ord. 07-1394, § 2; Ord. 09-1438, § 1; Ord. 12-1496, § 1; Ord. 12-1497, § 1; Ord. 12-1505, § 1; Ord. 13-1514, § 1)

2410 Addressing the Council.
Any person desiring to address the Council shall first secure the permission of the Presiding Officer to do so; provided, however, that under the following headings of business, any qualified and interested person may address the Council upon obtaining the recognition of the Presiding Officer:

A. Written Communications. Interested parties or their authorized representatives may direct written communications to the Council in regard to matters then under discussion.

B. Oral Communications. Members of the public may address the Council by oral communications on any matter within the subject matter jurisdiction of the City Council, at such place in the agenda as may be designated by the City Council; provided, however, that preference shall be given to those persons who notify the City Administrator in advance of their desire to speak in order that the same may appear on the agenda of the Council. The City Council may limit the time allowed for each member of the public to address the Council as reasonably necessary to enable the Council to conduct its business.

C. Public Hearings. When the Presiding Officer opens the public testimony portion of a public hearing item, interested persons or their authorized representatives may present evidence and address the Council extemporaneously, or by reading protests, petitions, or communications in regard to matters then under consideration, subject at all times to the maintenance of order by the Presiding Officer and compliance with the time limits set forth in CMC 2412 unless otherwise specified by the Presiding Officer. All public testimony on public hearing items shall be given during the public testimony portion of the public hearing item. After the close of the public testimony portion for the public hearing, no member of the general public shall be entitled to speak or present any other evidence or communications on the item. (Ord. 72-236, § 2; Ord. 87-818, § 1; Ord. 01-1226, § 3)

2411 Addressing Council After Motion Is Made.
When a motion is pending before the Council, no person other than a Councilmember shall address the Council without first securing the permission of the presiding officer to do so. (Ord. 72-236, § 2)

2412 Manner of Addressing Council.
A. Protocol. Each person desiring to address the Council is requested to fill out a speaker card and to give that card to the City Clerk. The use of speaker cards is for the purpose of ensuring that a speaker’s name is entered correctly in the minutes of the Council meeting. Speaker cards are to be submitted to the City Clerk prior to the commencement of the meeting but no later than the point in the meeting when the item about which the speaker desires to speak is reached on the agenda and announced by the Presiding Officer. When his or her name has been called by the Presiding Officer, he or she shall step up to the audience podium, state his or her name in an audible tone of voice for the record, and, unless further time is granted by the Council, shall limit his or her comments to three (3) minutes. Except as authorized in subsection B of this Section, no person shall be permitted to yield additional time to the speaker. No person, other than the Council and the person having the floor, shall be permitted to enter into any discussion, either directly or through a member of the Council, without the permission of the Presiding Officer. No question shall be asked a Councilmember except through the Presiding Officer.

B. Spokesperson for Group of Persons. Whenever any group of persons wishes to address the Council on the same subject matter, it shall be proper for the Presiding Officer to request that a spokesperson be chosen by the group to address the Council. When a spokesperson is chosen, that spokesperson may be yielded time from up to three (3) additional persons who have turned in speaker cards to the City Clerk, unless a greater or lesser time to speak is designated by the Presiding Officer. In such cases, the spokesperson shall use the additional time to present additional data or argument from the group so as to limit the number of persons required to speak and avoid unnecessary repetition. (Ord. 72-236, § 2; Ord. 01-1226, § 4; Ord. 11-1465, § 1)

2413 Decorum.
A. By Councilmembers. While the Council is in session, the members must preserve order and decorum, and a member shall not, by conversation or otherwise, delay or interrupt the proceedings or the peace of the Council nor disturb any member while speaking, nor refuse to obey the orders of the Council or the Presiding Officer, except as may be otherwise provided.

B. By Other Persons. Any person making personal, impertinent, or slanderous remarks or who shall become boisterous while addressing the Council may be forthwith, by the Presiding Officer, barred from further audience at said meeting before the Council, unless permission to continue be granted by a majority vote of the Council.

C. Enforcement. Any law enforcement officer on duty, or whose services are commanded by the Presiding Officer, shall be Sergeant-at-Arms of the Council meetings. He, or they, shall carry out all orders and instructions given by the Presiding Officer for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum at the Council meeting. Upon instructions of the Presiding Officer, it shall be the duty of the Sergeant-at-Arms, or any of them present, to place any person who violates the order and decorum of the meeting under arrest, and cause him to be prosecuted under the provisions of this Code, the complaint to be signed by the Presiding Officer. (Ord. 72-236, § 2)

2414 Voting Required – Disqualification.
Any disqualified member shall openly state or have the Presiding Officer announce the fact and nature of such disqualification in open meeting, and shall not be subject to further inquiry.

A member who is disqualified by conflict of interest in any matter shall not remain in the Chamber during the debate and vote on such matter, but shall request and be given the Presiding Officer’s permission to absent himself. A member stating such disqualification shall not be counted as part of a quorum and shall be considered absent for the purpose of determining the outcome of any vote on such matter. Any member having a remote interest in any matter as provided in the Government Code shall divulge the same before voting. (Ord. 72-236, § 2)

2415 Roll Call Vote.
A roll call vote shall be taken upon the adoption of all ordinances and be entered upon the minutes of the proceedings of the Council. Upon request of any member, a roll call vote shall be taken and recorded on any vote. Whenever a recorded or roll call vote of the Council is in order, the City Clerk shall call the names of the members in alphabetic order, with the Mayor voting last in every case. (Ord. 72-236, § 2)

2416 Councilmembers to Avoid Improper Consideration of Pending or Contemplated Matters.
A. Fair Hearings. Members of the Council shall exercise care to avoid discussion or listening to a discussion of the facts of any matter which by law requires evidence to be taken at a public hearing and findings of fact to be made by the City Council while such matter is pending before the City Council, except in a public hearing before the Council. The Council shall exercise like care as to any such matter which is pending before an agency of the City and which is expected to be the subject of public hearing by the City Council.

B. Open Mind. No member of the Council shall pledge or promise to vote in a certain way on any such matter. (Ord. 72-236, § 2)

2417 Preparation and Introduction of Ordinances, Resolutions and Other Matters.
A. Preparation of Ordinances. All ordinances shall be prepared in final form by the City Attorney. Ordinances may be requested of the City Attorney by a majority vote of the Council, or requested by any member of the City Council or by the City Administrator. In addition the City Attorney may recommend ordinances on his own initiative.

B. Prior Approval of Ordinances. All ordinances, resolutions and contract documents shall, before presentation to the Council, have been approved as to form and legality by the City Attorney or his authorized representative, and, where there are substantive matters of administration involved, shall have been examined and approved as to such matters by the City Administrator or his authorized representative.

C. Introduction and Adoption of Ordinances and Resolutions. All ordinances shall be read in full either at the time of introduction or passage except when, after reading by title, further reading is waived by regular motion and adopted by majority vote of all Councilmembers present.

Resolutions which have been prepared in writing and distributed to the members of the Council need not be read in full nor shall a motion waiving further reading be required after reading of the resolution number and title except resolutions for the payment of money. Any member may call for a roll call vote or demand that a resolution be read in full.

When a resolution has not been prepared in advance, the resolution may be presented verbally in motion form together with the instruction for the written preparation and later execution. (Ord. 72-236, § 2; Ord. 96-1086, § 1)

2418 Robert’s Rules of Order.
In all matters and things not otherwise provided for herein, the proceedings of the Council shall be governed by “Robert’s Rules of Order,” 1990 (10th) Edition. However, no ordinance, resolution, proceedings or other action of the City Council shall be invalidated, or the legality thereof otherwise affected, by the failure or omission to observe or follow said Rules. Except as specifically provided elsewhere in this Code, any rule of procedure affecting the order of business may be suspended with the approval of a majority of members of the entire City Council. (Ord. 2, § 2405; Ord. 72-236, § 2; Ord. 96-1086, § 2; Ord. 07-1394, § 3)

2419 Prohibited Mass Mailings by Councilmembers.
(a) No member of the City Council nor Mayor shall cause to be designed, produced, printed, copied, or distributed, by any means, to any person’s residence, place of employment or business, or post office box, any newsletter, brochure, flyer, letter, or other mailing at City expense, excluding any single letter sent in response to an unsolicited request, without the prior approval of the City Council.

(b) City expense shall be defined as any expenditure of City funds, any use of City staff time or City facilities or equipment to design, produce, print, or copy any newsletter, brochure, flyer, poster, letter, or other mailing. (Ord. 18-1801, § 2)

2450 Code of Ethics.
A. Purpose. The City of Carson hereby adopts this Code of Ethics for members of the City Council and the City’s commissions, boards and committees (collectively “members”) to ensure the citizens of the City receive fair, ethical and accountable government, with adherence to both the spirit and the letter of the law affecting governmental operations. Nothing in the Code of Ethics is intended to limit or otherwise infringe on the First Amendment rights of free speech or association of public officials or members of the public, or to conflict with any Federal, State or local laws.

B. Distribution of Code of Ethics. This Code of Ethics shall be included in the regular orientations for candidates for City Council, application packets to commissions, boards, and committees, and given to newly elected and appointed officials. Members entering office shall sign a statement affirming they read and understood the City of Carson Code of Ethics. In addition, the Code of Ethics shall be periodically reviewed and updated by the City Council upon recommendations from commissions, boards, committees, and the citizens of Carson.

C. Adherence to Principles. All members shall strive to adhere to the principles set forth in the Code of Ethics. If it appears that any member has not or is not adhering to the principles in this Code of Ethics, a hearing may be held by the City Council to discuss whether action should be taken. No hearing may be held, unless: (1) the hearing is requested by two members of the City Council, and (2) the person who is the subject of the hearing is given thirty (30) days’ advance notice of the hearing, which notice shall describe the facts and reason for the hearing. The person who is the subject of the hearing shall be afforded all appropriate due process, including a meaningful opportunity to respond to allegations before any action is taken pursuant to subsection (D) of this Section.

D. Actions Against Members. If, after a hearing described in subsection (C) of this Section, the Council wishes to take action in response to any violation of the Code of Ethics, such action may include a public admonishment, a resolution of censure, removal of the member from the commission, board or committee on which he or she serves (does not apply to members of the Council), or any other action reasonably related to ensuring that member does not engage in future Code of Ethics violations; provided further, that such action is consistent with all Federal, State and local laws. The Council may adopt a policy of progressive remedies starting with warnings and increasing to more serious penalties to deter or prevent future violations.

E. Code of Ethics. The following principles shall constitute the Carson Code of Ethics, applicable to all members of the City Council and the City’s commissions, boards and committees:

1. Act in the Public Interest. Recognizing that stewardship of the public interest must be their primary concern, members will work for the common good of the people of Carson and not for any private or personal interest, and they will assure fair and equal treatment of all persons, claims and transactions coming before the Carson City Council, commissions, boards and committees.

2. Comply with the Law. Members shall comply with the laws of the nation, the State of California and the City of Carson in the performance of their public duties. These laws include, but are not limited to: the United States and California constitutions; the Carson Municipal Code; laws pertaining to conflicts of interest, election campaigns, financial disclosures, employer responsibilities, and open processes of government. Members shall also comply with all applicable City policies and procedures.

3. Conduct of Members. The professional and personal conduct of members must be above reproach and should take steps to avoid even the appearance of impropriety. Members shall refrain from abusive conduct, personal charges or verbal attacks upon the character or motives of other members of the Council, commissions, boards and committees, the staff or the public.

4. Respect for Process. Members shall perform their duties in accordance with the processes and rules of order established by the City Council and commissions, boards, and committees governing the deliberation of public policy issues, meaningful involvement of the public, and implementation of policy decisions of the City Council by City staff.

5. Conduct of Public Meetings. Members shall prepare themselves for public issues, listen courteously and attentively to all public discussions before the body, and focus their attentions on the business at hand. They shall refrain from interrupting other speakers, making personal comments not germane to the business of the body, or interfering with the orderly conduct of meetings.

6. Decisions Based on Merit. Members shall base their decisions on the merits and substance of the matter at hand, rather than on unrelated considerations.

7. Communication. Members shall publicly share substantive information that is relevant to a matter under consideration by the Council or commissions, boards, and committees, which they may have received from sources outside of the public decision-making process.

8. Conflict of Interest. In order to assure their independence and impartiality on behalf of the common good, members shall not use their official positions to influence government decisions in which they have a material financial interest, or where they have an organizational responsibility or personal relationship which may give the appearance of a conflict of interest.

In accordance with the law, members who are subject to the City’s Conflict Code shall, in accordance with the Conflict Code, disclose investments, interests in real property, sources of income and gifts; and abstain from participating in deliberations and decision-making where conflicts may exist.

9. Gifts and Favors. Members shall not use their public office to take any special advantage of services or opportunities for personal gain that are not available to the public in general. They shall refrain from accepting any gifts, favors or promises of future benefits which might compromise their independence of judgment or action or give the appearance of being compromised.

10. Confidential Information. Members shall respect the confidentiality of information concerning the property, personnel or affairs of the City. They shall neither disclose confidential information without proper legal authorization, nor use such information to advance their personal, financial or other private interests.

11. Use of Public Resources. Members shall not use public resources not available to the public in general, such as City staff time, equipment, supplies or facilities, for private gain or personal purposes.

12. Representations of Private Interests. In keeping with their role as stewards of the public interest, members of Council shall not appear on behalf of the private interests of third parties before the Council or any commission, board, committee, or proceeding of the City, nor shall members of commissions, boards, and committees appear before their own bodies or before the Council on behalf of the private interests of third parties on matters related to the areas of service of their bodies. This section shall not prevent members of commissions, boards, and committees from attending meetings of the Council or other commissions, boards or committees and advocating their views on matters of public policy, provided they are not doing so as a lobbyist for compensation.

13. Advocacy. Members shall represent the official policies or positions of the City Council, commission, board, or committee to the best of their ability when designated as delegates for this purpose. When presenting their individual opinions and positions, members shall explicitly state that they do not represent their body or the City of Carson, nor shall they allow the inference that they do. When representing the City on Federal, State, or regional bodies, members shall advocate policies which are in the best interest of the City of Carson over their own personal interests.

14. Policy Role of Members. Members shall respect and adhere to the council-manager structure of Carson City government. In this structure, the City Council determines the policies of the City with the advice, information and analysis provided by the public, commissions, boards, committees, and City staff.

Individual members therefore shall not interfere with the administrative functions of the City or the professional duties of City staff; nor shall they impair the ability of staff to implement Council policy decisions.

15. Independence of Commissions, Boards, and Committees. Because of the value of the independent advice of commissions, boards, and committees to the public decision-making process, members of Council shall refrain from using their position to unduly influence the deliberations or outcomes of board and commission proceedings.

16. Positive Workplace Environment. Members shall support the maintenance of a positive and constructive workplace environment for City employees and for citizens and businesses dealing with the City. Members shall recognize their special role in dealings with City employees to in no way create the perception of inappropriate direction to staff.

F. No Effect on Decisions. A violation of this Code of Ethics shall not be a basis for challenging the validity of any Council, commission, board, or committee decision. (Ord. 08-1409, § 1)

2460 Incompatible Office.
As authorized by Government Code Section 1099(a), members of the Carson City Council are expressly authorized to hold office simultaneously as elected or appointed officers of the City of Carson and as elected or appointed officers of the California State University, Dominguez Hills, Alumni Advisory Council, the Compton Community College District Board of Trustees, the Compton Unified School District Board of Trustees, the Greater Los Angeles County Vector Control District Board of Trustees, the Los Angeles County College District Board of Trustees, the Los Angeles Unified School District Board of Trustees, the Metropolitan Water District Board of Directors, the Sanitation District of Los Angeles County Board of Directors, the South Coast Air Quality Management District Governing Board, the Southern California Association of Governments General Assembly, the Water Replenishment District of Southern California Board of Directors, or the West Basin Municipal Water District Board of Directors. The foregoing offices are declared by the City Council to be an exception to the potential prohibitions of Government Code Section 1099. (Ord. 17-1642U, § 1; Ord. 17-1643, § 1)

CHAPTER 5
CITY FUNDS AND RECORDS
Sections:

§ 2500    Person to Present Claims.

§ 2501    Itemization Necessary.

§ 2502    Presenting and Filing.

§ 2503    Suit.

§ 2504    Method of Approval.

§ 2504.1    Register of Demands.

§ 2504.2    Payroll and Budgeted Demands.

§ 2505    Disposition of Claim.

§ 2506    Approved and Allowed.

§ 2507    Warrants and Checks.

§ 2507.1    Payroll Checks.

§ 2508    Sufficient Money in Treasury.

§ 2509    Payment by Treasurer.

§ 2510    Disapproved for Want of Funds.

§ 2511    Registration of Demands.

§ 2512    Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund.

§ 2513    Petty Cash Fund.

§ 2514    Change Fund.

§ 2515    Revolving Fund.

§ 2516    Creation of Fund.

§ 2517    Restrictions as to Disbursements.

§ 2518    Transferral of Monies to Fund.

§ 2519    Disbursements.

§ 2520    Repealed.

§ 2521    Repealed.

§ 2522    Reserved.

§ 2523    Reserved.

§ 2524    Reserved.

§ 2525    Park Acquisition Fund – Creation of.

§ 2526    Park Acquisition Fund – Revenues.

§ 2527    Park Acquisition Fund – Expenditures.

§ 2528    Park Acquisition Fund – Budget.

§ 2529    Revenue Sharing Trust Fund – Creation of.

§ 2530    Revenue Sharing Trust Fund – Revenues.

§ 2531    Revenue Sharing Trust Fund – Expenditures.

§ 2532    Revenue Sharing Trust Fund – Budget.

§ 2533    Reserved.

§ 2534    Reserved.

§ 2535    Carson Redevelopment Agency – Administrative Fund.

§ 2536    Air Quality Improvement Trust Fund – Definitions.

§ 2537    Same – Establishment of Fund.

§ 2538    Same – Audits.

2500 Person to Present Claims.
No City Officer shall, except for his own service, present any claim, account or demand for allowance against the City, or in any way except in the discharge of his official duty advocate the relief asked in the claim or demand made by any other person. Any person may appear before the City Council and oppose the allowance of any claim or demand made against the City. (Ord. 2, § 2500)

2501 Itemization Necessary.
The City Council shall not hear, consider, allow or approve any claim, bill or demand against the City unless the same be itemized giving names, dates, and particular services rendered, character of process served and upon whom, distance travelled, character of work done, and number of days engaged, materials and supplies furnished, when and to whom, and in what quantity furnished, the price therefor, and any other pertinent details as the case may be. Claims and demands for salaries and wages of officers and employees of the City may, but need not be, presented to the City in accordance with the provisions of this Code. (Ord. 2, § 2501)

2502 Presenting and Filing.
All claims against the City of Carson shall comply with the requirements set forth in Sections 900 through 935.6 of the Government Code of the State of California. (Ord. 2, § 2502)

2503 Suit.
Any action brought against the City of Carson upon any claim or demand shall conform to the requirements of Sections 940 through 949 of the Government Code of the State of California and any action brought against any employees shall comply with the requirements of Sections 950 through 951 of the Government Code of the State of California. (Ord. 2, § 2503)

2504 Method of Approval.
Each claim or demand, except those claims or demands arising as a result of the purchase of supplies and equipment, shall be presented by the City Clerk and all those claims or demands arising as a result of the purchase of supplies and equipment shall be presented by the Purchasing Officer to the Department Head, if any, who authorized the same, for his written approval, and each claim or demand shall thereafter be presented to the City Administrator for his written approval thereof. The City Administrator shall inform the City Council in writing of any claims or demands presented against the City which shall fail to obtain the approval of the proper Department Head or which shall fail to obtain the approval of the City Administrator. All such claims and demands, whether approved as aforesaid or not, shall be forwarded by the City Administrator to the City Council for audit. The City Council shall audit said claims and demands as required by law. (Ord. 2, § 2504; Ord. 44, § 1)

2504.1 Register of Demands.
A register of all such demands shall be submitted to the City Council prior to payment, except as provided in CMC 2504.2, and shall have attached thereto the affidavit of the City Administrator certifying as to the accuracy of the demands and the availability of funds for payment thereof. (Ord. 12, § 2504.1)

2504.2 Payroll and Budgeted Demands.
Payroll warrants for officers and employees whose compensation has been previously fixed by the City Council need not be audited by the City Council prior to payment. Payrolls shall be presented to the City Council for ratification and approval at its first meeting after delivery of the payroll warrants.

Warrants drawn in payment of demands certified or approved by the Director of Finance as conforming to a budget approved by ordinance or resolution of the City Council need not be audited by the City Council prior to payment. Budgeted demands paid by warrant prior to audit by the City Council shall be stated on the register of demands separately from unpaid demands, and shall be presented to the City Council for ratification and approval at its first meeting after delivery of the warrants. (Ord. 12, § 1; Ord. 44, § 2; Ord. 71-188, § 1)

2505 Disposition of Claim.
If the City Council finds that any claim or demand is not a proper charge against the City, it shall be rejected by resolution or minute action, and the fact of rejection shall be plainly endorsed upon the claim by the City Clerk or his authorized representative. If any claim or demand is determined to be a proper charge against the City, the same shall be allowed only by resolution setting forth as to each claim the name of the claimant, a brief statement of the claim and the amount allowed. Any claim may be allowed in part and rejected in part by the City Council. (Ord. 2, § 2505)

2506 Approved and Allowed.
If any claim or demand be approved and allowed by the City Council, the Director of Finance shall endorse upon each of the duplicate copies thereof the words “allowed by the City Council of the City of Carson,” together with the resolution number allowing the same and for what amount and from what, and the Director of Finance shall attest the same with his signature. (Ord. 2, § 2506; Ord. 44, § 3)

2507 Warrants and Checks.
If any claim or demand be approved and allowed by the City Council, the Mayor shall draw a warrant upon the City Treasury for the same, which warrant shall be countersigned by the Director of Finance and Administration, and shall specify for what purpose same is drawn and the fund from which it is to be paid. The signatures of the Mayor and the Director of Finance and Administration may be by facsimile signature affixed by a person duly authorized by such officer. The manual signature of the City Treasurer or Deputy City Treasurer shall also be required. Such facsimile signatures shall be affixed by means of a check-signing machine requiring the use of two (2) different keys to unlock the mechanism. One (1) such key shall remain in the possession and control of the Director of Finance and Administration and the other key shall remain in the possession and control of the City Treasurer. Warrants and checks drawn upon City funds may be combined in one (1) instrument. (Ord. 2, § 2507; Ord. 71-194, § 1; Ord. No. 81-557, § 1)

2507.1 Payroll Checks.
The City Treasurer shall establish a separate payroll account, on which all payroll checks shall be drawn. Said payroll account shall be designated the “Payroll Revolving Fund” and shall be maintained and replenished out of the General Fund of the City. The Payroll Revolving Fund shall not contain monies in excess of $25,000, unless otherwise authorized by resolution of the City Council. All monies in said fund shall be expended exclusively for payroll purposes.

Payroll checks shall require the manual signature of the City Treasurer, and no other signature thereon shall be required. Before such payroll checks shall be issued the Director of Finance shall certify the payroll to be correct and sign the same. The same shall be countersigned by the Mayor. (Ord. 12, § 1; Ord. 44, § 4; Ord. 69-85, § 1)

2508 Sufficient Money in Treasury.
Except as otherwise provided, no warrant shall be drawn or evidence of indebtedness issued unless there be at the time sufficient money in the treasury legally applicable to the payment of the same. (Ord. 2, § 2508)

2509 Payment by Treasurer.
Upon presentation of said warrant, properly executed and endorsed, the City Treasurer shall pay the same out of the funds in the City Treasury properly applicable to that purpose. (Ord. 2, § 2509)

2510 Disapproved for Want of Funds.
When an order or demand is not approved for want of funds and its amount does not exceed the income and revenue for the year in which the indebtedness was incurred, the Director of Finance shall endorse on it: “Not approved for want of funds,” with the date of presentation and his signature. (Ord. 2, § 2510; Ord. 44, § 5)

2511 Registration of Demands.
The Director of Finance shall number the endorsement, register the order or demand in his records, and deliver it to the claimant, or his order. From delivery the order or demand bears interest at six (6) percent a year. Orders or demands shall be paid in the order they are registered. (Ord. 2, § 2511; Ord. 44, § 6)

2512 Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund.
(1) To comply with the provisions of Section 196, Article 5 of Chapter 1 of Division 1 of the Streets and Highways Code, there is hereby created in the City Treasury a special fund to be known as the “Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund.”

(2) All monies received by the City from the State of California under the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interests therein, or for engineering, or for the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or highways by the City shall be paid into said fund.

(3) All monies in said fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by, and subject to the provisions of Sections 194 through 202 of Article 5, Chapter 1, Division 1 of the Streets and Highways Code. (Ord. 2, § 2512; Ord. 9, § 1)

2513 Petty Cash Fund.
A petty cash fund is hereby established in the City Treasury to be maintained in cash in the custody of the City Treasurer. Said fund shall not exceed $2,000 at any time. Disbursements may be made therefrom by the City Treasurer in amounts not to exceed $75.00 for any item.

The City Treasurer shall obtain and keep receipts for all disbursements therefrom, and shall report in writing to the City Council monthly all disbursements therefrom and the balance on hand. Transfer of funds to such petty cash account shall be provided for in the register of demands, and all disbursements therefrom subsequent to the last transfer of funds to such petty cash account shall be audited by the City Council upon acting upon such register of demands. (Ord. 12, § 1; Ord. 69-114, § 1; Ord. 71-190, § 1; Ord. 75-328, § 1; Ord. 77-390, § 1; Ord. 80-528, § 1; Ord. 02-1244, § 1)

2514 Change Fund.
There is hereby established a “Change Fund” in an amount not to exceed $300.00 to be kept in the custody of the City Treasurer, to be used by the City Treasurer and employees of the City under the Treasurer’s direction, for the purpose of making change in cash transactions with the City. The particular amount of such fund shall be established by Resolution of the City Council from time to time, excepting that the initial amount is authorized to be $200.00. No monies of said fund shall be used for any other purposes than herein authorized. Such fund shall be subject to audit on a regular basis, in accordance with the audit procedures established for the City and its funds. (Ord. 69-85, § 2; Ord. 69-96, § 1)

2515 Revolving Fund.
There is hereby established a “Revolving Fund” in such amount as shall be established by the City Council by resolution from time to time. Said fund shall be used for the following purposes only:

A. Refunding deposits made with the City, which deposits are not revenues of the City and are refundable.

B. Purchase of postage for the postage meter of the City, and the payment of recordation and certification fees to the County Recorder.

C. Payment of registration fees and reservation deposits and reimbursement of actual and necessary expenses incurred in connection with the authorized attendance of City Councilmembers and other City officers and employees at meetings, conferences and conventions.

This fund shall not be used for the purpose or acquisition of any supplies or materials, or for capital expenditures, or for payroll purposes. Disbursements from this fund shall be made by the Treasurer upon receipt of an order signed by the City Administrator or the Director of Finance. Each such order shall clearly specify the purposes for which it is drawn. If the expenditure conforms to the budget, it need not be audited prior to payment, but shall be included in a register of demands presented at the first meeting of the City Council thereafter for Council ratification. Reimbursement of the Revolving Fund shall be made only upon presentation to the City Council of a statement, certified by the Treasurer, indicating the amounts, dates and purposes for which each withdrawal was made since the preceding certified statement. (Ord. 69-85; Ord. 71-197; Ord. 75-350, § 1)

2516 Creation of Fund.
There is hereby established a fund to be known as the “Special Fund for Capital Improvements.” (Ord. 69-90, § 2516)

2517 Restrictions as to Disbursements.
The fund herein created shall remain inviolate for the making of such capital improvements as the City Council shall direct to be made from such fund. (Ord. 69-90, § 2517)

2518 Transferral of Monies to Fund.
The City Council may transfer to the Special Fund any part of any unencumbered surplus funds over and above the amount of $200,000 remaining on hand in the City General Fund at the end of the fiscal year. (Ord. 69-90, § 2518)

2519 Disbursements.
Disbursements shall not be made from this fund for any purpose other than for the acquisition of property and for the construction of capital improvements having a life span of five (5) years or more. Before any expenditures are made from this fund all such capital expenditures shall be budgeted in accordance with budget procedures adopted by the City Council. (Ord. 69-90, § 2519)

2520 Repealed.
Repealed by Ord. 99-1174. (Ord. 69-91, § 2520)

2521 Repealed.
Repealed by Ord. 99-1174. (Ord. 69-91, § 2521)

2522 Reserved.
2523 Reserved.
2524 Reserved.
2525 Park Acquisition Fund – Creation of.
A special fund is hereby created for the purpose of depositing therein monies received by the City from subdividers, in a manner compliant with Government Code Section 66477, for the purposes set forth in CMC 9207.25, and for use of such funds for such purposes. Said fund shall be known and designated as the “Park Acquisition Fund.” (Ord. 72-229, § 1; Ord. 92-974, § 1; Ord. 19-1927, § 5)

2526 Park Acquisition Fund – Revenues.
All monies received by the City from subdividers, in a manner compliant with Government Code Section 66477, shall be deposited in said fund. (Ord. 72-229, § 1; Ord. 92-974, § 1; Ord. 19-1927, § 5)

2527 Park Acquisition Fund – Expenditures.
Expenditures from said fund shall be made for the purposes and subject to the limitations set forth in CMC 9207.25 and such limitations as may be provided by law. (Ord. 72-229, § 1; Ord. 92-974, § 1)

2528 Park Acquisition Fund – Budget.
Monies deposited into said fund shall be earmarked within said fund for use exclusively for the purpose provided for in CMC 2527. Before expenditures are made from such fund, such expenditures shall be budgeted in accordance with CMC Article II, Chapter 9.5 and such other procedure as may be adopted by the City Council. (Ord. 72-229, § 1)

2529 Revenue Sharing Trust Fund – Creation of.
A special fund is hereby created for the purpose of depositing therein monies to be used for the purposes authorized by the Federal Revenue Sharing Act of 1972 and for such other purposes as may from time to time be authorized by Federal law. (Ord. 72-244, § 1)

2530 Revenue Sharing Trust Fund – Revenues.
All monies received by the City pursuant to the Federal Revenue Sharing Act of 1972 shall be paid into said fund. (Ord. 72-244, § 1)

2531 Revenue Sharing Trust Fund – Expenditures.
Expenditures from the fund shall be made only for purposes authorized by the Federal Revenue Sharing Act of 1972. (Ord. 72-244, § 1)

2532 Revenue Sharing Trust Fund – Budget.
Monies deposited in said fund shall be earmarked within said fund for use exclusively for the purposes provided in CMC 2531. Before expenditures are made from said fund, all such expenditures shall be budgeted in accordance with Article II, Chapter 9.5 of the Carson Municipal Code and with such other budget procedures as may be adopted by the City Council. (Ord. 72-244, § 1)

2533 Reserved.
2534 Reserved.
2535 Carson Redevelopment Agency – Administrative Fund.
A special fund is hereby created for the purpose of depositing therein any and all monies appropriated by the City Council for the administrative expenses of the Carson Redevelopment Agency. All such monies shall be kept in the treasury of the City. Monies shall be drawn from such fund from time to time as necessary to meet the administrative expenses of the Redevelopment Agency. Such funds shall be drawn in like manner as money is drawn for other purposes and departments of the City, subject to budgetary control. Before expenditures are made from said fund, such expenditures shall be budgeted in accordance with Health and Safety Code Section 36.611 and such budget shall be approved by the City Council in accordance with Health and Safety Code Section 33.612. (Ord. 73-261, § 1)

2536 Air Quality Improvement Trust Fund – Definitions.
For the purposes of CMC 2536, 2537, and 2538, the following definitions shall apply:

(a) “Mobile Source Air Pollution Reduction Program” shall mean any program or project implemented by the City to reduce air pollution emitted from motor vehicles pursuant to the California Clean Air Act of 1988 or the Air Quality Management Plan for the South Coast Air Quality Management District prepared and adopted in accordance with the provisions of Health and Safety Code Sections 40460 through 40470.

(b) “Fee Administrator” shall mean the City Treasurer of the City of Carson. (Ord. 91-939, § 2)

2537 Same – Establishment of Fund.
The Fee Administrator shall establish a separate interest-bearing trust fund account with a financial institution authorized to accept deposits of City funds. This account shall be known as the “Air Quality Improvement Trust Fund.” All interest earned by the account shall be credited to this account. All funds received by the City pursuant to Health and Safety Code Sections 44243 and 44244, along with any other funds designated by the City Council, shall be deposited in this account and shall be used for the sole purpose of financing mobile source air pollution reduction programs. The Fee Administrator shall be responsible for depositing funds in the Air Quality Improvement Trust Fund. (Ord. 91-939, § 2)

2538 Same – Audits.
The City hereby consents to audits, at least once every two (2) years, of all programs and projects funded by vehicle registration fees provided by Health and Safety Code Section 44243; provided, that such audit shall be conducted by an independent auditor selected by the South Coast Air Quality Management District. Audit costs shall be funded as provided in Health and Safety Code Section 44244.1. (Ord. 91-939, § 2)

CHAPTER 6
PURCHASING SYSTEM
Sections:

§ 2600    Purpose and Applicability.

§ 2601    Definitions.

§ 2602    Centralized Purchasing.

§ 2603    Purchasing Manager.

§ 2604    Requisitions.

§ 2605    Purchase Orders and Contracts.

§ 2606    City Manager Expenditure Authority.

§ 2607    Evasion of Provisions of This Chapter Prohibited.

§ 2608    Encumbrance of Funds.

§ 2609    Inspections.

§ 2610    Bidding Procedures for Purchase of Materials, Supplies, Equipment and Services.

§ 2611    Exceptions to Bidding Requirements for Purchases Other Than for Public Projects.

§ 2611.1    Local Preference for Materials, Services, Supplies, and Equipment.

§ 2612    Contracts for Public Project.

§ 2613    Procurement Protest Procedures.

§ 2614    Disposition of Surplus Property.

§ 2615    Employee Conflict of Interest Prohibited.

§ 2616    Services Performed by City Employees.

Prior legislation: Ords. 42, 80-507, 87-775, 88-829, 98-1134, 00-1216, 13-1526, 16-1583.

2600 Purpose and Applicability.
(a) The purpose of this Chapter is to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of materials, supplies, equipment, and services and professional services, to secure for the City materials, supplies, equipment, and services and professional services at the lowest possible cost commensurate with quality needed, to exercise positive financial control over purchases, to clearly define authority of the purchasing function and to assure the quality of purchases, a purchasing system is hereby adopted.

(b) This Chapter shall apply to all purchase orders and contracts solicited or entered into after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter. (Ord. 17-1609, § 2)

2601 Definitions.
As used in this Chapter, the following words shall have the following definitions:

(a) “Awarding authority” shall mean the City Council, City Manager or his or her designee who has been given the authority to award under this Chapter.

(b) “Capitalized equipment” shall mean equipment that is reported as an asset on the City’s audited financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.

(c) “Commission” shall mean the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Commission, created pursuant to California Public Contract Code Section 22010.

(d) “Inventory” shall mean supplies that may be consumed such as light bulbs, printing paper, writing instruments, and other similar items.

(e) “Local business” shall mean a business that can certify that the business:

(1) Has a headquarter, primary or branch office within the City, which was established prior to the City inviting bids for the respective procurement; and

(2) Possesses a current business license and certificate of occupancy; and

(3) Is certified by the State Department of General Services as a small business.

(f) “Maintenance work” shall have the same meaning as that term is defined under California Public Contract Code Section 22002.

(g) “Public project” shall have the same meaning as that term is defined under California Public Contract Code Section 22002.

(h) “Purchase order” shall mean a written or electronic authorization for a particular vendor to provide particular materials, supplies, equipment, and services to the City for a particular price and which shall contain terms and conditions of such purchase and shall be in a form approved by the City Attorney.

(i) “Purchasing system” shall mean the purchasing system established by the ordinance codified in this Chapter and codified under this Chapter.

(j) “Surplus property” shall mean personal property belonging to the City that is no longer needed or which has become obsolete or worn out as determined by the relevant City department. “Surplus property” includes capitalized equipment, but does not include inventory.

(k) “The Act” shall mean the “Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act.” (Ord. 17-1609, § 2; Ord. 18-1806, § 2)

2602 Centralized Purchasing.
The purchasing system is intended to be centralized within the finance function of the City. The City Manager may authorize, in writing, any department to purchase specified supplies and equipment independent of the Purchasing Manager; however, such purchases shall be made in conformity with established procedures and regulations. (Ord. 17-1609, § 2)

2603 Purchasing Manager.
The City Manager shall serve as the Purchasing Manager. The City Manager may also appoint a designee to serve as the Purchasing Manager and to administer the purchasing system. The Purchasing Manager’s authority and responsibilities shall be in accordance with the purchasing system, any established administrative rules and procedures, and as established by the City Council and/or the City Manager. The Purchasing Manager may also establish administrative rules and procedures in order to carry out the purposes of this Chapter. (Ord. 17-1609, § 2)

2604 Requisitions.
Administrative rules and procedures governing the purchasing system, either by resolution or administrative procedures and regulation, shall provide procedures that require every department to annually submit requests and estimates for materials, supplies, equipment and services to the designated Purchasing Manager in a prescribed requisition process. (Ord. 17-1609, § 2)

2605 Purchase Orders and Contracts.
(a) Purchase Orders. Every expenditure of public funds made pursuant to this Chapter, irrespective of the source, by the City shall require a purchase order, where the original template form of the purchase order shall be approved by the City Attorney; however, the following expenditures may not require a purchase order:

(1) Individual purchases of materials, supplies, and equipment from one (1) vendor of less than $1,000, in the aggregate, during a fiscal year.

(2) Individual purchases made pursuant to CMC 2611(i)(11) through (18).

(3) Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Purchasing Manager, in his or her sole discretion, may require the use of a purchase order.

(b) Written Contracts. The following shall govern the use of written contracts:

(1) For purchases of any personal property, including materials, supplies and equipment:

(i) If the estimated value of an individual purchase is less than $25,000 over a fiscal year or is a purchase made under CMC 2611(i)(6), (8), (12), (13), (14), and (17), then a separate written contract may not be required. However, the Purchasing Manager shall have the sole discretion to require the use of a separate written contract, in a form approved by the City Attorney, in addition to the purchase order requirement under subsection (a) of this Section.

(ii) If the estimated value of an individual purchase is $25,000 or greater over a fiscal year, then a separate written contract, in a form approved by the City Attorney, shall be required in addition to the purchase order requirement under subsection (a) of this Section. However, the Purchasing Manager has the sole discretion to waive this requirement.

(2) For purchases of any services:

(i) If the estimated cost of a service is less than $5,000 over a fiscal year, then a separate written contract may not be required.

(ii) If the estimated cost of a service is $5,000 or greater over a fiscal year, then a separate written contract, in a form approved by the City Attorney, shall be required in addition to the purchase order requirement under subsection (a) of this Section.

(iii) Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Purchasing Manager, in his or her sole discretion, may require the use of a separate written contract, in a form approved by the City Attorney, in addition to the purchase order requirement under subsection (a) of this Section. (Ord. 17-1609, § 2)

2606 City Manager Expenditure Authority.
The City Manager may approve expenditures that are $25,000 or less. All expenditures of greater than $25,000 shall be approved by the City Council. (Ord. 17-1609, § 2)

2607 Evasion of Provisions of This Chapter Prohibited.
Purchases for materials, supplies, equipment and services shall not be split into smaller orders or projects, artificially aggregated into larger orders or projects, or willfully mischaracterized or misclassified for purposes of evading the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 17-1609, § 2)

2608 Encumbrance of Funds.
Except in cases of emergency as defined in CMC 2611(d), the Purchasing Manager shall confirm the requested purchase is funded in the current fiscal year adopted budget. For items not identified in the current fiscal year adopted budget, the requesting City department shall be required to request a budget transfer to or receive City Council approval prior to engaging in the procurement process. (Ord. 17-1609, § 2)

2609 Inspections.
The Purchasing Manager, in his or her discretion, shall have the authority to inspect supplies and equipment delivered, or services rendered, to determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the original contract or order. (Ord. 17-1609, § 2)

2610 Bidding Procedures for Purchase of Materials, Supplies, Equipment and Services.
Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, all contracts of the City for the purchase of materials, supplies, equipment, and services of an estimated aggregate annual value that is $25,000 or greater shall be made using the procedures contained in this Section. Purchases that are less than $25,000 shall be governed by the procedures found under CMC 2611(a). As used in this Section, “materials, supplies, equipment, and services” include all personal property and services, except professional services, as defined in CMC 2611(c), procured by the City. This Section shall not govern public project purchases.

(a) Notice Inviting Bids. Notices inviting sealed bids shall include a general description of the materials, supplies, equipment, or services to be purchased; shall state where bid blanks and specifications may be secured; shall state the time, location, and manner in which the bids shall be submitted; and the time and place for opening bids. Any invitation to bid, request for proposal, and other solicitation may be canceled in whole or in part when there is good cause therefor or when in the judgment of the awarding authority cancellation is in the City’s best interests.

(b) Published Notice. Notice inviting sealed bids shall be published at least ten (10) days before the date of opening of the bids. Notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, printed and published in the City, or if there is none, it shall be posted in at least three (3) public places in the City that have been designated by ordinance as the places for posting public notices. Notice shall also be posted on the City’s official website if such website exists.

(c) Bidders’ List. If a bidders’ list has been established, the Purchasing Manager shall also solicit sealed bids from responsible prospective vendors or contractors whose names are on the bidders’ list.

(d) Interpretation of Bid Specification. Oral interpretation of written bid specifications shall not be made to prospective bidders. If the prospective bidder discovers discrepancies or omissions in any specification, or if the bidder is in doubt as to the meaning of any specification, the bidder shall request a written interpretation or modification from the City. If interpretations or modifications are deemed necessary, the City will then issue a written addendum to all parties known to have received copies of the specifications.

(e) Bidder’s Security. When deemed necessary by the Purchasing Manager, bidder’s security may be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Bidders shall be entitled to return of bid security; provided, that a successful bidder shall forfeit its bid security upon refusal or failure to execute the contract within ten (10) days after the notice of award of contract has been mailed, unless the City is responsible for the delay. The City Council may, on refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, award it to the next lowest responsible bidder.

(1) If the City Council awards the contract to the next lowest responsible bidder, the amount of the bidder’s security shall be applied by the City to the difference between the successful bid and the next lowest responsible bid, and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the successful bidder.

(f) Performance Bonds. The Purchasing Manager shall have authority to require a performance bond before entering a contract in such amount as it shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the City. If a performance bond is required, then the form and amount of the bond shall be described in the notice inviting bids.

(g) Bid Submission and Opening. Sealed bids shall be submitted to the City Clerk and shall be opened publicly by the Purchasing Manager or designee in the presence of one (1) or more witnesses at the time and place designated in the invitation to bid. No bid shall be considered which has not been received at the place, and at or prior to the time, stated in the invitation for bids. No bid shall be considered which is transmitted by electronic facsimile or electronic mail, unless specifically authorized in the bid. The amount of each bid, the name of each bidder, and such other relevant information as the Purchasing Manager deems relevant shall be announced and recorded. If no bids are received and subject to the approval of the Purchasing Manager, procurement may proceed without further compliance with competitive bidding requirements. After the opening of a sealed or formal bid/proposal, and after the City has identified the awardee, a “notice of intent to award” will be sent to all actual bidders by mail, email, or fax at the option of the City, and all applicable response periods will begin on the date the notice was sent identifying the awardee and including at least the following text: “Protests must comply with the requirements of Carson Municipal Code Sections 2613 and be submitted no later than five business days after the date of this notice.”

(h) Bid Acceptance and Evaluation. Bids shall be evaluated on the requirements set forth in the invitation to bid, and no such criterion shall be used unless set forth in the invitation to bid or in this Chapter. Evaluation criteria may include criteria to determine acceptability, including, but not limited to, inspection, testing, quality, workmanship, delivery, and suitability for a particular purpose. Criteria that will affect the bid price and be considered in evaluation of a bid shall be objectively measurable if possible, such as discounts, transportation costs, and total or life cycle costs.

(i) Award to Lowest Responsive and Responsible Bidder. Unless bids are rejected as provided in this Chapter, all contracts of the City for the purchase of materials, supplies, equipment, and services of a value equal to or exceeding $25,000, except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, shall be awarded to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder. “Lowest responsible and responsive bidder” means the bidder who submits the lowest monetary bid that responds to the terms upon which bids were requested, and who has demonstrated the attribute of trustworthiness, as well as quality, fitness, capacity, and experience to satisfactorily perform the contract. To the extent permitted by law, criteria for determining whether a bidder is responsible include, without limitation, all of the following:

(1) The conformity of the supplies, materials, equipment, or services to the required specifications;

(2) The ability, capacity, and skill of the bidder to provide the supplies, materials, equipment, or services as required;

(3) The ability of the bidder to provide the required items or services within the time specified;

(4) The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience, efficiency, financial resources, and financial responsibility of the bidder;

(5) The ability of the bidder to promptly provide future maintenance, repair, parts, and service after purchase;

(6) The bidder’s prior record of performance on other procurements or projects, including timely completion of performance, quality of products and work provided, and completion of projects within the bid amount submitted and project budget;

(7) The bidder’s involvement in prior or current litigation or contract disputes that could impair satisfactory performance of the contract to be awarded; and

(8) The bidder’s history of noncompliance with occupational safety and health requirements, labor statutes and regulations, and other local, State, and Federal laws.

The purchasing file shall contain a written summary of the basis on which the award is made. If a bidder is rejected because of an adverse determination of that bidder’s capability of performing the contract, a written determination of irresponsibility, setting forth the basis of the finding, shall be prepared by the Procurement Officer or designee. The unreasonable failure of a bidder promptly to supply information in connection with an inquiry regarding responsibility may be grounds for a determination of irresponsibility. Prompt written notice shall be sent to the bidder of the evidence reflecting upon the bidder’s responsibility that has been either received from others or adduced from independent investigation. The bidder shall be afforded an opportunity to rebut such adverse evidence and to present evidence of qualification. After consideration of the evidence and the rebuttal evidence, the Procurement Officer shall make a final determination of the lowest bidder’s responsibility and promptly so notify the bidder in writing. A bidder aggrieved by any such determination may protest as provided in CMC 2613.

(j) Equal Bids. If prices quoted or received in two (2) or more sealed bids are equally the lowest bidder, including application of the local preference pursuant to CMC 2611.1, then a bidder may be chosen pursuant to any of the following options that is deemed to serve the best interest of the City:

(1) Select one (1) bid, giving preference to a business located within the City of Carson; or

(2) Reject all bids and re-solicit for bids; or

(3) Reject all bids and authorize negotiation of an agreement between the City and one (1) of the equivalent bidders; or

(4) Select one (1) bid, giving preference to the business which is the most experienced; or

(5) Take any other action that the City Council deems to serve the best interest of the City.

(k) Rejection or Waiver of Bid Requirements.

(1) At any time, the awarding authority may reject any and all bids presented and may re-solicit for bids in its discretion.

(2) The awarding authority may waive any irregularities or informalities in any bid or bidding. (Ord. 17-1609, § 2; Ord. 18-1806, §§ 3, 4)

2611 Exceptions to Bidding Requirements for Purchases Other Than for Public Projects.
Except as otherwise provided by law, the following purchases of materials, services, supplies and equipment shall not require compliance with the bidding requirements of this Chapter:

(a) Informal Purchases. Any contract for a purchase of less than $25,000 shall be let in accordance with the procedures established herein. Contract requirements shall not be artificially divided so as to constitute separate purchases under this Section.

(1) Bidding shall not be required for individual purchases of materials, supplies, equipment, and services of an estimated value of less than $5,000. The Purchasing Manager shall adopt administrative rules and procedures for making individual purchases of less than $5,000. These administrative rules and procedures shall include the requirement to prepare and maintain written records adequate to document the procurement, properly account for the funds expended, and facilitate an audit of such purchases.

(2) So far as practical, for any purchase costing $5,000 or more and less than $25,000, at least three (3) vendors shall be solicited to submit price quotations by use of sealed bidding methods, electronic facsimile, or electronic mail. This solicitation requirement may be met if price quotations have been sought through prices listed on a vendor’s Internet website; provided, that the Purchasing Manager reviews and approves such pricing. Award shall be made to the responsive and responsible vendor who offers the lowest acceptable quotation that best meets the needs of the City. The names of vendors submitting quotations, their respective local addresses and principal places of business, and the date and amount of each quotation shall be recorded and maintained as a public record.

(i) Bids shall be submitted to the Purchasing Manager, who shall specify the time, place, and manner in which bids are to be submitted. It is the responsibility of the bidder to ensure that the Purchasing Manager receives the bid document at the time, place and manner so specified.

(ii) The Purchasing Manager shall keep a record of all informal bid orders and submitted informal bids for a period of two (2) years after submission of such bids or the placing of such orders. This record, while so kept, shall be open to public inspection, except as prohibited by law, such as in the case of a bidder’s proprietary information.

(b) Competitive Proposals. When the Purchasing Manager determines that conditions are inappropriate for the use of competitive bidding or that sealed bidding is infeasible or contrary to the best interests of the City, a contract may be entered by use of the competitive proposal method. The facts supporting such a determination shall be recorded and maintained as a public record.

(1) Request for Proposals. The Purchasing Manager shall issue or approve a request for proposals describing the services or product to be procured, the format which proposals shall follow, the elements proposals shall contain, other appropriate requirements, and a statement of the time and place for the receipt and opening of sealed proposals. The request for proposals shall identify all significant evaluation criteria and the procedures to be used for evaluation and selection for negotiation and/or contract award.

(2) Notice of Solicitation. Notice of a request for proposals shall be published at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the date of proposal opening on the City website. The notice shall include a general description of the item or service required, a statement that proposals shall be submitted to the City Clerk’s office, and the place, date, and time of proposed opening. The Purchasing Manager or department director may give such other notice as he or she deems appropriate.

(3) Proposal Opening. Proposals shall be opened publicly by the Purchasing Manager or designee in the presence of one (1) or more witnesses at the time and place specified in the request for proposals. The name of the offeror and such other information as the Purchasing Manager deems appropriate shall be announced and recorded. If no proposals are received, procurement may proceed without further compliance with competitive proposal requirements.

(4) Proposal Evaluation. The City may, at any time, waive or modify any element of the request for proposals and/or any evaluation criterion. If so stated in the request for proposals, selection may be made, without negotiation, solely on the written submittals. If negotiation is elected, the City may negotiate with one (1) or all offerors that the Purchasing Manager determines have a reasonable chance of selection, based on price and other factors stated in the solicitation.

(c) Professional and Personal Services Procurement. The procurement of the professional services of any architect, landscape architect, engineer, artist, environmental consultant, land surveyor, construction project manager, accountant, appraiser, financial advisor, attorney, or other provider of professional services involving a high degree of technical or individual skill shall be based on demonstrated competence, the professional qualifications necessary for satisfactory performance of the required services, and a fair and reasonable price, after notice to a number of potential offerors adequate to permit reasonable competition consistent with the nature and requirements of the procurement. Offerors shall provide evidence that the person or firm carrying out contract responsibilities possesses the expertise and experience to perform the requisite professional services. The contract file shall contain a written summary of the basis on which notice to potential offerors was given and on which the award was made. Professional services contracts, except as authorized below, shall be awarded in accordance with CMC 2610. Professional service contracts of less than $25,000 may be awarded in accordance with subsection (a) or (b) of this Section by purchase order on the written recommendation of the department or division head. Professional services contracts for the preparation of environmental reports or special studies regarding private projects, when the project applicant has deposited the full amount of the contract, may be awarded by the City Engineer or the Community Development Director.

(d) Emergency Purchasing.

(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, the Purchasing Manager may make or authorize others to make emergency purchases of materials, supplies, equipment, or services when there exists a sudden, unexpected occurrence that poses a clear and imminent danger, requiring immediate action to prevent or mitigate the loss or impairment of life, health, property, or essential public services. Emergency purchases shall be made with such competition as is practicable under the circumstances. A written determination of the basis for the emergency and the selection of the particular contractor shall be included in the contract file. Emergency procurements shall require approval of the City Manager or his or her designee. In the absence or unavailability of the City Manager or designee, any department head shall have like authority for purchases related to their respective departments.

(2) Within five (5) business days after such emergency purchase, a record of each emergency procurement shall be made setting forth the vendor’s name, the amount and type of the contract, the terms of the contract, and the identification number of the purchasing file. Expenditures made during a locally declared emergency or in an emergency situation must be reported to the City Council at the next regular City Council meeting if approval for such expenditures would otherwise have been subject to the approval of the City Council.

(e) Sole Source Purchasing. The City Manager may dispense with this Chapter’s bidding requirements if he or she finds that the materials, supplies, equipment, or services are unique because of their quality, durability, availability, or fitness for a particular use and are available only from one (1) source, or, if available from more than one (1) source, can be purchased from the manufacturer or service provider for a lower price. If the cost of such sole source purchasing is $25,000 or greater, then the City Council’s approval shall be required.

(f) Piggyback Purchasing. The City, through the Purchasing Manager, may purchase materials, supplies, equipment, or services, without complying with the bidding or proposal procedures in this Chapter, from any vendor who offers the materials, supplies, equipment, or services at the same or better price, terms, and/or conditions as the supplier previously offered to another city or other public agency as the lowest bidder pursuant to the competitive bidding or proposal process required by that city or other public agency; provided, that:

(1) A copy of the solicitation has been obtained from the originating city or public agency and reviewed by the Purchasing Manager for compliance with this Chapter; and

(2) The Purchasing Manger determines that the specifications of the materials, supplies, equipment, or services required by the City are not materially different from those specified in the originating city’s or public agency’s solicitation; and

(3) The selected bidder was selected in compliance with the competitive bidding or proposal process requirements of such city or other public agency; and

(4) The Purchasing Manager determines that the competitive bidding or proposal process utilized is at least the same as that contained in this Chapter; and

(5) The contract resulting from the original solicitation is current or the solicitation is within two (2) years from the date of the City’s order, or written justification is provided justifying use of an older solicitation; and

(6) The Purchasing Manager determines that, as a result of piggyback purchasing, the price of the materials, supplies, equipment, or services is lower than it would be if purchased directly by the City pursuant to this Chapter.

(g) Cooperative Purchasing. The City, through the Purchasing Manager, may purchase materials, supplies, equipment, or services through a joint powers or other cooperative purchasing program with any local, county, State, or Federal public entity or entities, or any association of public agencies, including the California League of Cities, the California State Association of Counties, and the National Conference of Mayors; provided, that:

(1) The selected bidder was selected in compliance with the competitive bidding or proposal process requirements of any participating entity or association; and

(2) The Purchasing Manager determines that the competitive bidding or proposal process utilized is at least the same as that contained in this Chapter; and

(3) The Purchasing Manager determines that, as a result of cooperative purchasing, the price of the materials, supplies, equipment, or services is likely to be lower than it would be if purchased directly by the City pursuant to this Chapter.

Such cooperative purchasing may include, but is not limited to, joint or multi-party contracts between public agencies and public agency contracts negotiated to be available to other public agencies.

(h) Notice of Award. With respect to contracts awarded under this Section, no notice of intent to award shall be required to bidders as provided for contracts awarded pursuant to CMC 2610 and the procurement protest procedures under CMC 2613 shall not apply.

(i) Other Purchases. The City Council has determined that the purchase of the following items shall not require compliance with the bidding provisions of this Chapter, so long as funds have been properly appropriated and such purchases conform with all other requirements of this Chapter:

(1) Books, periodicals, records, tapes, and other similar materials.

(2) Intellectual property with a unique or special purpose, as documented in writing by the Purchasing Manager.

(3) Items and services acquired with Federal or State loan or grant funds when the terms and conditions of such loan or grant require compliance with procedures that are different from this Chapter; however, where such procedures are less restrictive, this Chapter shall govern to the extent permitted by the terms and conditions of such loan or grant.

(4) Insurance, insurance adjusting, legal, and related services. If a new appropriation therefor is required or an existing appropriation is insufficient, the City Manager or Finance Director is authorized to bind coverage or otherwise provide for such services until the required appropriation has been approved.

(5) Vendor servicing agreements where the equipment has been purchased competitively.

(6) Express mail through a private carrier.

(7) Services from other governmental agencies that are not covered under a specific inter-agency agreement.

(8) Advertising and publication for City programs and events.

(9) Professional development, training, and continuing education classes for City employees.

(10) Intellectual property use licenses.

(11) Fuel purchases and other commodities that are subject to market pricing.

(12) City utility bills (e.g., water, electrical, and gas).

(13) Postage.

(14) Publication of legal notices required by law.

(15) Food purchased at retail.

(16) Renewal of software licenses already purchased by the City.

(17) Commission and committee member stipends.

(18) Travel and conference expenses.

The City Manager may award all contracts under this Section that are less than or equal to the City Manager’s expenditure authority under CMC 2606.

(j) For the evaluation and award of any bids, proposals, or offers received pursuant to this Section, a local preference shall be given to local businesses, as provided further in CMC 2611.1.

(k) If prices quoted or received in two (2) or more bids, proposals, or offers pursuant to this Section are equally the lowest, including application of a local preference pursuant to CMC 2611.1, then the awarding authority may choose whichever options as provided in CMC 2610(j)(1) through (5) that it deems to serve the best interest of the City. (Ord. 17-1609, § 2; Ord. 18-1806, §§ 5, 6)

2611.1 Local Preference for Materials, Services, Supplies, and Equipment.
(a) Local Preference for Materials, Supplies, and Equipment. Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter to the contrary, except for those contracts funded through programs or partners, including but not limited to Federal or State agencies, which prohibit the use of a local preference, local businesses shall be provided a local preference for all contracts for materials, supplies, or equipment as provided in this Section.

(1) This subsection shall only be applicable to contracts for materials, supplies, or equipment in an amount of $100,000 or less.

(2) Amount of Preference. A local preference of five (5) percent shall be extended to all bids by a local business for all applicable contracts.

(3) Application of Preference. All bids submitted by a local business that include a certification signed by the bidder that the business meets the definition under CMC 2601 shall have the bid price reduced by the local preference and the reduced bid amount shall be deemed the amount of the bid.

(4) Substantial Local Work. The local preference awarded shall be applied only if the local business substantially acts as the supplier or dealer, or substantially designs, manufactures or assembles the materials, supplies and/or equipment at a business location in the City. As used in this subsection, “substantially” means not less than two-thirds (2/3) of the work performed under the contract must be performed, respectively, by the local business in the City.

(b) Local Preference for Services. Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter to the contrary, except for those contracts funded through programs or partners, including but not limited to Federal or State agencies, which prohibit the use of a local preference, local businesses shall be provided a local preference for contracts for services provided in this Section.

(1) Applicable Contracts. This subsection shall only be applicable to contracts for services in an amount less than $100,000.

(2) Preference. The City shall give a primary preference to local businesses on contracts for services, whenever such businesses have the necessary qualifications, experience and expertise to complete the project(s) being proposed for work, as determined by the City. When a proposal, bid, or offer submitted by a local business for award is being evaluated, the local business shall be provided a five (5) percent preference for a local business in the proposal price.

(3) Substantial Local Work. The preference awarded shall only be applied if the services are provided directly by the local business using employees whose exclusive, primary working location is in the City.

(c) Nothing in this Section is intended to require the award of any contract to any particular bidder, offeror, or proposer, regardless if they qualify as a local business.

(d) Nothing in this Section is intended to limit the City’s authority to reject any and all bids.

(e) This Section shall not apply to public projects.

(f) Failure to Maintain Status as Local Business. Without limitation to any other remedies available to the City, if for any reason a contractor that receives a local preference pursuant to this Section fails to maintain its status as a local business for more than sixty (60) days during the entire term of its related contract with the City, the City shall be entitled to withhold or recover funds from the contractor in an amount that represents the value of the bid. (Ord. 18-1806, § 7)

2612 Contracts for Public Project.
(a) Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act Adopted. The City Council of the City of Carson, California, hereby adopts the Act, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing purchases and contracts awarded by the City for “public projects” and “maintenance work,” as defined in California Public Contract Code Section 22002. In accordance with the Act, the City shall utilize the Act’s procedures and definitions when contracting for “public projects” or “maintenance work.” However, nothing shall preclude the City from utilizing more restrictive procedures.

(b) Informal Bidding Procedure. Public projects and maintenance work which are in accordance with the limits established in California Public Contract Code Section 22032(b) may be let to contract by following the Act’s informal procedures. The informal procedures include the following:

(1) Contractors List. A list of contractors, identified according to categories of work, shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the provision of California Public Contract Code Section 22034, together with any criteria promulgated by the Commission from time to time.

(2) Notice Inviting Bids. At least ten (10) calendar days before bids are due, a notice inviting informal bids shall be mailed to all contractors on the list for the category of work being bid, and to all construction trade journals specified pursuant to the requirements of California Public Contract Code Section 22036; provided however:

(i) Additional contractors and trade journals may be notified at the discretion of the Purchasing Manager.

(ii) If there is no list of qualified contractors maintained by the City for the particular category of work to be performed, the notice inviting bids shall be sent only to the construction trade journals specified by the Commission.

(iii) If the product or service is proprietary in nature, such that it can be obtained only from a certain contractor or contractors, the notice inviting informal bids may be sent exclusively to those contractor(s).

(3) The City Council may delegate the authority to award contracts under this informal bidding procedure to the Purchasing Manager.

(4) If all bids received under this informal bidding procedure are in excess of the limits provided in California Public Contract Code Section 22034(d), then the City Council may award the contract consistent with California Public Contract Code Section 22034(d).

(c) Formal Bidding Procedure. Public projects and maintenance work, which are in accordance with the limits established in Public Contract Code Section 22032(c), shall, unless otherwise provided by the Act or by law, be let to contract pursuant to the formal procedures set forth in the Act.

(1) Notice Inviting Bids.

(i) Formal bids shall state the time and place for the receiving and opening of sealed bids and distinctly describe the project. The notice shall be published at least fourteen (14) calendar days before the date of opening the bids in a newspaper of general circulation pursuant to the requirements of California Public Contract Code Section 22037.

(ii) The notice inviting formal bids shall also be sent electronically, if available, by either facsimile or electronic mail, and mailed to all construction trade journals specified in California Public Contract Code Section 22036.

(iii) For circumstances not involving a public project, where there is no construction trade journal for the maintenance work to be procured, the notice inviting bids shall instead be made in conformity with established procedures. All notices under this paragraph shall be sent at least fifteen (15) calendar days before the date of opening the bids.

(iv) In addition to notice required by this Section, the City may give such other notice as it deems proper.

(2) The City Council shall adopt plans, specifications and working details for all public projects requiring the formal bid procedure, pursuant to California Public Contract Code Section 22039.

(d) Bid Acceptance or Rejection.

(1) Processing Bids. Sealed bids shall be submitted to the City Clerk and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. It is the responsibility of the bidder to ensure receipt of the bid document by the City Clerk by the designated hour. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notice. A tabulation of all bids received shall be open for public inspection during regular business hours for a period of not less than thirty (30) calendar days after the bid opening.

(2) Bid Acceptance or Rejection.

(i) Rejection of All Bids. In its discretion the awarding authority may reject all bids presented, if the City, prior to rejecting all bids and declaring that the project can be more economically performed by City employees, furnishes a written notice to the apparent low bidder. The notice shall inform the bidder of the City’s intention to reject the bid, and shall be mailed at least two (2) business days prior to the hearing where the bid will be rejected. If after the first invitation of bids all bids are rejected, after reevaluating its cost estimates of the project, the City may:

(A) Abandon the project or readvertise for bids; or

(B) Following passage of a resolution of the City Council by a four-fifths (4/5) vote stating the project can be performed more economically by the employees of the City, the City may have the project done by force account without further complying with the requirements of the Act.

(ii) If a contract is awarded, it shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. If two (2) or more bids are the same and the lowest, the City may accept the one (1) it chooses.

(iii) If no bids are received through the formal or informal procedure, the project may be performed by the employees of the City by force account or negotiated contract without further complying with this article. (Ord. 17-1609, § 2)

2613 Procurement Protest Procedures.
Procurements for public works projects, materials, supplies, goods and services shall be protested in accordance with this Section. Protests not complying with the provisions of this Section shall not be reviewed.

(a) Definitions. For the purposes of this Section:

(1) “Bid” includes “offer” and “proposal” in the context of formal, informal, or negotiated procurements.

(2) “Days” mean business days unless otherwise indicated.

(3) “Filing date” or “submission date” means the final date for receipt by the City Clerk or the Purchasing Manager of the City of Carson.

(4) “Interested party” means an actual bidder or offeror.

(5) “Procurement staff” means the Finance Director, designated Purchasing Manager, City Engineer, Community Development Director or other department director initiating the procurement being requested, or the designees of any of these persons.

(6) “Reviewing officer” means the City Manager or designee.

(7) “Mail” means any delivery service such as U.S. mail, UPS or FedEx.

(b) Grounds for Protest. Any interested party may file a written protest on any of the following grounds:

(1) The existence of a substantial defect, error or omission in the solicitation documents issued by the City;

(2) Failure of the City to follow the procedures of this Chapter;

(3) Failure of the City to apply correctly the standards of review, evaluation, or scoring of a bid or proposal as specified in the solicitation documents therefor;

(4) Award of the contract by the City to a bidder other than on the basis stated in the solicitation documents; or

(5) Such other grounds as would state a cause of action at law or in equity.

(c) Disallowed Protest Grounds. Protests based on the following grounds shall not be considered:

(1) An evaluator’s professional judgment on the quality of a response; or

(2) The proposer’s assessment of the agency’s needs or requirements; or

(3) Any grounds other than those listed in subsection (b) of this Section.

(d) Protest Filing and Delivery. Pursuant to CMC 2610, a notice of intent to award shall be issued prior to the award of contracts awarded in accordance with CMC 2610. Protests made in accordance with said section shall be processed in accordance herewith. Protestors shall bear all costs of the protest other than salary and personnel costs of City employees. Protests shall be filed with the City Clerk in writing and hand delivered or sent by certified U.S. mail, return receipt requested.

(e) Protest/Appeal Contents. Protest documents shall:

(1) Include the name, address, business telephone, email, and fax number of the protestor;

(2) Identify the procurement or project under protest by name, solicitation number, and submission date;

(3) Contain a concise statement of the grounds for protest and the facts supporting such grounds, including all supporting documentation (documentation submitted after filing will not be reviewed); and

(4) State the form of relief requested.

(f) Pre-Opening Protest Period – Solicitation Documents. Interested parties wishing to protest City solicitation documents must do so before the final date to accept bids and within five (5) business days after the date the solicitation documents are issued or amended.

(g) Post-Opening Protest Period. In cases of protests involving aspects of City procurement other than solicitation documents, interested parties shall make such protest within five (5) business days after the notice of intent to award is mailed or otherwise transmitted.

(h) Protest Process.

(1) Upon receipt of a timely protest, procurement staff shall review all the submitted materials and create and retain a written record of their review. Not later than ten (10) days after receipt of the protest, procurement staff shall respond in writing to the protest and to each material issue raised in the protest.

(2) In the event of a timely protest, procurement staff shall not proceed with the solicitation or award of the contract until all administrative remedies have been exhausted unless the City Manager determines that the award of a contract without delay is necessary to protect substantial interests of the City.

(3) Procurement staff may elect, but are not obligated, to attempt to resolve the protest with the affected parties. “Resolution” means the formal withdrawal of a protest by the protestor, or written acknowledgement of protest resolution signed by the City and the protestor.

(4) If procurement staff attempts resolution, protestors shall be notified in writing of the date on which their matters shall be considered and shall be afforded an opportunity to present evidence for consideration to the City and such technical or other staff as the City deems necessary.

(5) Procurement staff shall make a formal decision (“protest determination”) to deny or uphold the protest and shall notify the protestor of that decision by mail, email or fax. The decision notification shall include a statement that the protestor has the right to appeal the protest determination to the City Council within three (3) business days of the decision notification.

(6) The award of contract shall be deferred until completion of the protest procedure provided that if award of the contract is by the City Council, the protest determination may be made by the City Council concurrent with the decision to award the contract. The protestor shall be given at least five (5) days’ written notice of the date of the City Council meeting to consider the award and the right to appear and be heard, but no further appeal rights. (Ord. 17-1609, § 2)

2614 Disposition of Surplus Property.
(a) All City departments shall submit to the Purchasing Manager, at such times and in such form as the Purchasing Manager shall prescribe, reports showing all surplus property which is no longer needed or which has become obsolete or worn out.

(b) The Purchasing Manager may dispose of surplus property by the following methods:

(1) Competitive bidding under subsection (c) of this Section;

(2) Public auction under subsection (d) of this Section;

(3) Other methods of disposition under Section 2614(e); provided, that the Purchasing Manager determines that competitive bidding or auctioning of such surplus property is infeasible, has not resulted in sale of such surplus property, or will result in minimal return to the City.

(c) Competitive Bidding. If the Purchasing Manager elects to dispose of surplus property by competitive bidding, the following procedures shall be used:

(1) Surplus property shall be sold to the highest bidder submitting a sealed bid in response to a notice of sale by sealed bid.

(2) The Purchasing Manager shall cause to be published at least three (3) days before the sale, in a locally adjudicated newspaper, a notice setting forth a general description of the surplus property to be sold; and the date, time and location for submittal of sealed bids, which date shall not be less than five (5) calendar days following the last date of publication of the notice; the location where the property may be inspected; any special terms or conditions of sale; and the place, date and time when the bids will be opened and tabulated.

(3) The Purchasing Manager shall accept the highest bid or may reject all bids, and at a later date hold another public sale by competitive bidding. However, if the disposition of such surplus property includes capitalized equipment, then approval of the City Council shall also be required prior to disposition of such capitalized equipment.

(d) Auction. If the Purchasing Manager elects to dispose of surplus property by auction, the following procedures shall be used:

(1) If the auction of such surplus property includes capitalized equipment, then the Purchasing Manager shall seek the approval of the City Council prior to initiating disposition by auction.

(2) Surplus property shall be sold to the highest bidder at a public auction conducted by a licensed auctioneer or through participation in a cooperative auction of government agencies.

(3) The Purchasing Manager shall cause to be published at least three (3) days before the sale, in a locally adjudicated newspaper, a notice setting forth a general description of the surplus personal property to be sold, and the date, time and location of the auction. If the auction is part of a cooperative auction, the notice given by or on behalf of the agency coordinating the auction will satisfy the requirements of this subsection and no additional notice is required.

(4) The surplus property shall be sold to the highest bidder, provided the bid exceeds the minimum bid price, if any.

(5) All surplus property shall be sold “as-is” without warranty express or implied.

(6) The Purchasing Manager may contract with a professional auctioneer and allow a flat fee, hourly fee or percentage of the amount of the sale to be paid based upon that which is common and customary method and rate for such auctioneering services.

(e) Other Methods of Disposition. The Purchasing Manager, when in his or her judgment that the competitive bid or auction of surplus property is infeasible, has not resulted in sale of such surplus property, or will result in minimal return to the City, may dispose of such surplus property by:

(1) Donation to any other governmental organization, nonprofit group or corporation exempt from Federal taxes pursuant to Internal Revenue Code Section 501(c)(3) located within or serving the City of Carson. Surplus property shall only be donated upon approval of the City Council; or

(2) Sending to a recycling or waste disposal facility.

(3) However, to the extent that the disposition of such surplus property includes capitalized equipment, then approval of the City Council shall also be required prior to disposition of such capitalized equipment.

(f) The Purchasing Manager shall keep a written record of surplus property sold or donated pursuant to this Chapter. If the property was sold, the record shall include the price or other consideration paid and the identity of the purchaser. If the property was donated, the record shall include the identity of the donee.

(g) Unless otherwise provided, all proceeds from sale or auction of surplus property will be deposited into the City’s general fund. Proceeds from sale of enterprise, Federal, grant or other special designation property will be reimbursed, less prorated selling expenses to the appropriate fund, after completion of each sale. (Ord. 17-1609, § 2)

2615 Employee Conflict of Interest Prohibited.
(a) It shall be unethical for any City employee or City official to participate directly or indirectly in a procurement contract when the City employee or official knows that:

(1) The City employee or official, or any member of the City employee’s or official’s immediate family has a financial interest pertaining to the procurement contract; or

(2) Any other person, business, or organization with whom the City employee or official, or any member of the City employee’s or official’s immediate family is negotiating or has an arrangement concerning prospective employment is involved in the procurement contract.

(b) No City employee or City official may purchase any surplus property from the City. (Ord. 17-1609, § 2)

2616 Services Performed by City Employees.
Nothing in this Chapter shall preclude the City from utilizing its employees from performing work or services. (Ord. 17-1609, § 2)

CHAPTER 7
DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, COMMISSIONS
Sections:

A. Planning Commission

§ 2700    Planning Commission – Creation of.

§ 2701    Members.

§ 2702    Absence from Meetings.

§ 2703    Regular Meetings.

§ 2704    Duties.

§ 2705    Records.

§ 2706    Organization.

§ 2707    Stipend and Expenses.

§ 2708    Reserved.

§ 2709    Reserved.

B. Department of Community Development

§ 2710    Repealed.

§ 2711    Repealed.

§ 2712    Repealed.

C. Finance Division

§ 2720    Finance Division.

§ 2721    Director of Finance.

§ 2722    Transfer of Duties of City Clerk to the Director of Finance.

§ 2723    Duties of the Director of Finance.

§ 2724    Director of Finance – Bond.

D. Department of Parks and Recreation

§ 2730    Department of Parks and Recreation.

§ 2731    Director of Parks and Recreation.

§ 2732    Duties of the Director of Parks and Recreation.

§ 2733    Divisions of the Department of Parks and Recreation.

§ 2734    Parks in the Department of Parks and Recreation.

E. Parks, Recreation and Cultural Arts Commission

§ 2735    Parks, Recreation and Cultural Arts Commission Established.

§ 2736    Members.

§ 2737    Absence from Meetings.

§ 2738    Organization.

§ 2739    Meetings.

§ 2740    Repealed.

§ 2741    Duties and Functions of Members.

§ 2742    Compensation and Expenses.

F. Environmental Commission

§ 2750    Environmental Commission – Establishment of.

§ 2751    Members.

§ 2752    Regular Meetings.

§ 2753    Duties.

§ 2754    Records.

§ 2755    Organization.

§ 2756    Compensation and Expenses.

§ 2757    Absence from Meetings.

G. Human Relations Commission

§ 2760    Declaration of Policy.

§ 2761    Human Relations Commission Established.

§ 2762    Members.

§ 2763    Organization.

§ 2764    Regular Meetings.

§ 2765    Absence from Meetings.

§ 2766    Duties and Functions of Commission.

§ 2767    Compensation and Expenses.

H. Department of Public Safety

§ 2780    Department of Public Safety.

§ 2781    Director of Public Safety.

§ 2782    Chief of Police – References to.

§ 2783    Duties of the Director of Public Safety.

§ 2784    Department of Public Safety – Functions.

§ 2785    County Contracts and Districts.

§ 2786    City Security Officers.

§ 2787    Applications, Investigations, and Examination of Applicants.

§ 2788    Oath.

§ 2789    Training.

§ 2790    Powers and Duties.

§ 2791    Uniforms and Insignia.

§ 2792    Nature of Position.

I. Department of Public Works

§ 2793    Department of Public Works.

§ 2794    Director of Public Works.

§ 2795    Duties of the Director of Public Works.

J. Cultural Arts Commission

§ 2796.1    Cultural Arts Commission – Establishment of.

§ 2796.2    Members.

§ 2796.3    Organization.

§ 2796.4    Meetings.

§ 2796.5    Absence from Meetings.

§ 2796.6    Duties and Functions of Commission.

§ 2796.7    Compensation and Expenses.

K. Department of Personnel

§ 2797.1    Department of Human Resources Established.

§ 2797.2    Director of Personnel.

§ 2797.3    Duties of the Director of Personnel.

L. Public Works Commission

§ 2798.1    Public Works Commission – Establishment of.

§ 2798.2    Members.

§ 2798.3    Organization.

§ 2798.4    Regular Meetings.

§ 2798.5    Absence from Meetings.

§ 2798.6    Duties and Functions of Commission.

§ 2798.7    Compensation and Expenses.

§ 2798.8    Membership Qualifications.

M. Senior Citizens Advisory Commission

§ 2799.1    Senior Citizens Advisory Commission – Establishment of.

§ 2799.2    Members.

§ 2799.3    Organization.

§ 2799.4    Regular Meetings.

§ 2799.5    Absence from Meetings.

§ 2799.6    Duties and Functions of Commission.

§ 2799.7    Compensation and Expenses.

N. Youth Commission

§ 27100.1    Youth Commission – Establishment of.

§ 27100.2    Members.

§ 27100.3    Organization.

§ 27100.4    Regular Meetings.

§ 27100.5    Absence from Meetings.

§ 27100.6    Duties and Functions of Commission.

§ 27100.7    Compensation and Expenses.

O. Citywide Advisory Commission

§ 27101.1    Citywide Advisory Commission – Establishment of.

§ 27101.2    Members.

§ 27101.3    Organization.

§ 27101.4    Regular Meetings.

§ 27101.5    Absence from Meetings.

§ 27101.6    Duties and Functions of Commission.

§ 27101.7    Compensation and Expenses.

§ 27101.8    Membership Qualifications.

P. Veterans Affairs Commission

§ 27102.1    Veterans Affairs Commission – Establishment of.

§ 27102.2    Members.

§ 27102.3    Organization.

§ 27102.4    Regular Meetings.

§ 27102.5    Absence from Meetings.

§ 27102.6    Duties and Functions of Commission.

§ 27102.7    Compensation and Expenses.

§ 27102.8    Membership Qualifications.

Q. Public Safety Commission

§ 27103.1    Public Safety Commission – Establishment of.

§ 27103.2    Members.

§ 27103.3    Organization.

§ 27103.4    Regular Meetings.

§ 27103.5    Absence from Meetings.

§ 27103.6    Duties and Functions of Commission.

§ 27103.7    Compensation and Expenses.

§ 27103.8    Membership Qualifications.

R. Economic Development Commission

§ 27104.1    Economic Development Commission – Establishment of.

§ 27104.2    Members.

§ 27104.3    Organization.

§ 27104.4    Regular Meetings.

§ 27104.5    Absence from Meetings.

§ 27104.6    Duties and Functions of Commission.

§ 27104.7    Compensation and Expenses.

§ 27104.8    Membership Qualifications.

S. Public Relations Commission

§ 27105.1    Public Relations Commission – Establishment of.

§ 27105.2    Members.

§ 27105.3    Organization.

§ 27105.4    Regular Meetings.

§ 27105.5    Absence from Meetings.

§ 27105.6    Duties and Functions of Commission.

§ 27105.7    Compensation and Expenses.

§ 27105.8    Membership Qualifications.

T. Women’s Issues Commission

§ 27106.1    Women’s Issues Commission – Establishment of.

§ 27106.2    Members.

§ 27106.3    Organization.

§ 27106.4    Regular Meetings.

§ 27106.5    Absence from Meetings.

§ 27106.6    Duties and Functions of Commission.

§ 27106.7    Compensation and Expenses.

§ 27106.8    Membership Qualifications.

U. Technology Advancement and Innovation Commission

§ 27107.1    Technology Advancement and Innovation Commission – Establishment of.

§ 27107.2    Members.

§ 27107.3    Organization.

§ 27107.4    Regular Meetings.

§ 27107.5    Absence from Meetings.

§ 27107.6    Duties and Functions of Commission.

§ 27107.7    Compensation and Expenses.

§ 27107.8    Membership Qualifications.

V. Beautification Commission

§ 27108.1    Beautification Commission – Establishment of.

§ 27108.2    Members.

§ 27108.3    Organization.

§ 27108.4    Regular Meetings.

§ 27108.5    Absence from Meetings.

§ 27108.6    Duties and Functions of Commission.

§ 27108.7    Compensation and Expenses.

§ 27108.8    Membership Qualifications.

W. Bullying Prevention Commission

§ 27109.1    Bullying Prevention Commission – Establishment of.

§ 27109.2    Members.

§ 27109.3    Organization.

§ 27109.4    Regular Meetings.

§ 27109.5    Absence from Meetings.

§ 27109.6    Duties and Functions of Commission.

§ 27109.7    Compensation and Expenses.

§ 27109.8    Membership Qualifications.

A. Planning Commission

2700 Planning Commission – Creation of.
A Planning Commission is hereby created and established in accordance with the provisions of the Planning Law of the State of California, Title 7 of the Government Code, and in particular pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 3 of said Title 7 of the Government Code. Said Planning Commission may be known and referred to as the “Carson Planning Commission” or as the “Planning Commission.” (Ord. 13, § 1)

2701 Members.
The Planning Commission shall consist of nine (9) members, and three (3) alternate members who shall be called upon, when necessary, in the order of their appointments as Alternate 1, 2 or 3, to substitute for any absent commissioner, each of whom shall be and remain a resident of the City of Carson. All members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. The tenure of any member of the Commission and any Alternate shall be terminable at will, and without cause, by removal on the motion of any member of the Council, duly seconded, and with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. Subject to the provisions of this Section, the tenure of Commission members appointed on or after April 1, 1997, shall expire at midnight on the last day of the calendar month in which the next general municipal election after the member’s appointment is held for seats on the Carson City Council. Each Commission member shall continue to serve until a successor has been appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor, and has qualified unless the City Council declares the position to be vacant. Should any vacancy exist on the Commission, an appointment shall be made by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. All appointments shall be made in an open meeting of the City Council. (Ord. 13, § 1; Ord. 71-151, § 2; Ord. 74-307, § 1; Ord. 80-542, § 1; Ord. 84-694, § 1; Ord. 92-983, § 2; Ord. 97-1113, § 1; Ord. 04-1325, § 2; Ord. 04-1330, § 2; Ord. 13-1520, § 1; Ord. 13-1523, § 1)

2702 Absence from Meetings.
If a member of the Planning Commission is absent from three (3) successive regular meetings without being excused by the Commission, or is absent for any reason for more than six (6) regular meetings in any twelve (12) month period, the office of such member shall be vacated and the Chair shall immediately notify the City Manager, who shall notify the City Council that said office is vacant. Upon such notification, a successor for the remainder of the term of such member shall be appointed by the appointing authority for the member whose position is vacated. (Ord. 13, § 1; Ord. 84-694, § 1; Ord. 92-983, § 2; Ord. 97-1113, § 1)

2703 Regular Meetings.
Regular meetings of the Planning Commission shall be held on the second and fourth Tuesdays of each calendar month, at the hour of 6:30 p.m., or on the next succeeding day which is not a holiday. Regular meetings may be adjourned by public announcement to a specified date, and any such adjourned meeting shall be deemed a regular meeting. Said meeting dates may be changed by resolution adopted by the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council. (Ord. 13, § 1; Ord. 77-415, § 2; Ord. 91-947, § 1)

2704 Duties.
The Planning Commission shall have the power and duty, except as otherwise provided by law, to:

(a) Prepare and recommend to the City Council a comprehensive long-term general plan for the physical development of the City, including all segments of the City, and of any land outside its boundaries which in the Planning Commission’s judgment bears relation to its planning.

(b) Investigate and make recommendations to the City Council upon reasonable and practical means for putting into effect the general plan or part thereof, in order that it will serve as a pattern and guide for the orderly physical growth and development of the City, and as a basis for the efficient expenditure of funds relating to the subjects of the general plan.

(c) Render an annual report to the City Council on the status of the plan and progress in its application.

(d) Endeavor to promote public interest in an understanding of the general plan, and regulations relating to it.

(e) Consult and advise with public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational, professional and other organizations, and citizens generally with relation to carrying out the general plan.

(f) Review proposals for major public works submitted to it by departments of the City, and report to such departments with respect to conformity thereof with the general plan.

(g) Review proposals for acquisition of property for street, park or other public purposes and report to the appropriate City department as to conformity thereof with the general plan.

(h) Make recommendations to the City Council with respect to a specific plan or regulation or any amendment to a specific plan or regulation, and report to the City Council upon any change or addition proposed with respect thereto.

(i) Hold a public hearing on any proposed zoning ordinance or amendment to zoning ordinance which changes any property from one zone to another or imposes or removes regulations with respect thereto, and render its decision thereon in the form of a written recommendation to the City Council. Such recommendation shall include the reasons for the recommendation and shall be transmitted to the City Council in such form and manner as may be specified by the City Council. (Ord. 13, § 4)

(j) Hear and decide applications for conditional uses or other permits provided for by the zoning ordinance, where criteria are provided by such zoning ordinance for determining such matters, subject to appeal to the City Council.

(k) Hear and decide applications for exceptions or variances from the terms of the zoning ordinance, subject to appeal to the City Council.

(l) Consider tentative maps of proposed subdivisions of land and recommend to the City Council approval, conditional approval or disapproval of such tentative maps.

(m) Have and exercise all of the powers, duties, rights, privileges and authorities of a City Planning Commission, all as provided for by the law of the State of California, and by the provisions of the Carson Municipal Code, as said law or Municipal Code now exists and as the same may from time to time be hereafter amended. (Ord. 13, § 1)

2705 Records.
The Planning Commission shall cause proper records to be kept of all its official acts and proceedings, and shall make reports to the City Council as provided for by the State Planning Law or as provided by the City Council. (Ord. 13, § 1)

2706 Organization.
The Planning Commission shall elect a Chairman, a Vice-Chairman and a Secretary from among its members, for a term of one (1) year, at its first regular meeting in July of each year. The Commission may also appoint such other officers as may be necessary for the administration of its business, at the same time and for like terms. Said officers shall enter in the duties of their office at the first regular meeting in July of each year. The Commission shall adopt rules and regulations for the transaction of its business and shall keep a record of all its minutes, resolutions, actions, findings and determinations. Minutes, resolutions, and official records shall be filed with the City Clerk and the City Administrator. (Ord. 13, § 1; Ord. 74-307, § 4)

2707 Stipend and Expenses.
Each member and alternate member of the Planning Commission shall receive as a stipend for service on the Planning Commission $50.00 for each meeting of the Planning Commission attended by such member, not to exceed a total stipend of $200.00 in any one (1) month. The Secretary of the Planning Commission shall submit to the Finance Officer at the end of each calendar month a statement showing the number of meetings of the Planning Commission attended by each member during such month. No additional stipend shall be paid for expenses incurred by the members of the Planning Commission in the performance of their duties, except that the City Council may, from time to time, authorize in advance expenditures for attendance at seminars, institutes, or other meetings which the City Council finds beneficial to the Commissioners in the performance of their duties, and in the best interest of the City. Claims for such expenditures shall be filed with the Finance Officer and shall be subject to audit and approval by the City Council. (Ord. 16, § 1; Ord. 73-268, § 1; Ord. 05-1335, § 1; Ord. 13-1520, § 2)

2708 Reserved.
2709 Reserved.
B. Department of Community Development

2710 Repealed.
Repealed by Ord. 00-1190. (Ord. 39, § 1; Ord. 71-151, § 1)

2711 Repealed.
Repealed by Ord. 00-1190. (Ord. 39, § 1; Ord. 71-151, § 1)

2712 Repealed.
Repealed by Ord. 00-1190. (Ord. 39, § 1; Ord. 71-151, § 1; Ord. 71-163, § 1)

C. Finance Division

2720 Finance Division.
There is hereby created and established a Finance Division. The Finance Division shall be composed of the following Sections which shall consist of such personnel as may be authorized by the City Council:

(a) Accounting Section.

(b) Purchasing and Central Services Section.

(c) Business License Section. (Ord. 79-496; Ord. 80-546, § 1; Ord. 82-605, § 1; Ord. 00-1190, § 18)

2721 Director of Finance.
The Division of Finance shall be headed by a Director of Finance who shall be appointed by the City Manager with approval of the City Council. (Ord. 79-496; Ord. 00-1190, § 19)

2722 Transfer of Duties of City Clerk to the Director of Finance.
a. The powers and duties imposed upon the City Clerk by Article I of Chapter 4, Part 2, Division 3, Title 4 of the Government Code of the State are hereby transferred to the Director of Finance in accordance with Section 37209 of the Government Code.

b. The financial and accounting powers and duties imposed upon the City Clerk by Sections 40802 through 40805 of the Government Code of the State are hereby transferred to the Director of Finance, as authorized by Section 40805.5 of said Code. (Ord. 40; Ord. 79-496)

2723 Duties of the Director of Finance.
The Director of Finance shall be responsible to the City Manager and shall perform the following duties in addition to those provided for in CMC 2722.

(a) Serve as the administrative head of the Division of Finance and have direct charge of all City personnel assigned to the Department of Finance.

(b) Advise and assist the City Council, City Manager, City Groups and City Commissions on all matters relating to finance.

(c) Plan, organize, staff, direct and control all functions, operations, programs and responsibilities of the Division of Finance including, but not limited to, the following:

(1) Accounting and Financial Management Responsibilities.

(i) Administration of financial affairs of the City.

(ii) Maintain a general accounting system and records which will accurately reflect the City financial transactions, and prepare financial statements and performance reports which will clearly show the financial condition of the City including revenue, expenses and capital assets.

(iii) Preparation of the City register of demands, payment warrants and vouchers and the City payroll.

(iv) Audit and approve before payment all bills, invoices, payrolls, demands and charges against the City.

(v) Assure the maintenance of inventory records of City stocks, surpluses and capital assets, and assure that an annual inventory is accomplished for all stock and supplies.

(2) Purchasing and Central Services Responsibilities.

(i) Provide centralized purchasing of materials and services for all City groups, divisions, sections, and programs in accordance with Article II, Chapter 6, Purchasing System.

(ii) Establish and direct printing and reproduction services, communications and mail service.

(iii) Establish and administer City-wide supplies and materials warehousing and inventory procedures and facilities.

(iv) Establish and administer records management procedures and facilities.

(3) License and Franchising Responsibilities.

(i) Enforce and administer the City business and franchise regulations and ordinances including collection and accountability for license and franchise fees collected.

(ii) Serve as and perform the duties of the tax collector as provided in the business license ordinance.

(4) Perform other duties as may be required by other ordinances and resolutions governing fiscal administration and exercise such powers as are necessarily incident to the above duties and powers or as may be assigned to the Director from time to time by the City Manager. (Ord. 40; Ord. 69-76, § 2; Ord. 79-496; Ord. 80-546, § 1; Ord. 82-605, § 2; Ord. 00-1190, § 20)

2724 Director of Finance – Bond.
The Director of Finance shall execute a bond to the City similar to the financial bond of public officers, in conformity with the provisions of the Government Code of the State and Section 36518 thereof. (Ord. 40; Ord. 79-496; Ord. 80-546, § 1)

D. Department of Parks and Recreation

2730 Department of Parks and Recreation.
There is hereby created and established a Department of Parks and Recreation, which shall consist of such personnel as may be authorized by the City Council. (Ord. 53, § 1)

2731 Director of Parks and Recreation.
The Department of Parks and Recreation shall be headed by a Director of Parks and Recreation who shall be appointed by the City Administrator with the approval of the City Council. (Ord. 53, § 1)

2732 Duties of the Director of Parks and Recreation.
The Director of Parks and Recreation shall be responsible to the City Administrator and shall perform the following duties:

(a) Be the administrative head of the Department of Parks and Recreation and shall have direct charge of all City personnel assigned to the Department of Parks and Recreation.

(b) Advise and assist the City Council and City Administrator on all matters relating to park and recreation activities and facilities.

(c) Supervise and evaluate the needs and resources of the City for recreational activities and facilities.

(d) Plan and supervise the development and maintenance of this City’s parks.

(e) Be responsible for the administration and enforcement of all rules, regulations and policies of the City and the Department of Parks and Recreation relating to the parks and their facilities.

(f) Perform such other duties as the City Administrator may from time to time assign him. (Ord. 53, § 1)

2733 Divisions of the Department of Parks and Recreation.
The Department of Parks and Recreation shall be divided under the Director of Parks and Recreation into the following divisions:

a. Division of Recreation. The Division of Recreation under the Assistant Director of Recreation shall perform specialized work in the supervision, planning and organizing of recreational programs and perform other related work as required.

b. Division of Maintenance. The Division of Maintenance under the Assistant Director of Maintenance shall perform specialized work in the planning and supervision of the development and maintenance of the City parks and perform other related work as required. (Ord. 53, § 1)

2734 Parks in the Department of Parks and Recreation.
The Department of Parks and Recreation is responsible for the operations and maintenance of a total of sixteen (16) parks. Of this total, twelve (12) are full-service parks and four (4) are mini parks.

A. The names and locations of the twelve (12) full-service parks are as follows:

i. Anderson Park – 19101 South Wilmington Avenue, Carson, California 90746;

ii. Calas Park – 1000 East 220th Street, Carson, California 90745;

iii. Carriage Crest Park – 23800 South Figueroa Street, Carson, California 90745;

iv. Carson Park – 21411 South Orrick Avenue, Carson, California 90745;

v. Del Amo Park – 703 East Del Amo Boulevard, Carson, California 90745;

vi. Dolphin Park – 21205 Water Street, Carson, California 90745;

vii. Dominguez Park – 21330 Santa Fe Avenue, Carson, California 90810;

viii. Foisia Park – 23410 Catskill Avenue, Carson, California 90745;

ix. Hemingway Park – 700 East Gardena Avenue, Carson, California 90746;

x. Mills Park – 1340 East Dimondale Drive, Carson, California 90746;

xi. Stevenson Park – 17400 Lysander Drive, Carson, California 90746;

xii. Veterans Park – 22400 Moneta Avenue, Carson, California 90745.

B. The names and locations of the four (4) mini parks are as follows:

i. Friendship Mini Park – 21930 South Water Street, Carson, California 90745;

ii. Perry Street Mini Park – 215th and Perry Street, Carson, California 90745;

iii. Reflection Mini Park – 21208 Shearer Avenue, Carson, California 90746;

iv. Walnut Mini Park – 440 East Walnut Avenue, Carson, California 90746. (Ord. 18-1827, § 1)

E. Parks, Recreation and Cultural Arts Commission

2735 Parks, Recreation and Cultural Arts Commission Established.
There shall be, and there is hereby, established a commission to be known and designated as the Parks, Recreation and Cultural Arts Commission. This Commission shall formulate, subject to Council direction, oversight, and approval, Parks, Recreation and Cultural Arts Programs for the City of Carson. (Ord. 69-65, § 1; Ord. 12-1506, § 1)

2736 Members.
The Parks and Recreation Commission shall consist of nine (9) members, and three (3) alternate members who shall be called upon, when necessary, in the order of their appointments as Alternate 1, 2 or 3, to substitute for any absent commissioner, each of whom shall be and remain a resident of the City of Carson. All members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. The tenure of any member of the Commission and any Alternate shall be terminable at will, and without cause, by removal on the motion of any member of the Council, duly seconded, and with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. Subject to the provisions of this Section, the tenure of Commission members appointed on or after April 1, 1997, shall expire at midnight on the last day of the calendar month in which the next general municipal election after the member’s appointment is held for seats on the Carson City Council. Each Commission member shall continue to serve until a successor has been appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor, and has qualified unless the City Council declares the position to be vacant. Should any vacancy exist on the Commission, an appointment shall be made by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. All appointments shall be made in an open meeting of the City Council. (Ord. 69-65, § 1; Ord. 72-215, § 1; Ord. 72-227, § 1; Ord. 74-307, § 2; Ord. 84-694, § 2; Ord. 92-983, § 2; Ord. 93-1010, § 2; Ord. 94-1041, § 1; Ord. 97-1113, § 1; Ord. 98-1132, § 2; Ord. 04-1325, § 3; Ord. 04-1330, § 3; Ord. 12-1506, § 2; Ord. 12-1495, § 1; Ord. 13-1516, § 1; Ord. 13-1520, § 1; Ord. 13-1523, § 1)

2737 Absence from Meetings.
If a member of the Parks, Recreation and Cultural Arts Commission is absent from three (3) successive regular meetings without being excused by the Commission, or is absent for any reason for more than six (6) regular meetings in any twelve (12) month period, the office of such member shall be vacated and the Chair shall immediately notify the City Manager, who shall notify the City Council that said office is vacant. Upon such notification, a successor for the remainder of the term of such member shall be appointed by the appointing authority for the member whose position is vacated. (Ord. 69-65, § 1; Ord. 84-694, § 2; Ord. 92-983, § 2; Ord. 97-1113, § 1; Ord. 12-1506, § 3)

2738 Organization.
The Parks, Recreation and Cultural Arts Commission shall elect a Chairperson, a Vice-Chairperson and a Secretary from among its members, for a term of one (1) year, at its first regular meeting in July of each year. The Commission may also appoint such other officers as may be necessary or convenient for the administration of its business, at the same time and for like terms. Said officers shall enter in the duties of their office at the first regular meeting in July of each year. The Commission shall adopt rules and regulations for the transaction of its business, and shall keep a record of all its minutes, resolutions, actions, findings and determinations, all of which shall be filed with the City Clerk and the City. The Director of Community Services shall appoint a City employee to serve as staff advisor to the Commission. (Ord. 69-65, § 1; Ord. 74-307, § 5; Ord. 12-1506, § 4)

2739 Meetings.
The Parks, Recreation and Cultural Arts Commission shall hold at least one (1) regular meeting in each month at such time and place as designated in the rules and regulations of the Commission. The Commission shall further determine and provide in its rules and regulations the manner in which special meetings may be held and the notice to be given of such meetings. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum. (Ord. 69-65, § 1; Ord. 12-1506, § 5)

2740 Repealed.
Repealed by Ord. 84-694.

2741 Duties and Functions of Members.
The Parks, Recreation and Cultural Arts Commission will be a functioning arm of the City structure, as all other appointed commissions, and will be the responsibility of and staffed by the Community Services Department.

The functions of the Parks, Recreation and Cultural Arts Commission shall be to advise and recommend to the City Council and City staff on all matters relating to parks, recreation, and cultural arts and shall also:

1. Act in an advisory capacity to the City Council in all matters pertaining to parks, public recreation and cultural arts, and to cooperate with other governmental agencies and civic groups in the advancement of sound park and recreation planning and programming.

2. Formulate general policies on recreation services and cultural art activities for approval by the City Council.

3. Advise with the Recreation and Cultural Arts staff on the development of recreation areas, facilities, programs, cultural art presentations, and improved recreational services.

4. Recommend the adoption of standards on organization, areas and facilities, programs, cultural art presentations and financial support.

5. Make periodic inventories of recreation services and cultural arts activities that exist, or may be needed, and interpret the needs of the public to the City Council.

6. Interpret the policies and functions of the Parks, Recreation and Cultural Arts Commission to the public.

7. Advise the Director of Community Services in the preparation of the annual budget of the Department and a long-range recreation capital improvement program before it is presented to the City Council. (Ord. 69-65, § 1; Ord. 12-1506, § 6)

2742 Compensation and Expenses.
Each member and alternate member of the Parks, Recreation and Cultural Arts Commission shall receive compensation at the rate of $35.00 for each meeting of the Commission attended by such member, not to exceed a total compensation of $70.00 in any one (1) month. Such compensation shall be paid on the first demand register of the month. The Secretary of the Commission shall submit to the Finance Officer at the end of each calendar month a statement showing the number of meetings of the Commission attended by each member during such month. No additional compensation shall be paid for expenses incurred by the members of the Commission in the performance of their duties, except that the City Council may, from time to time, authorize in advance expenditures for attendance at seminars, institutes or other meetings which the City Council finds beneficial to the Commissioners in the performance of their duties, and in the best interest of the City. Claims for such expenditures shall be filed with the Finance Officer and shall be subject to audit and approval by the City Council. (Ord. 69-65, § 1; Ord. 73-268, § 1; Ord. 06-1368, § 2; Ord. 12-1506, § 7; Ord. 13-1520, § 2)

F. Environmental Commission

2750 Environmental Commission – Establishment of.
There is hereby established an Environmental Commission. Said Environmental Commission may be known and referred to as the “Carson Environmental Commission” or as the “Environmental Commission.” (Ord. 70-128, § 1)

2751 Members.
The Environmental Commission shall consist of nine (9) members, and three (3) alternate members who shall be called upon, when necessary, in the order of their appointments as Alternate 1, 2 or 3, to substitute for any absent commissioner, each of whom shall be and remain a resident of the City of Carson. All members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. The tenure of any member of the Commission and any Alternate shall be terminable at will, and without cause, by removal on the motion of any member of the Council, duly seconded, and with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. Subject to the provisions of this Section, the tenure of Commission members appointed on or after April 1, 1997, shall expire at midnight on the last day of the calendar month in which the next general municipal election after the member’s appointment is held for seats on the Carson City Council. Each Commission member shall continue to serve until a successor has been appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor, and has qualified unless the City Council declares the position to be vacant. Should any vacancy exist on the Commission, an appointment shall be made by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. All appointments shall be made in an open meeting of the City Council. (Ord. 71-128, § 1; Ord. 71-153, § 1; Ord. 72-207, § 1; Ord. 74-307, § 3; Ord. 80-542, § 2; Ord. 84-694, § 3; Ord. 97-1113, § 1; Ord. 04-1325, § 4; Ord. 04-1330, § 4; Ord. 13-1519, § 1; Ord. 13-1523, § 1)

2752 Regular Meetings.
At least one (1) regular meeting of the Environmental Commission shall be held every month. Said meeting shall be held at the hour of 6:30 p.m. in the Carson City Hall, on the first Wednesday or on the next succeeding day which is not a holiday. Regular meetings may be adjourned by public announcement to a specific date, and any such adjourned meeting shall be deemed a regular meeting. All meetings shall be open to the public. (Ord. 70-128; Ord. 77-416, § 1; Ord. 94-1029)

2753 Duties.
The Environmental Commission shall have the power and duty, except as otherwise provided by law, to:

(a) Undertake investigation and studies, and to hold hearings concerning the pollution of the City’s environment, and to make recommendations to the City Council of reasonable and practical means of creating and maintaining a desirable, healthy environment in and throughout the City of Carson. Said investigations and studies may be made by committees created by the Commission, chaired by a member of the Commission and comprised of Commission members, citizens of the City of Carson and any other individuals having experience or expertise which would be helpful in the accomplishment of the committee’s purposes.

(b) Consult and advise with public officials and agencies on the local, state and federal level, with members of the industrial, civic, educational and professional communities, either individually or in concert, towards the goal of accomplishment and execution of the environmental plans, programs and policies approved by the City Council.

(c) Endeavor to promote public interest in and understanding of the problems of environmental pollution and remedies therefor.

(d) Recommend to the City Council the adoption of standards or guidelines relating to permitted levels of noise, air pollution and water pollution.

(e) Act as the City Underground Utilities Advisory Committee.

(f) Coordinate enforcement by, and cooperative efforts between, other concerned governmental agencies, private firms and organizations and the several departments of the City.

(g) Review proposed legislation, Federal, State and local, which may have a bearing upon environmental factors affecting the City, and make recommendation to the City Council as to any position or action to be taken with respect thereto. (Ord. 70-128, § 1; Ord. 72-207, § 2)

2754 Records.
The Environmental Commission shall cause proper records to be kept of all its official acts and proceedings, and shall make reports to the City Council as provided for by the City Council. (Ord. 70-128, § 1)

2755 Organization.
The Environmental Commission shall elect a Chairman, a Vice-Chairman and a Secretary from among its members, for a term of one (1) year, at its first regular meeting in July of each year. The Commission may also appoint such other officers as may be necessary for the administration of its business, at the same time and for like terms. Said officers shall enter in the duties of their office at the first regular meeting in July of each year. The Commission shall adopt rules and regulations for the transaction of its business and shall keep a record of all its minutes, resolutions, actions, findings, and determinations. Minutes, resolutions and official records shall be filed with the City Clerk and the City Administrator. (Ord. 70-128, § 1; Ord. 74-307, § 6)

2756 Compensation and Expenses.
Each member and alternate member of the Environmental Commission shall receive compensation at the rate of $35.00 for each meeting of the Environmental Commission attended by such member, not to exceed a total compensation of $70.00 in any one (1) month. Such compensation shall be paid on the first register of the month. No additional compensation shall be paid for expenses incurred by the members of the Commission in the performance of their duties, except that the City Council may, from time to time, authorize in advance expenditures for attendance at seminars, institutes or other meetings which the City Council may find to be beneficial to the Commissioners in the performance of their duties, and in the best interests of the City. Claims for such expenses shall be filed with the Finance Officer and shall be subject to audit and approval by the City Council. (Ord. 70-128, § 1; Ord. 73-268, § 1; Ord. 06-1368, § 3; Ord. 13-1519, § 1)

2757 Absence from Meetings.
If a member of the Environmental Commission is absent from three (3) successive regular meetings without being excused by the Commission, or is absent for any reason for more than six (6) regular meetings in any twelve (12) month period, the office of such member shall be vacated and the chair shall immediately notify the City Manager, who shall notify the City Council that said office is vacant. Upon such notification, a successor for the remainder of the term of such member shall be appointed by the appointing authority for the member whose position is vacated. (Ord. 84-694, § 3; Ord. 92-983, § 2; Ord. 97-1113, § 1)

G. Human Relations Commission

2760 Declaration of Policy.
The City Council recognizes and finds:

That in an increasingly complex society it is necessary for local government to be concerned with the problems and needs of individuals and groups within that society if the Constitutional principles of democracy, freedom and equality of opportunity are to be achieved, preserved and protected;

That the rights of individuals, regardless of religious affiliation, national origin, political belief, economic status, cultural background, race, color, age or sex are identical under law, and should be equal in practice in our society and community;

That the people of a community are that community’s greatest resource.

That it is therefore in the best interest of the community not only to protect and insure the legal rights of individuals and groups, but also to seek to provide opportunity for the full realization of the hopes, aspirations, abilities and ambitions of individuals of all religions, races, national origins, political beliefs, economic or social status, cultural background, ages or sex, thereby encouraging and developing the human resources of the community to their highest potential value, thereby improving the quality of our society and the richness of life. (Ord. 74-294; Ord. 87-812, § 1; Ord. 89-883, § 1)

2761 Human Relations Commission Established.
In order to work toward the fulfillment of the goals and objectives embodied in the foregoing statement of policy, the Human Relations Commission is hereby established. (Ord. 74-294; Ord. 87-812, § 1; Ord. 89-883, § 1)

2762 Members.
The Human Relations Commission shall consist of nine (9) members, seven (7) general members and two (2) youth members, and three (3) alternate members who shall be called upon, when necessary, in the order of their appointments as Alternate 1, 2 or 3, to substitute for any absent commissioner, each of whom shall be a resident of the City of Carson. The members shall be appointed as follows.

(a) General Members. All general members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. Subject to the provisions of this Section 2762, the tenure of the first general members appointed after the effective date hereof shall expire April 30, 1994. Thereafter, all general members shall be appointed biennially for two (2) year terms expiring at midnight on April 30th of each regular municipal election year (each even-numbered year).

(b) Youth Members.* The two (2) youth members shall be appointed by the Mayor, based upon the recommendation of the general members, and subject to approval by the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. Each youth member shall serve for a one (1) year term or until his or her successor is appointed and qualified. All terms of office shall commence on July 1st of each year and expire on June 30th of the successive year. Thereafter, one (1) or both of the youth commissioners may be appointed for one (1) additional year, for a maximum tenure of two (2) years. The two (2) youth members shall meet all of the following qualifications.

(1) Youth members shall be between the ages of sixteen (16) and twenty-one (21) and enrolled in school at the time of appointment;

(2) Youth members shall have maintained at least a 2.0 grade point average in the previous school year; and

(3) Youth members shall have an interest in human relations issues and concerns.

(c) Termination, Vacancies, Voting. The tenure of any member of the Commission and any Alternate shall be terminable at will, and without cause, by removal on the motion of any member of the Council, duly seconded, and with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. Subject to the provisions of this Section, the tenure of Commission members appointed on or after April 1, 1997, shall expire at midnight on the last day of the calendar month in which the next general municipal election after the member’s appointment is held for seats on the Carson City Council. Each Commission member shall continue to serve until a successor has been appointed by the appointing power and has qualified unless the City Council declares the position to be vacant. Should any vacancy exist on the Commission, an appointment shall be made by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. All appointments shall be made in an open meeting of the City Council. Action taken by the Commission shall only be valid if a majority of the general members present, and in no event less than three (3) general members, have voted for it. (Ord. 74-294; Ord. 75-330, § 1; Ord. 81-562, § 1; Ord. 81-581, § 1; Ord. 84-694, § 4; Ord. 87-812, § 1; Ord. 89-883, § 1; Ord. 92-983, § 1; Ord. 93-1010, § 3; Ord. 94-1041, § 2; Ord. 97-1113, § 1; Ord. 04-1325, § 5; Ord. 04-1330, § 5; Ord. 07-1384, § 1; Ord. 13-1520, § 1; Ord. 13-1523, § 1)

*Editor’s Note: Procedures for the filling of vacancies for youth members may be found in Ordinance No. 93-1010, Section 4, which has not been codified herein.

2763 Organization.
The Human Relations Commission shall elect a Chairperson, a Vice-Chairperson and a Secretary from among its members, for terms of one (1) year, at its first regular meeting in July of each year. The Commission may also appoint such other officers as may be necessary or convenient for the administration of its business, at the same time and for like terms. Said officers shall enter in the duties of their office at the first regular meeting in July of each year. The Commission shall adopt rules and regulations for the transaction of its business and shall keep a record of all its minutes, resolutions, actions, findings and determinations, all of which shall be filed with the City Clerk. Minutes, resolutions, and recommendations shall be filed with the City Clerk and the City Administrator. (Ord. 74-294; Ord. 87-812, § 1; Ord. 89-883, § 1)

2764 Regular Meetings.
The Human Relations Commission shall hold at least one (1) regular meeting in each month at such time and date as designated in the rules and regulations of the Commission. Five (5) members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum. The Commission may hold its meetings in the Council Chambers or in such other suitable place as the Commission may designate. All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public. (Ord. 74-294; Ord. 81-562, § 1; Ord. 81-581, § 1; Ord. 87-812, § 1; Ord. 89-883, § 1)

2765 Absence from Meetings.
If a member of the Human Relations Commission is absent from three (3) successive regular meetings without being excused by the Commission, or is absent for any reason for more than six (6) regular meetings in any twelve (12) month period, the office of such member shall be vacated and the Chair shall immediately notify the City Manager, who shall notify the City Council that said office is vacant. Upon such notification, a successor for the remainder of the term of such member shall be appointed by the appointing authority for the member whose position is vacated. (Ord. 74-294; Ord. 84-694, § 4; Ord. 87-812, § 1; Ord. 89-883, § 1; Ord. 92-983, § 2; Ord. 97-1113, § 1)

2766 Duties and Functions of Commission.
The Carson Human Relations Commission shall have the following duties and responsibilities:

(a) To advise and consult with the City Council, City Administrator, and the commissions, boards and officers of the City on all matters involving discrimination on the basis of race, religion, national origin, culture, economic status, age or sex;

(b) To recommend such corrective or legislative action as may be appropriate to effectuate the policy of the City Council which is declared in this Part;

(c) To invite and enlist the cooperation of racial, religious and ethnic groups, youth and senior citizen organizations, community organizations, fraternal and benevolent societies, veterans organizations, professional and technical organizations and other groups in the City of Carson in carrying on its work;

(d) To foster communication, mutual respect and understanding among all racial, religious and other groups in the community;

(e) To make such studies in any area of human relationship in the community as in the judgment of the Commission will aid in effectuating its general purpose;

(f) To cooperate with the City, County, State and Federal agencies whenever it deems such action appropriate in effectuating the policy of this Part;

(g) To initiate, conduct or recommend such educational programs as, in the judgment of the Commission, will increase good will among inhabitants of the community and open new opportunities into all phases of community life and society for all inhabitants of the City;

(h) To hold conferences, and other public meetings, in the interest of the constructive resolution of racial, religious or other group tensions, prejudice or discrimination;

(i) To receive, hear and investigate complaints of tensions, practices of discrimination and acts of prejudice against any person or group because of race, color, religion, ethnic origin, culture, economic status, age or sex, whether practiced by private persons, associations, corporations or public bodies, and to seek to resolve such matters through consultation and advice;

(j) To seek the best means of progressively improving human relations in the entire City;

(k) To issue such publications and such special reports concerning its work and investigations it may consider desirable and in the public interest, subject to the approval of the City Council;

(l) To refer all findings of discrimination within the jurisdiction of any County, State or Federal boards, commissions or departments to such agencies;

(m) To make recommendations and reports to the City Council on all matters within the duties and functions of the Commission;

(n) To submit an annual report to the City Council and such other reports as may be requested by the City Council. (Ord. 74-294; Ord. 84-694, § 4; Ord. 87-812, § 1; Ord. 89-883, § 1)

2767 Compensation and Expenses.
Each member and alternate member of the Human Relations Commission shall receive compensation at the rate of $35.00 for each meeting of the Human Relations Commission attended by such member, not to exceed a total compensation of $70.00 in any one (1) month. Such compensation shall be paid on the first register of the month. No additional compensation shall be paid for expenses incurred by the members of the Commission in the performance of their duties, except that the City Council may, from time to time, authorize in advance expenditures for attendance at seminars, institutes or other meetings which the City Council may find to be beneficial to the Commissioners in the performance of their duties, and in the best interests of the City. Claims for such expenses shall be filed with the Finance Officer and shall be subject to audit and approval by the City Council. (Ord. 74-294; Ord. 87-812, § 1; Ord. 89-883, § 1; Ord. 06-1368, § 4; Ord. 13-1520, § 2)

H. Department of Public Safety

2780 Department of Public Safety.
There is hereby created and established a Department of Public Safety which shall consist of a Director of Public Safety and such other personnel as may be authorized by the City Council. (Ord. 82-611, § 1; Ord. 89-892, § 1)

2781 Director of Public Safety.
The Department of Public Safety shall be headed by the Director of Public Safety who shall be appointed and may be dismissed by the City Administrator with the approval of the City Council.

The Public Safety Director shall be the City Officer and that member of City government referred to as Chief of Police in Government Code Sections 36501 and 36505. (Ord. 82-611, § 1; Ord. 89-892, § 1)

2782 Chief of Police – References to.
Wherever the term “Chief of Police” is used in the Carson Municipal Code, such term shall mean the Director of Public Safety of the City of Carson except to the extent that the Sheriff of Los Angeles County is designated as Chief of Police for the purpose of performance of, and within the scope of, the County Law Enforcement Contract. Any action heretofore taken by the City Council of the City of Carson referring to or designating the Sheriff of Los Angeles County as Chief of Police is hereby modified and superseded to the extent that the same is inconsistent herewith. (Ord. 75-325, § 1; Ord. 77-406, § 1; Ord. 89-892, § 1)

2783 Duties of the Director of Public Safety.
The Director of Public Safety shall be responsible to the City Administrator and shall perform the following duties:

(a) Be the administrative head of the Public Safety Department and have direct charge of all personnel assigned to the Public Safety Department.

(b) Plan and recommend objectives and programs for the Public Safety Department.

(c) Advise and assist the City Council and City Administrator on all matters relating to public safety.

(d) Supervise and evaluate the needs and resources of the City for public safety programs.

(e) Develop and direct public education and service programs for continuing public safety needs.

(f) Act as Assistant Director of Civil Defense, and as such, develop and maintain plans for civil emergency and natural disaster relief services.

(g) Administer and monitor the County Law Enforcement, Fire, Public Health and Animal Control Contracts.

(h) Perform such other related duties as may be assigned from time to time by the City Administrator.

(i) Supervise and evaluate needs for Security Officer services and security systems. (Ord. 82-611, § 1; Ord. 89-892, § 1)

2784 Department of Public Safety – Functions.
The Department of Public Safety shall include and have responsibility for the following functions of the City:

(a) Administration of Law Enforcement Contract, including general law enforcement, traffic enforcement, investigations, community relations with respect to law enforcement and jail.

(b) Youth services, including programs to educate youth in law enforcement and safety related areas.

(c) Municipal Code enforcement services, including programs to ensure compliance with and enforcement of this Code and solid waste management.

(d) Health services, including planning, liaison and ambulance services.

(e) Animal control services, including regulations, licensing and pound services.

(f) Fire protection services, including fire prevention, fire protection, fire education, rescue and paramedic services.

(g) Civil defense, including emergency preparedness, planning coordination and liaison.

(h) Administration of the residential refuse collection program.

(i) Security officer services and facility security systems. (Ord. 82-611, § 1; Ord. 89-892, § 1)

2785 County Contracts and Districts.
Where any of the functions or activities mentioned in CMC 2784 are provided by Los Angeles County pursuant to contract with the City, or by County Districts, or by contract with a private contractor, the Department of Public Safety shall have the responsibility for the administration and monitoring of such contracts, maintenance of liaison between the City and County officers and other personnel having responsibility for the performance of such contracts and recommendations to the City Administrator as to the level of performance, amendment and renewal of such contracts. The Department of Public Safety shall have the responsibility for performance of any functions authorized by the City Council or pursuant to law, and pursuant to the Department’s responsibilities referred to in CMC 2784 which are not within the scope of any County or private contract or District functions. (Ord. 82-611, § 1; Ord. 89-892, § 1)

2786 City Security Officers.
In order to provide for the public safety, there is hereby created and established the position of City Security Officer for the City of Carson. City Security Officers shall be under the supervision, direction and control of the Public Safety Director. (Ord. 75-342, § 1; Ord. 77-406, § 1; Ord. 79-475, § 1; Ord. 89-892, § 1)

2787 Applications, Investigations, and Examination of Applicants.
The applicants shall have such qualifications and stand such examinations of their physical and mental fitness as may be prescribed from time to time. The character and reputation of prospective City Security Officers shall be investigated by the Public Safety Director. (Ord. 75-342, § 1; Ord. 77-406, § 1; Ord. 79-475, § 1; Ord. 89-892, § 1)

2788 Oath.
Before entering upon his duties as a City Security Officer of the City of Carson, each officer shall take the following oath before the City Clerk:

I................, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of California against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of California; that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter.

(Ord. 75-342, § 1; Ord. 77-406, § 1; Ord. 89-892, § 1)

2789 Training.
City Security Officers shall be trained in accordance with State law and in the manner determined and directed by the Public Safety Director. (Ord. 75-342, § 1; Ord. 77-406, § 1; Ord. 79-475, § 1; Ord. 89-892, § 1)

2790 Powers and Duties.
While on duty, under the orders of the Public Safety Director, City Security Officers shall have the authority and duty to enforce the provisions of the Municipal Code and the ordinance of the City of Carson as may be from time to time designated or assigned by the Public Safety Director pursuant to California Penal Code Section 836.5. City Security Officers may make arrests for violation of such Municipal Code ordinances and may issue citations for misdemeanors pursuant to California Penal Code Chapter 5C (commencing with Section 853.6) and Carson Municipal Code Article I, Chapter 2. City Security Officers shall be responsible for the proper performance of their duties and shall be subject to removal by the Public Safety Director. City Security Officers shall not be considered general law enforcement officers and shall only have powers prescribed by this Code. (Ord. 75-342, § 1; Ord. 77-406, § 1; Ord. 79-475, § 1; Ord. 89-892, § 1)

2791 Uniforms and Insignia.
It shall be unlawful for any City Security Officer to wear identifying uniform and insignia except while on duty. (Ord. 75-342, § 1; Ord. 77-406, § 1; Ord. 89-892, § 1)

2792 Nature of Position.
Since City Security Officers have only limited law enforcement responsibilities, they shall be considered as civilian employees of the City of Carson for the purposes of pension and pay. (Ord. 75-342, § 1; Ord. 77-406, § 1; Ord. 89-892, § 1)

I. Department of Public Works

2793 Department of Public Works.
There is hereby created and established a Department of Public Works. The Department of Public Works shall be composed of an Engineering Division and a Street Maintenance Division; consisting of such personnel as may be authorized by the City Council. (Ord. 77-407, § 1)

2794 Director of Public Works.
The Department of Public Works shall be headed by a Director of Public Works who shall be appointed by the City Administrator with the approval of the City Council. (Ord. 77-407, § 1)

2795 Duties of the Director of Public Works.
The Director of Public Works shall be responsible to the City Administrator and shall perform the following duties:

a. Be the administrative head of the Department of Public Works and have direct charge of all City personnel assigned to the Department of Public Works.

b. Advise and assist the City Council, City Administrator, and other City departments or commissions on all matters relating to Public Works.

c. Keep current the City’s Master Plan of Highways and Select System of Streets.

d. Act as the Superintendent of Streets as provided in the Streets and Highways Code unless another person is appointed by the City Council as the Superintendent of Streets for a particular project or duty.

e. Administer and cause to be enforced the Streets and Highways Code, Highway Permit and Traffic Ordinances, City Ordinances, including all State and Federal laws relating to Public Works.

f. Investigate and make recommendations to the City Council, City Administrator, and other City departments or commissions when warranted or directed.

g. Administer and certify to the usage and expenditures of Federal and State Gas Tax Funds received by the City.

h. Perform such other duties as may from time to time be assigned by the City Administrator. (Ord. 77-407, § 1)

J. Cultural Arts Commission

2796.1 Cultural Arts Commission – Establishment of.
There is hereby established a Cultural Arts Commission. Said shall be known and referred to as the “Cultural Arts Commission.” (Ord. 13-1516, § 2)

2796.2 Members.
The Cultural Arts Commission shall consist of nine (9) members, and three (3) alternate members who shall be called upon, when necessary, in the order of their appointments as Alternate 1, 2 or 3, to substitute for any absent commissioner, each of whom shall be and remain a resident of the City of Carson. All members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. The tenure of any member of the Commission and any Alternate shall be terminable at will, and without cause, by removal on the motion of any member of the Council, duly seconded, and with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. Subject to the provisions of this Section, the tenure of Commission members appointed on or after April 1, 1997, shall expire at midnight on the last day of the calendar month in which the next general municipal election after the member’s appointment is held for seats on the Carson City Council. Each Commission member shall continue to serve until a successor has been appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor, and has qualified unless the City Council declares the position to be vacant. Should any vacancy exist on the Commission, an appointment shall be made by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. All appointments shall be made in an open meeting of the City Council. (Ord. 13-1516, § 2; Ord. 13-1520, § 1; Ord. 13-1523, § 1)

2796.3 Organization.
The Cultural Arts Commission shall elect a Chairman and a Vice Chairman, for terms of one (1) year, at its first regular meeting in September of each year. The Commission may also appoint such other officers as may be necessary or convenient for the administration of its business, at the same time and for like terms. Said officers shall enter in the duties of their office at the first regular meeting in September of each year. The Commission shall adopt rules and regulations for the transaction of its business and shall keep a record of all its minutes, resolutions, actions, findings and determinations, all of which shall be filed with the City Clerk and the City. The Parks and Recreation Director shall appoint a City employee to serve as staff advisor to the Commission. (Ord. 13-1516, § 2)

2796.4 Meetings.
The Cultural Arts Commission shall establish a regular time and place for meetings and shall hold at least one (1) regular meeting each month. Special meetings of the Cultural Arts Commission may be called at any time by the Presiding Officer, or by any four (4) or more members of the Cultural Arts Commission by providing notice of such meeting as required by law. (Ord. 13-1516, § 2)

2796.5 Absence from Meetings.
If a member of the Cultural Arts Commission is absent from three (3) successive regular meetings without being excused by the Commission, or is absent for any reason for more than six (6) regular meetings in any twelve (12) month period, the office of such member shall be vacated and the Chair shall immediately notify the City Manager, who shall notify the City Council that said office is vacant. Upon such notification, a successor for the remainder of the term of such member shall be appointed by the appointing authority for the member whose position is vacated. (Ord. 13-1516, § 2)

2796.6 Duties and Functions of Commission.
The Cultural Arts Commission will be a functioning arm of the City structure, as all other appointed commissions, and will be the responsibility of the Parks and Recreation Department.

The functions of the Cultural Arts Commission shall be to advise and recommend to the City Council and City staff on all matters relating to cultural arts and shall also:

(a) Encourage programs for the cultural enrichment of the City.

(b) Coordinate and strengthen existing organizations in the cultural arts field.

(c) Propose methods to encourage private initiative in the arts and culture.

(d) Advise and consult with other groups and individuals of the community, and coordinate with the State and Federal cultural commissions in obtaining the benefits of this knowledge, experience and resource in the fields of culture and the arts.

(e) Formulate programs and methods to encourage creative activities to the highest standards, as well as to encourage increased public understanding, appreciation and enjoyment of the cultural art forms and activities.

(f) Review and make recommendations upon all works of art to be acquired by the City, either by purchase, gift or otherwise, and the location thereof.

(g) Review and make recommendations with respect to the removal, relocation or alteration of any existing works of art in the possession of the City. (Ord. 13-1516, § 2)

2796.7 Compensation and Expenses.
Each member and alternate member of the Cultural Arts Commission shall receive compensation at the rate of $35.00 for each meeting of the Commission attended by such member, not to exceed a total compensation of $70.00 in any one (1) month. The Secretary of the Commission shall submit to the Finance Officer at the end of each calendar month a statement showing the number of meetings of the Commission attended by each member during such month. No additional compensation shall be paid for the expenses incurred by the members of the Commission in the performance of their duties, except the City Council may, from time to time, authorize in advance expenditures for attendance at seminars, institutes or other meetings which the City Council finds beneficial to the Commissioners in the performance of their duties, and in the best interests of the City. Claims for such expenditures shall be filed with the Finance Officer and shall be subject to audit and approval by the City Council. (Ord. 13-1516, § 2; Ord. 13-1520, § 2)

K. Department of Personnel

2797.1 Department of Human Resources Established.
There is hereby created and established a Department of Human Resources which shall consist of a Director of Human Resources and such other personnel as may be authorized by the City Council. All references in the Carson Municipal Code and in the ordinances, resolutions, polices, procedures, contracts, agreements, and other official promulgations of the City of Carson to the ‘Department of Personnel’, or the ‘Director of Personnel’ or ‘Personnel Manager’, shall be deemed to be references to the ‘Department of Human Resources’ or the ‘Director of Human Resources’, respectively, upon and after the effective date of this Section. (Ord. 82-605, § 4; Ord. 96-1096, § 2)

2797.2 Director of Personnel.
The Department of Personnel shall be headed by a Director of Personnel who shall be appointed by the City Administrator with the approval of the City Council. (Ord. 82-605, § 4)

2797.3 Duties of the Director of Personnel.
The Director of Personnel shall be responsible to the City Administrator and shall perform the following duties.

a. Serve as the administrative head of the Department of Personnel and have direct charge of all City personnel assigned to the Department of Personnel.

b. Advise and assist the City Council, City Administrator, and other City departments, commissions and committees on all matters relating to Personnel.

c. Administer the provisions of the Personnel System and of the Personnel Rules not specifically reserved to the City Council or City Administrator.

d. Prepare and recommend, after consultation with Department Directors, a position classification plan, including position specifications, a compensation plan and Personnel Rules which shall become effective upon approval by the City Council.

e. Administer procedures for recruitment and selection of City employees, including notice of open positions, conducting and grading of tests and preparation of lists of persons eligible for appointment to positions in the City service.

f. Assist in developing criteria and parameters to be used in negotiations with recognized employee organizations. Assist in representing the City in such negotiations.

g. Process employee grievances and appeals in accordance with Personnel Rules and the City’s standard management procedures.

h. Develop, recommend and publish procedures relating to the administration of personnel policies and programs.

i. Maintain centralized personnel records relating to City employees.

j. Perform such other duties as may, from time to time, be assigned by the City Administrator. (Ord. 82-605, § 4)

L. Public Works Commission

2798.1 Public Works Commission – Establishment of.
There is hereby established a Public Works Commission. Said Public Works Commission may be known and referred to as the “Carson Public Works Commission” or the “Public Works Commission.” (Ord. 99-1181, § 2)

2798.2 Members.
The Public Works Commission shall consist of nine (9) members, and three (3) alternate members who shall be called upon, when necessary, in the order of their appointments as Alternate 1, 2 or 3, to substitute for any absent commissioner. Each member shall be a person having interest, experience or ability in construction, transportation, traffic or circulation areas to ensure that traffic, vehicle parking, bikeways, and transportation systems and other City facilities are regulated and constructed in a manner calculated to best provide for the safety and welfare of the public. All members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. The tenure of any member of the Commission and any Alternate shall be terminable at will, and without cause, by removal on the motion of any member of the Council, duly seconded, and with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. Subject to the provisions of this Section, the tenure of Commission members appointed on or after April 1, 1997, shall expire at midnight on the last day of the calendar month in which the next general municipal election after the member’s appointment is held for seats on the Carson City Council. Each Commission member shall continue to serve until a successor has been appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor, and has qualified unless the City Council declares the position to be vacant. Should any vacancy exist on the Commission, an appointment shall be made by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. All appointments shall be made in an open meeting of the City Council. (Ord. 99-1181, § 2; Ord. 04-1325, § 7; Ord. 04-1330, § 7; Ord. 13-1519, § 1; Ord. 13-1523, § 1)

2798.3 Organization.
The Public Works Commission shall elect a Chairperson and a Vice Chairperson from among its members, for terms of one (1) year, at its first regular meeting in July of each year. The Commission may also appoint such other officers as may be necessary or convenient for the administration of its business, at the same time and for like terms. Said officers shall enter in the duties of their office at the first regular meeting in July of each year. The Commission shall adopt Bylaws for the transaction of its business. The Bylaws, or any amendments thereto, shall become effective only upon approval by the City Council. The Commission shall keep a record of all its minutes, resolutions, actions, findings and determinations, all of which shall be filed with the City Clerk. Minutes, resolutions, and recommendations shall be filed with both the City Clerk and the City Manager. (Ord. 99-1181, § 2)

2798.4 Regular Meetings.
The Public Works Commission shall hold at least one (1) regular meeting in each month at such time and place as designated in the Bylaws of the Commission. Regular meetings may be adjourned by public announcement to a specified date, time, and place, and any such adjourned meeting shall be deemed a regular meeting. All meetings shall be open to the public. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum. (Ord. 99-1181, § 2)

2798.5 Absence from Meetings.
If a member of the Public Works Commission is absent from three (3) successive regular meetings without being excused by the Commission, or is absent for any reason for more than six (6) regular meetings in any twelve (12) month period, the office of such member shall be vacated and the Chair shall immediately notify the City Manager, who shall notify the City Council that said office is vacant. Upon such notification, a successor for the remainder of the term of such member shall be appointed by the appointing authority for the member whose position is vacated. (Ord. 99-1181, § 2)

2798.6 Duties and Functions of Commission.
The Carson Public Works Commission shall have the following authority and duties:

(a) Act in an advisory capacity to the City Council and the Director of Engineering Services in all matters pertaining to public works issues.

(b) Capital Improvement Program formulation and review, including deficiency and feasibility reports, project priorities and capital improvement reports.

(c) Activities within the public rights-of-way which are not subject to administrative permit procedure, including encroachments and undergrounding of utilities.

(d) Traffic management, including matters germane to traffic circulation, regulatory traffic control devices which require action by City Council or Planning Commission, special traffic and parking studies, temporary street closures and the proposed use of Proposition A and Proposition C Local Return Funds.

(e) Environmental enhancement and beautification, including design review for aesthetic evaluation of landscaped median improvement projects within the public right-of-way.

(f) Review and provide advice concerning the operations of and contract for the Carson circuit transportation system. (Ord. 99-1181, § 2)

2798.7 Compensation and Expenses.
Each member and alternate member of the Public Works Commission shall receive compensation at the rate of $35.00 for each meeting of the Public Works Commission attended by such member, not to exceed a total compensation of $70.00 in any one (1) month. Such compensation shall be paid on the first register of the month. No additional compensation shall be paid for expenses incurred by the members of the Commission in the performance of their duties, except that the City Council may, from time to time, authorize in advance expenditures for attendance at seminars, institutes or other meetings which the City Council may find to be beneficial to the Commissioners in the performance of their duties, and in the best interests of the City. Claims for such expenses shall be filed with the Finance Officer and shall be subject to audit and approval by the City Council. (Ord. 99-1181, § 2; Ord. 06-1368, § 6; Ord. 13-1519, § 1)

2798.8 Membership Qualifications.
Each member of the Public Works Commission shall be and remain a resident of, or have a place of employment or business in, the City of Carson, and be at least eighteen (18) years of age at the time of the member’s appointment. (Ord. 99-1181, § 2)

M. Senior Citizens Advisory Commission

2799.1 Senior Citizens Advisory Commission – Establishment of.
There is hereby established a Senior Citizens Advisory Commission. Said Senior Citizens Advisory Commission may be known and referred to as the “Carson Senior Citizens Advisory Commission” or the “Senior Citizens Advisory Commission.” (Ord. 97-1119, § 1)

2799.2 Members.
The Senior Citizens Advisory Commission shall consist of eleven (11) members, and three (3) alternate members who shall be called upon, when necessary, in the order of their appointments as Alternate 1, 2 or 3, to substitute for any absent commissioner, each of whom shall be and remain a resident of the City of Carson and be at least fifty (50) years of age. All members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. The tenure of any member of the Commission and any Alternate shall be terminable at will, and without cause, by removal on the motion of any member of the Council, duly seconded, and with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. Subject to the provisions of this Section, the tenure of Commission members appointed on or after April 1, 1997, shall expire at midnight on the last day of the calendar month in which the next general municipal election after the member’s appointment is held for seats on the Carson City Council. Each Commission member shall continue to serve until a successor has been appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor, and has qualified unless the City Council declares the position to be vacant. Should any vacancy exist on the Commission, an appointment shall be made by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. All appointments shall be made in an open meeting of the City Council. (Ord. 97-1119, § 1; Ord. 97-1126, § 1; Ord. 04-1325, § 8; Ord. 04-1330, § 8; Ord. 13-1520, § 1; Ord. 13-1523, § 1)

2799.3 Organization.
The Senior Citizens Advisory Commission shall elect a Chairperson, a Vice Chairperson, and a Corresponding Secretary from among its members, for terms of one (1) year, at its first regular meeting in July of each year. The Commission may also appoint such other officers as may be necessary or convenient for the administration of its business, at the same time and for like terms. Said officers shall enter in the duties of their office at the first regular meeting in July of each year. The Commission shall adopt Bylaws for the transaction of its business. The Bylaws, or any amendments thereto, shall become effective only upon approval by the City Council. The Commission shall keep a record of all its minutes, resolutions, actions, findings and determinations, all of which shall be filed with the City Clerk. Minutes, resolutions, and recommendations shall be filed with both the City Clerk and the City Manager. (Ord. 97-1119, § 1)

2799.4 Regular Meetings.
The Senior Citizens Advisory Commission shall hold at least one (1) regular meeting in each month at such time and place as designated in the Bylaws of the Commission. Regular meetings may be adjourned by public announcement to a specified date, time, and place, and any such adjourned meeting shall be deemed a regular meeting. All meetings shall be open to the public. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum. (Ord. 97-1119, § 1)

2799.5 Absence from Meetings.
If a member of the Senior Citizens Advisory Commission is absent from three (3) successive regular meetings without being excused by the Commission, or is absent for any reason for more than six (6) regular meetings in any twelve (12) month period, the office of such member shall be vacated and the Chair shall immediately notify the City Manager, who shall notify the City Council that said office is vacant. Upon such notification, a successor for the remainder of the term of such member shall be appointed by the appointing authority for the member whose position is vacated. (Ord. 97-1119, § 1)

2799.6 Duties and Functions of Commission.
The Carson Senior Citizens Advisory Commission shall have the following authority and duties:

(a) To act in an advisory capacity to the City Council, City Council subcommittee or City department concerned with senior citizens’ problems concerning, but not limited to, social service programs for seniors (case management and in-home supportive services including the Stroke Activity Center, housing security/personal safety, transportation, recreation, therapeutics, economics and other governmental concerns which can impact the seniors of Carson).

(b) To assist City staff in establishing goals and objectives. Developing financial support networks and delivery of services to seniors.

(c) To assemble information on problems and their solutions for older Americans through all available means including public hearings.

(d) To be empowered on its own initiative to make recommendations to senior citizens service agencies on matters within its purview.

(e) To act to facilitate coordination between existing and proposed programs for the elderly.

(f) To carry out such studies as may be assigned to it by City Council.

(g) To officially represent the City before State, local and national organizations and agencies when directed by the City Council.

(h) To report to the Mayor and City Council its findings on a regular basis. (Ord. 97-1119, § 1)

2799.7 Compensation and Expenses.
Each member and alternate member of the Senior Citizens Advisory Commission shall receive compensation at the rate of $35.00 for each meeting of the Senior Citizens Advisory Commission attended by such member, not to exceed a total compensation of $70.00 in any one (1) month. Such compensation shall be paid on the first register of the month. No additional compensation shall be paid for expenses incurred by the members of the Commission in the performance of their duties, except that the City Council may, from time to time, authorize in advance expenditures for attendance at seminars, institutes or other meetings which the City Council may find to be beneficial to the Commissioners in the performance of their duties, and in the best interests of the City. Claims for such expenses shall be filed with the Finance Officer and shall be subject to audit and approval by the City Council. (Ord. 97-1119, § 1; Ord. 06-1368, § 7; Ord. 13-1520, § 2)

N. Youth Commission

27100.1 Youth Commission – Establishment of.
There is hereby established a Youth Commission. Said Youth Commission may be known and referred to as the “Carson Youth Commission” or the “Youth Commission.” (Ord. 98-1132, § 1)

27100.2 Members.
The Youth Commission shall consist of eleven (11) members, and three (3) alternate members who shall be called upon, when necessary, in the order of their appointments as Alternate 1, 2 or 3, to substitute for any absent commissioner, each of whom shall be and remain a resident of the City of Carson and be at least thirteen (13) but not more than eighteen (18) years of age at the time of their appointment. All members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. The tenure of any member of the Commission and any Alternate shall be terminable at will, and without cause, by removal on the motion of any member of the Council, duly seconded, and with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. The term of office of Commission members shall be for one (1) year commencing July 1st and expiring at midnight on June 30th unless a different expiration date is prescribed by the City Council at the time of the member’s appointment. Each Commission member shall continue to serve until a successor has been appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor, and has qualified unless the City Council declares the position to be vacant. Should any vacancy exist on the Commission, an appointment shall be made by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. All appointments shall be made in an open meeting of the City Council. (Ord. 98-1132, § 1; Ord. 04-1325, § 10; Ord. 04-1330, § 10; Ord. 12-1495, § 3; Ord. 13-1516, § 3; Ord. 13-1520, § 1; Ord. 13-1523, § 1)

27100.3 Organization.
The Youth Commission shall elect a Chairperson, a First Vice Chairperson, and a Second Vice Chairperson from among its members, for terms of one (1) year, at its first regular meeting in July of each year. The Commission may also appoint such other officers as may be necessary or convenient for the administration of its business, at the same time and for like terms. Said officers shall enter in the duties of their office at the first regular meeting in July of each year. The Commission shall adopt Bylaws for the transaction of its business. The Bylaws, or any amendments thereto, shall become effective only upon approval by the City Council. The Commission shall keep a record of all its minutes, resolutions, actions, findings and determinations, all of which shall be filed with the City Clerk. Minutes, resolutions, and recommendations shall be filed with both the City Clerk and the City Manager and shared with the Parks & Recreations Commission and the Human Relations Commission. (Ord. 98-1132, § 1)

27100.4 Regular Meetings.
The Youth Commission shall hold at least one (1) regular meeting in each month at such time and place as designated in the Bylaws of the Commission. Regular meetings may be adjourned by public announcement to a specified date, time, and place, and any such adjourned meeting shall be deemed a regular meeting. All meetings shall be open to the public. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum. (Ord. 98-1132, § 1)

27100.5 Absence from Meetings.
If a member of the Youth Commission is absent from three (3) successive regular meetings without being excused by the Commission, or is absent for any reason for more than six (6) regular meetings in any twelve (12) month period, the office of such member shall be vacated and the Chair shall immediately notify the City Manager, who shall notify the City Council that said office is vacant. Upon such notification, a successor for the remainder of the term of such member shall be appointed by the appointing authority for the member whose position is vacated. (Ord. 98-1132, § 1)

27100.6 Duties and Functions of Commission.
The Carson Youth Commission shall have the following authority and duties:

(a) Act in an advisory capacity to the City Council and the Director of Recreation and Community Services in all matters pertaining to youth issues and to cooperate with other governmental agencies and civic groups in the advancement of sound youth programs.

(b) Formulate general policies on youth services for approval by the City Council.

(c) Advise the Director of Recreation and Community Services concerning the development of youth facilities, programs, and services.

(d) Make periodic inventories of youth services that exist or may be needed and interpret the needs of the public to the City Council and the Director of Recreation and Community Services.

(e) Aid in coordinating youth services with the programs of other governmental agencies, public service agencies, and volunteer organizations.

(f) Attend and become involved in activities of any ad-hoc committees and meet with appropriate community organizations, agencies, or other groups, so as to provide adequate information for deliberations.

(g) Generate discussion in the community with respect to youth problems, concerns, and issues. (Ord. 98-1132, § 1)

27100.7 Compensation and Expenses.
Each member and alternate member of the Youth Commission shall receive compensation at the rate of $35.00 for each meeting of the Youth Commission attended by such member, not to exceed a total compensation of $70.00 in any one (1) month. Such compensation shall be paid on the first register of the month. No additional compensation shall be paid for expenses incurred by the members of the Commission in the performance of their duties, except that the City Council may, from time to time, authorize in advance expenditures for attendance at seminars, institutes or other meetings which the City Council may find to be beneficial to the Commissioners in the performance of their duties, and in the best interests of the City. Claims for such expenses shall be filed with the Finance Officer and shall be subject to audit and approval by the City Council. (Ord. 98-1132, § 1; Ord. 06-1368, § 8; Ord. 13-1520, § 2)

O. Citywide Advisory Commission

27101.1 Citywide Advisory Commission – Establishment of.
There is hereby established a Citywide Advisory Commission. Said Citywide Advisory Commission may be known and referred to as the “Carson Citywide Advisory Commission” or the “Citywide Advisory Commission.” (Ord. 98-1149, § 1)

27101.2 Members.
The Citywide Advisory Commission shall consist of nine (9) members, and three (3) alternate members who shall be called upon, when necessary, in the order of their appointments as Alternate 1, 2 or 3, to substitute for any absent commissioner, each of whom shall have the qualifications hereinafter set forth. All members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. The tenure of any member of the Commission and any Alternate shall be terminable at will, and without cause, by removal on the motion of any member of the Council, duly seconded, and with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. Subject to the provisions of this Section, the tenure of Commission members appointed on or after November 19, 1998, shall expire at midnight on the last day of the calendar month in which the next general municipal election after the member’s appointment is held for seats on the Carson City Council. Each Commission member shall continue to serve until a successor has been appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor, and has qualified unless the City Council declares the position to be vacant. Should any vacancy exist on the Commission, an appointment shall be made by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. All appointments shall be made in an open meeting of the City Council. (Ord. 98-1149, § 1; Ord. 04-1325, § 11; Ord. 04-1330, § 11; Ord. 13-1519, § 1; Ord. 13-1520, § 1; Ord. 13-1523, § 1)

27101.3 Organization.
The Citywide Advisory Commission shall elect a Chairperson and a Vice Chairperson from among its members, for terms of one (1) year, at its first regular meeting in July of each year. The Commission may also appoint such other officers as may be necessary or convenient for the administration of its business, at the same time and for like terms. Said officers shall enter in the duties of their office at the first regular meeting in July of each year. The Commission shall adopt Bylaws for the transaction of its business. The Bylaws, or any amendments thereto, shall become effective only upon approval by the City Council. The Commission shall keep a record of all its minutes, resolutions, actions, findings and determinations, all of which shall be filed with the City Clerk. Minutes, resolutions, and recommendations shall be filed with both the City Clerk and the City Manager. (Ord. 98-1149, § 1)

27101.4 Regular Meetings.
The Citywide Advisory Commission shall hold at least one regular meeting in each month at such time and place as designated in the Bylaws of the Commission. Regular meetings may be adjourned by public announcement to a specified date, time, and place, and any such adjourned meeting shall be deemed a regular meeting. All meetings shall be open to the public. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum. (Ord. 98-1149, § 1)

27101.5 Absence from Meetings.
If a member of the Citywide Advisory Commission is absent from three (3) successive regular meetings without being excused by the Commission, or is absent for any reason for more than six (6) regular meetings in any twelve (12) month period, the office of such member shall be vacated and the Chair shall immediately notify the City Manager, who shall notify the City Council that said office is vacant. Upon such notification, a successor for the remainder of the term of such member shall be appointed by the appointing authority for the member whose position is vacated. (Ord. 98-1149, § 1)

27101.6 Duties and Functions of Commission.
The Carson Citywide Advisory Commission shall have the following authority and duties:

A. Act in an advisory capacity to the City Council, the staff, and City consultants on those matters that deal with evaluation of community-wide issues in relationship to Community Development Block Grant funding, census activities, and special funding requests, as requested by the City Council.

1. Review and comment on community development strategy, as requested by the City Council.

2. Provide a forum for the exchange of information and input with the City Council and local citizens on the Community Development Block Grant program, census activities, and special funding requests, as requested by the City Council.

3. Serve as an alternative public body to fulfill all or a portion of the requirements for citizen participation in Federally funded programs per Title 24 CFR (Code of Federal Regulations) Section 91.105, at the discretion of the City Council. (Ord. 08-1399 § 1)

27101.7 Compensation and Expenses.
Each member and alternate member of the Citywide Advisory Commission shall receive compensation at the rate of $35.00 for each meeting of the Citywide Advisory Commission attended by such member, not to exceed a total compensation of $70.00 in any one (1) month. Such compensation shall be paid on the first register of the month. No additional compensation shall be paid for expenses incurred by the members of the Commission in the performance of their duties, except that the City Council may, from time to time, authorize in advance expenditures for attendance at seminars, institutes or other meetings which the City Council may find to be beneficial to the Commissioners in the performance of their duties, and in the best interests of the City. Claims for such expenses shall be filed with the Finance Officer and shall be subject to audit and approval by the City Council. (Ord. 98-1149, § 1; Ord. 06-1368, § 9; Ord. 13-1519, § 1; Ord. 13-1520, § 2)

27101.8 Membership Qualifications.
(a) Each member of the Citywide Advisory Commission shall be a resident of or have a place of employment or business in the City of Carson, and/or live within the boundaries of a Target Area, and/or be a member of an existing organization having an interest in community development in the City of Carson, and be at least eighteen (18) years of age at the time of the member’s appointment.

(b) The Target Area boundaries are those boundaries which may be adopted from time-to-time as the official boundaries on the City’s Community Development Block Grant application and are more specifically described on the maps attached to such applications, as well as certain additional areas as may be designated from time-to-time. If the Target Area boundaries are amended, then the Commission’s membership may be reconstituted by procedures established by the City Council to reflect the new circumstances. (Ord. 98-1149, § 1)

P. Veterans Affairs Commission

27102.1 Veterans Affairs Commission – Establishment of.
There is hereby established a Veterans Affairs Commission. Said Veterans Affairs Commission may be known and referred to as the “Carson Veterans Affairs Commission” or the “Veterans Affairs Commission.” (Ord. 99-1154, § 1)

27102.2 Members.
The Veterans Affairs Commission shall consist of eleven (11) members, and three (3) alternate members who shall be called upon, when necessary, in the order of their appointments as Alternate 1, 2 or 3, to substitute for any absent commissioner, each of whom shall have the qualifications hereinafter set forth. All members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. The tenure of any member of the Commission and any Alternate shall be terminable at will, and without cause, by removal on the motion of any member of the Council, duly seconded, and with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. Subject to the provisions of this Section, the tenure of Commission members appointed on or after March 4, 1999, shall expire at midnight on the last day of the calendar month in which the next general municipal election after the member’s appointment is held for seats on the Carson City Council. Each Commission member shall continue to serve until a successor has been appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor, and has qualified unless the City Council declares the position to be vacant. Should any vacancy exist on the Commission, an appointment shall be made by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. All appointments shall be made in an open meeting of the City Council. (Ord. 99-1154, § 1; Ord. 04-1325, § 12; Ord. 04-1330, § 12; Ord. 12-1495, § 4; Ord. 13-1516, § 4; Ord. 13-1520, § 1; Ord. 13-1523, § 1)

27102.3 Organization.
The Veterans Affairs Commission shall elect a Chairperson and a Vice Chairperson from among its members, for terms of one (1) year, at its first regular meeting in July of each year. The Commission may also appoint such other officers as may be necessary or convenient for the administration of its business, at the same time and for like terms. Said officers shall enter in the duties of their office at the first regular meeting in July of each year. The Commission shall adopt Bylaws for the transaction of its business. The Bylaws, or any amendments thereto, shall become effective only upon approval by the City Council. The Commission shall keep a record of all its minutes, resolutions, actions, findings and determinations, all of which shall be filed with the City Clerk. Minutes, resolutions, and recommendations shall be filed with both the City Clerk and the City Manager. (Ord. 99-1154, § 1)

27102.4 Regular Meetings.
The Veterans Affairs Commission shall hold at least one (1) regular meeting in each month at such time and place as designated in the Bylaws of the Commission. Regular meetings may be adjourned by public announcement to a specified date, time, and place, and any such adjourned meeting shall be deemed a regular meeting. All meetings shall be open to the public. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum. (Ord. 99-1154, § 1)

27102.5 Absence from Meetings.
If a member of the Veterans Affairs Commission is absent from three (3) successive regular meetings without being excused by the Commission, or is absent for any reason for more than six (6) regular meetings in any twelve (12) month period, the office of such member shall be vacated and the Chair shall immediately notify the City Manager, who shall notify the City Council that said office is vacant. Upon such notification, a successor for the remainder of the term of such member shall be appointed by the appointing authority for the member whose position is vacated. (Ord. 99-1154, § 1)

27102.6 Duties and Functions of Commission.
The Carson Veterans Affairs Commission shall have the following authority and duties:

(a) Act in an advisory capacity to the City Council and the Director of Recreation and Community Services in all matters pertaining to veterans’ issues and to cooperate with other governmental agencies and civic groups in the advancement of sound veterans’ programs.

(b) Recommend general policies on veterans’ services for approval by the City Council.

(c) Advise the Director of Recreation and Community Services concerning the development of veterans’ facilities, memorials, programs, and services.

(d) Make periodic inventories of veterans’ services that exist or may be needed and interpret the needs of the veterans to the City Council and the Director of Recreation and Community Services.

(e) Aid in coordinating veterans’ services with the programs of other governmental agencies, public service agencies, and volunteer organizations.

(f) Attend and become involved in activities of any ad-hoc committees and meet with appropriate community organizations, agencies, or other groups, so as to provide adequate information for deliberations.

(g) Generate discussion in the community with respect to veterans’ problems, concerns, and issues. (Ord. 99-1154, § 1)

27102.7 Compensation and Expenses.
Each member and alternate member of the Veterans Affairs Commission shall receive compensation at the rate of $35.00 for each meeting of the Veterans Affairs Commission attended by such member, not to exceed a total compensation of $70.00 in any one (1) month. Such compensation shall be paid on the first register of the month. No additional compensation shall be paid for expenses incurred by the members of the Commission in the performance of their duties, except that the City Council may, from time to time, authorize in advance expenditures for attendance at seminars, institutes or other meetings which the City Council may find to be beneficial to the Commissioners in the performance of their duties, and in the best interests of the City. Claims for such expenses shall be filed with the Finance Officer and shall be subject to audit and approval by the City Council. (Ord. 99-1154, § 1; Ord. 06-1368, § 10; Ord. 13-1520, § 2)

27102.8 Membership Qualifications.
Each member of the Veterans Affairs Commission shall be a resident of the City of Carson and be at least eighteen (18) years of age at the time of the member’s appointment. (Ord. 99-1154, § 1)

Q. Public Safety Commission

27103.1 Public Safety Commission – Establishment of.
There is hereby established a Public Safety Commission. Said Public Safety Commission may be known and referred to as the “Carson Public Safety Commission” or the “Public Safety Commision.” (Ord. 99-1160, § 1; Ord. 01-1239, § 1)

27103.2 Members.
The Public Safety Commission shall consist of nine (9) members, and three (3) alternate members who shall be called upon, when necessary, in the order of their appointments as Alternate 1, 2 or 3, to substitute for any absent commissioner, each of whom shall have the qualifications hereinafter set forth. All members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. The tenure of any member of the Commission and any Alternate shall be terminable at will, and without cause, by removal on the motion of any member of the Council, duly seconded, and with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. Subject to the provisions of this Section, the tenure of Commission members appointed on or after February 7, 2002, shall expire at midnight on the last day of the calendar month in which the next general municipal election after the member’s appointment is held for seats on the Carson City Council. Each Commission member shall continue to serve until a successor has been appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor, and has qualified unless the City Council declares the position to be vacant. Should any vacancy exist on the Commission, an appointment shall be made by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. All appointments shall be made in an open meeting of the City Council. (Ord. 99-1160, § 1; Ord. 01-1239, § 1; Ord. 04-1325, § 13; Ord. 04-1330, § 13; Ord. 13-1519, § 1; Ord. 13-1523, § 1)

27103.3 Organization.
The Public Safety Commission shall elect a Chairperson and a Vice Chairperson from among its members, for terms of one (1) year, at its first regular meeting and thereafter at its first regular meeting in July of each year. The Commission may also appoint such other officers as may be necessary or convenient for the administration of its business, at the same time and for like terms. Said officers shall enter in the duties of their office at the first regular meeting in July of each year. The Commission shall adopt Bylaws for the transaction of its business. The Bylaws, or any amendments thereto, shall become effective only upon approval by the City Council. The Commission shall keep a record of all its minutes, resolutions, actions, findings and determinations, all of which shall be filed with the City Clerk. Minutes, resolutions, and recommendations shall be filed with both the City Clerk and the City Manager. (Ord. 99-1160, § 1; Ord. 01-1239, § 1)

27103.4 Regular Meetings.
The Public Safety Commission shall hold at least one (1) regular meeting in each month at such time and place as designated in the Bylaws of the Commission. Regular meetings may be adjourned by public announcement to a specified date, time, and place, and any such adjourned meeting shall be deemed a regular meeting. All meetings shall be open to the public. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum. (Ord. 99-1160, § 1; Ord. 01-1239, § 1)

27103.5 Absence from Meetings.
If a member of the Public Safety Commission is absent from three (3) successive regular meetings without being excused by the Commission, or is absent for any reason for more than six (6) regular meetings in any twelve (12) month period, the office of such member shall be vacated and the Chair shall immediately notify the City Manager, who shall notify the City Council that said office is vacant. Upon such notification, a successor for the remainder of the term of such member shall be appointed by the appointing authority for the member whose position is vacated. (Ord. 99-1160, § 1; Ord. 01-1239, § 1)

27103.6 Duties and Functions of Commission.
The Carson Public Safety Commission shall have the following authority and duties:

(a) Act in an advisory capacity to the City Council, City Manager, and Director of Public Safety in certain matters pertaining to public safety services within the City of Carson.

(b) Recommend general policies on public safety services for approval by the City Council, City Manager, or Director of Public Safety.

(c) Advise the City Council, City Manager, and Director of Public Safety concerning the development of public safety programs and services.

(d) Provide a forum for community discussion of public safety concerns and issues.

(e) “Public safety” as used herein refers to law enforcement, fire suppression, code enforcement, and disaster and emergency aid services provided within the City of Carson.

(f) The Public Safety Commission shall have no responsibility or authority to review, evaluate, investigate, or comment upon individual personnel complaints involving any public agency or contractor employee. Any and all such matters are solely within the jurisdiction of the involved public agency or contract employer and its internal affairs and personnel policies and procedures.

(g) The Public Safety Commission shall have no responsibility or authority to direct or interfere with the operations and management of any public safety agency or contractor, nor shall any individual member of the Public Safety Commission at any time attempt to direct, interfere with, or participate in the operations or management of any public safety agency or contractor or their personnel.

(h) The Public Safety Commission shall have no responsibility or authority to review, evaluate, investigate, or comment upon matters which are within the duties and functions of any other City of Carson commission or committee. (Ord. 99-1160, § 1; Ord. 01-1239, § 1)

27103.7 Compensation and Expenses.
Each member and alternate member of the Public Safety Commission shall receive compensation at the rate of $35.00 for each meeting of the Commission attended by such member, not to exceed a total compensation of $70.00 in any one (1) month. Such compensation shall be paid on the first register of the month. The Secretary of the Commission shall submit to the Finance Officer at the end of each calendar month a statement showing the number of meetings of the Commission attended by each member during such month. No additional compensation shall be paid for expenses incurred by the members of the Commission in the performance of their duties, except that the City Council may, from time to time, authorize in advance expenditures for attendance at seminars, institutes or other meetings which the City Council finds beneficial to the Commissioners in the performance of their duties, and in the best interest of the City. Claims for such expenditures shall be filed with the Finance Officer and shall be subject to audit and approval by the City Council. (Ord. 99-1160, § 1; Ord. 01-1239, § 1; Ord. 06-1368, § 11; Ord. 13-1519, § 1)

27103.8 Membership Qualifications.
Each member of the Public Safety Commission shall be a resident of the City of Carson and be at least eighteen (18) years of age at the time of the member’s appointment. (Ord. 99-1160, § 1; Ord. 01-1239, § 1)

R. Economic Development Commission

27104.1 Economic Development Commission – Establishment of.
There is hereby established an Economic Development Commission. Said Economic Development Commission may be known and referred to as the “Carson Economic Development Commission” or the “Economic Development Commission.” (Ord. 00-1191, § 1)

27104.2 Members.
The Economic Development Commission shall consist of eleven (11) members, and three (3) alternate members who shall be called upon, when necessary, in the order of their appointments as Alternate 1, 2 or 3, to substitute for any absent commissioner, each of whom shall have the qualifications hereinafter set forth. All members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. The tenure of any member of the Commission and any Alternate shall be terminable at will, and without cause, by removal on the motion of any member of the Council, duly seconded, and with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. Subject to the provisions of this Section, the tenure of Commission members appointed on or after June 8, 2000, shall expire at midnight on the last day of the calendar month in which the next general municipal election after the member’s appointment is held for seats on the Carson City Council. Each Commission member shall continue to serve until a successor has been appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor, and has qualified unless the City Council declares the position to be vacant. Should any vacancy exist on the Commission, an appointment shall be made by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. All appointments shall be made in an open meeting of the City Council. (Ord. 00-1191, § 1; Ord. 04-1325, § 14; Ord. 04-1330, § 14; Ord. 10-1454, § 1; Ord. 13-1520, § 1; Ord. 13-1523, § 1)

27104.3 Organization.
The Economic Development Commission shall elect a Chairperson and a Vice Chairperson from among its members, for terms of two (2) years, at its first regular meeting in July of each year. The Commission may also appoint such other officers as may be necessary or convenient for the administration of its business, at the same time and for like terms. Said officers shall enter in the duties of their office at the first regular meeting in July of each year. The Commission shall adopt Bylaws for the transaction of its business. The Bylaws, or any amendments thereto, shall become effective only upon approval by the City Council. The Commission shall keep a record of all its minutes, resolutions, actions, findings and determinations, all of which shall be filed with the City Clerk. Minutes, resolutions, and recommendations shall be filed with both the City Clerk and the City Manager. (Ord. 00-1191, § 1)

27104.4 Regular Meetings.
The Economic Development Commission shall hold at least one (1) regular meeting in each month at such time and place as designated in the Bylaws of the Commission. Regular meetings may be adjourned by public announcement to a specified date, time, and place, and any such adjourned meeting shall be deemed a regular meeting. All meetings shall be open to the public. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum. (Ord. 00-1191, § 1)

27104.5 Absence from Meetings.
If a member of the Economic Development Commission is absent from three (3) successive regular meetings without being excused by the Commission, or is absent for any reason for more than six (6) regular meetings in any twelve (12) month period, the office of such member shall be vacated and the Chair shall immediately notify the City Manager, who shall notify the City Council that said office is vacant. Upon such notification, a successor for the remainder of the term of such member shall be appointed by the appointing authority for the member whose position is vacated. (Ord. 00-1191, § 1)

27104.6 Duties and Functions of Commission.
The Carson Economic Development Commission shall have the following authority and duties:

(a) Act in an advisory capacity to the City Council, the Carson Redevelopment Agency, the City Manager, the Executive Director, and the Economic Development Group in all matters pertaining to economic development issues.

(b) Evaluate and recommend methods, measures, and programs which will favorably impact the City’s business and industrial climate by attracting to and retaining business and industry in Carson, by providing assistance to firms having the potential of expanding their activities in Carson, and by creating a positive image of Carson as a place for business and industry.

(c) Ensure a diverse economic and employment base for the City with a variety of business types, sizes, and markets, including small and disadvantaged businesses.

(d) Review requests for City and Redevelopment Agency assistance and make recommendations to the City Council and Redevelopment Agency.

(e) Coordinate projects with the Carson/Lomita/Torrance Private Industry Council that are designed to inform and educate citizens and businesses concerning its services.

(f) Advise and assist other City Groups, Commissions and Committees in developing and administering programs and procedures which will further the City’s economic development goals and objectives.

(g) Monitor regional projects, plans, and decisions which might impact the City’s economic development goals and objectives. (Ord. 00-1191, § 1)

27104.7 Compensation and Expenses.
No compensation shall be paid for expenses incurred by the members and alternate members of the Commission in the performance of their duties, except that the City Council may, from time to time, authorize in advance expenditures for attendance at seminars, institutes or other meetings which the City Council may find to be beneficial to the Commissioners in the performance of their duties, and in the best interests of the City. Claims for such expenses shall be filed with the Finance Officer and shall be subject to audit and approval by the City Council. (Ord. 00-1191, § 1; Ord. 06-1368, § 12; Ord. 11-1474, § 2; Ord. 13-1520, § 2)

27104.8 Membership Qualifications.
Each member of the Economic Development Commission shall be and remain a resident of, or have a place of employment or business in, the City of Carson, and be at least eighteen (18) years of age at the time of the member’s appointment. The membership of the Economic Development Commission shall include representatives of all major sectors of the Carson business community as determined in the sole discretion of the City Council. (Ord. 00-1191, § 1)

S. Public Relations Commission*

*Code reviser’s note: Ordinance No. 02-1246 added these provisions as Subchapter R, §§ 27104.1 through 27104.8. They have been renumbered to avoid duplication.

27105.1 Public Relations Commission – Establishment of.
There is hereby established a Public Relations Commission. Said Public Relations Commission may be known and referred to as the “Carson Public Relations Commission” or the “Public Relations Commission.” (Ord. 01-1239, § 2)

27105.2 Members.
The Public Relations Commission shall consist of nine (9) members, and three (3) alternate members who shall be called upon, when necessary, in the order of their appointments as Alternate 1, 2 or 3, to substitute for any absent commissioner, each of whom shall have the qualifications hereinafter set forth. All members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. The tenure of any member of the Commission and any Alternate shall be terminable at will, and without cause, by removal on the motion of any member of the Council, duly seconded, and with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. Subject to the provisions of this Section, the tenure of Commission members appointed on or after February 7, 2002, shall expire at midnight on the last day of the calendar month in which the next general municipal election after the member’s appointment is held for seats on the Carson City Council. Each Commission member shall continue to serve until a successor has been appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor, and has qualified unless the City Council declares the position to be vacant. Should any vacancy exist on the Commission, an appointment shall be made by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. All appointments shall be made in an open meeting of the City Council. (Ord. 01-1239, § 2; Ord. 04-1325, § 16; Ord. 04-1330, § 16; Ord. 11-1476, § 1; Ord. 12-1495, § 5; Ord. 13-1516, § 5; Ord. 13-1520, § 1; Ord. 13-1523, § 1)

27105.3 Organization.
The Public Relations Commission shall elect a Chairperson and a Vice Chairperson from among its members, for terms of one (1) year, at its first regular meeting and thereafter at its first regular meeting in July of each year. The Commission may also appoint such other officers as may be necessary or convenient for the administration of its business, at the same time and for like terms. Said officers shall enter in the duties of their office at the first regular meeting in July of each year. The Commission shall adopt Bylaws for the transaction of its business. The Bylaws, or any amendments thereto, shall become effective only upon approval by the City Council. The Commission shall keep a record of all its minutes, resolutions, actions, findings and determinations, all of which shall be filed with the City Clerk. Minutes, resolutions, and recommendations shall be filed with both the City Clerk and the City Manager. (Ord. 01-1239, § 2)

27105.4 Regular Meetings.
The Public Relations Commission shall hold at least one (1) regular meeting in each month at such time and place as designated in the Bylaws of the Commission. Regular meetings may be adjourned by public announcement to a specified date, time, and place, and any such adjourned meeting shall be deemed a regular meeting. All meetings shall be open to the public. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum. (Ord. 01-1239, § 2)

27105.5 Absence from Meetings.
If a member of the Public Relations Commission is absent from three (3) successive regular meetings without being excused by the Commission, or is absent for any reason for more than six (6) regular meetings in any twelve (12) month period, the office of such member shall be vacated and the Chair shall immediately notify the City Manager, who shall notify the City Council that said office is vacant. Upon such notification, a successor for the remainder of the term of such member shall be appointed by the appointing authority for the member whose position is vacated. (Ord. 01-1239, § 2)

27105.6 Duties and Functions of Commission.
The Carson Public Relations Commission shall have the following authority and duties:

(a) Act in an advisory capacity to the City Council, City Manager, and Public Information Manager in certain matters pertaining to public relations and public information services within the City of Carson.

(b) Recommend general policies on public relations and public information services for approval by the City Council, City Manager, or Public Information Manager.

(c) Advise the City Council, City Manager, and Public Information Manager concerning the development of public relations and information programs and events.

(d) Provide assistance to the Public Information staff on coordinating major public relations programs and events. (Ord. 01-1239, § 2)

27105.7 Compensation and Expenses.
Each member and alternate member of the Public Relations Commission shall receive compensation at the rate of $35.00 for each meeting of the Commission attended by such member, not to exceed a total compensation of $70.00 in any one (1) month. Such compensation shall be paid on the first register of the month. The Secretary of the Commission shall submit to the Finance Officer at the end of each calendar month a statement showing the number of meetings of the Commission attended by each member during such month. No additional compensation shall be paid for expenses incurred by the members of the Commission in the performance of their duties, except that the City Council may, from time to time, authorize in advance expenditures for attendance at seminars, institutes or other meetings which the City Council finds beneficial to the Commissioners in the performance of their duties, and in the best interest of the City. Claims for such expenditures shall be filed with the Finance Officer and shall be subject to audit and approval by the City Council. (Ord. 01-1239, § 2; Ord. 06-1368, § 13; Ord. 13-1520, § 2)

27105.8 Membership Qualifications.
Each member of the Public Relations Commission shall reside or be employed in the City of Carson and be at least eighteen (18) years of age at the time of the member’s appointment. “Employed in the City of Carson” shall mean that a commissioner’s principal place of business or employment must be located in the City of Carson. (Ord. 15-1567, § 2)

T. Women’s Issues Commission*

*Code reviser’s note: Ordinance No. 02-1246 added these provisions as Subchapter R, §§ 27104.1 through 27104.8. They have been renumbered to avoid duplication.

27106.1 Women’s Issues Commission – Establishment of.
There is hereby established a Women’s Issues Commission. Said Women’s Issues Commission may be known and referred to as the “Carson Women’s Issues Commission” or the “Women’s Issues Commission.” (Ord. 02-1246, § 1)

27106.2 Members.
The Women’s Issues Commission shall consist of nine (9) members, and three (3) alternate members who shall be called upon, when necessary, in the order of their appointments as Alternate 1, 2 or 3, to substitute for any absent commissioner, each of whom shall have the qualifications hereinafter set forth. All members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. The tenure of any member of the Commission and any Alternate shall be terminable at will, and without cause, by removal on the motion of any member of the Council, duly seconded, and with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. Subject to the provisions of this Section, the tenure of Commission members appointed on or after April 18, 2002, shall expire at midnight on the last day of the calendar month in which the next general municipal election after the member’s appointment is held for seats on the Carson City Council. Each Commission member shall continue to serve until a successor has been appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor, and has qualified unless the City Council declares the position to be vacant. Should any vacancy exist on the Commission, an appointment shall be made by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. All appointments shall be made in an open meeting of the City Council. (Ord. 02-1246, § 1; Ord. 04-1325, § 15; Ord. 04-1330, § 15; Ord. 13-1519, § 1; Ord. 13-1523, § 1)

27106.3 Organization.
The Women’s Issues Commission shall elect a Chairperson and a Vice Chairperson from among its members, for terms of one (1) year, at its first regular meeting and thereafter at its first regular meeting in July of each year. The Chairperson shall preside over the meetings of the Commission in a fair and impartial manner. The Commission may also appoint such other officers as may be necessary or convenient for the administration of its business, at the same time and for like terms. Said officers shall enter in the duties of their office at the first regular meeting in July of each year. The Commission shall adopt Bylaws for the transaction of its business. The Bylaws, or any amendments thereto, shall become effective only upon approval by the City Council. The Commission shall keep a record of all its minutes, resolutions, actions, findings and determinations, all of which shall be filed with the City Clerk. Minutes, resolutions, and recommendations shall be filed with both the City Clerk and the City Manager. (Ord. 02-1246, § 1)

27106.4 Regular Meetings.
The Women’s Issues Commission shall hold at least one (1) regular meeting in each month at such time and place as designated in the Bylaws of the Commission. Regular meetings may be adjourned by public announcement to a specified date, time, and place, and any such adjourned meeting shall be deemed a regular meeting. All meetings shall be open to the public. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum. (Ord. 02-1246, § 1)

27106.5 Absence from Meetings.
If a member of the Women’s Issues Commission is absent from three (3) successive regular meetings without being excused by the Commission, or is absent for any reason for more than six (6) regular meetings in any twelve (12) month period, the office of such member shall be vacated and the Chair shall immediately notify the City Manager, who shall notify the City Council that said office is vacant. Upon such notification, a successor for the remainder of the term of such member shall be appointed by the appointing authority for the member whose position is vacated. (Ord. 02-1246, § 1)

27106.6 Duties and Functions of Commission.
The Carson Women’s Issues Commission shall have the following authority and duties:

(a) Act in an advisory capacity to the City Council and City Manager with respect to issues affecting women and families in the City of Carson including domestic violence, equality in employment, educational equality, women’s empowerment, self-esteem, teen-dating abuse, women’s health, unwed motherhood, parenting, child care, social service resources available to women, and other issues of particular concern to women and families.

(b) Recommend to the Council educational programs and events which promote public understanding and awareness of women’s issues and social services available for women and families.

(c) Assist the City Council in the implementation of educational programs and events on women’s issues and social services available to women and families as may be authorized by the City Council.

(d) Review and recommend Council support of or opposition to legislation or programs of other agencies which affect women and families.

(e) Compile information on counseling, legal, medical, educational, employment, and housing resources available to women and families in need; provided, that the Commission shall not provide such services to women and families unless specifically authorized by the City Council.

(f) The Women’s Issues Commission shall have no responsibility or authority to direct or interfere with the operations and management of any public or private agency or contractor, nor shall any individual member of the Women’s Issues Commission at any time attempt to direct, interfere with, or participate in the operations or management of any public or private agency or contractor or their personnel.

(g) The Women’s Issues Commission shall have no responsibility or authority to review, evaluate, investigate, or comment upon matters which are within the duties and functions of City employees or any other City of Carson Commission. (Ord. 02-1246, § 1)

27106.7 Compensation and Expenses.
Each member and alternate member of the Women’s Issues Commission shall receive compensation at the rate of $35.00 for each meeting of the Commission attended by such member, not to exceed a total compensation of $70.00 in any one (1) month. Such compensation shall be paid on the first register of the month. The Secretary of the Commission shall submit to the Finance Officer at the end of each calendar month a statement showing the number of meetings of the Commission attended by each member during such month. No additional compensation shall be paid for expenses incurred by the members of the Commission in the performance of their duties, except that the City Council may, from time to time, authorize in advance expenditures for attendance at seminars, institutes or other meetings which the City Council finds beneficial to the Commissioners in the performance of their duties, and in the best interest of the City. Claims for such expenditures shall be filed with the Finance Officer and shall be subject to audit and approval by the City Council. (Ord. 02-1246, § 1; Ord. 06-1368, § 14; Ord. 13-1519, § 1)

27106.8 Membership Qualifications.
Each member of the Women’s Issues Commission shall be a resident of the City of Carson or work in the City of Carson during their tenure on the Commission and shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age at the time of the member’s appointment. (Ord. 02-1246, § 1)

U. Technology Advancement and Innovation Commission1

27107.1 Technology Advancement and Innovation Commission – Establishment of.
There is hereby established a Technology Advancement and Innovation Commission. Said Commission may be known and referred to as the “Carson Technology Advancement and Innovation Commission” or the “Technology Advancement and Innovation Commission.” (Ord. 14-1546, § 1)

27107.2 Members.
The Technology Advancement and Innovation Commission shall consist of nine (9) members, and three (3) alternate members who shall be called upon, when necessary, in the order of their appointments as Alternate 1, 2 or 3, to substitute for any absent commissioner. Each member shall be a person having interest, experience or ability in computers, computer programming, computer software, information technology, systems hardware and/or software inter- or intra-network connectivity, calculated to best provide for the training and education of the public. All members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. The tenure of any member of the Commission and any alternate shall be terminable at will, and without cause, by removal on the motion of any member of the Council, duly seconded, and with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. Subject to the provisions of this Section, the tenure of Commission members appointed on or after December 1, 2014, shall expire at midnight on the last day of the calendar month in which the next general municipal election after the member’s appointment is held for seats on the Carson City Council. Each Commission member shall continue to serve until a successor has been appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor, and has qualified unless the City Council declares the position to be vacant. Should any vacancy exist on the Commission, an appointment shall be made by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. All appointments shall be made in an open meeting of the City Council. (Ord. 14-1546, § 1)

27107.3 Organization.
The Technology Advancement and Innovation Commission shall elect a Chairperson and a Vice Chairperson from among its members, for terms of one (1) year, at its first regular meeting in July of each year. The Commission may also appoint such other officers as may be necessary or convenient for the administration of its business, at the same time and for like terms. Said officers shall enter in the duties of their office at the first regular meeting in July of each year. The Commission shall adopt Bylaws for the transaction of its business. The Bylaws, or any amendments thereto, shall become effective only upon approval by the City Council. The Commission shall keep a record of all its minutes, resolutions, actions, findings and determinations, all of which shall be filed with the City Clerk. Minutes, resolutions, and recommendations shall be filed with both the City Clerk and the City Manager. (Ord. 14-1546, § 1)

27107.4 Regular Meetings.
The Technology Advancement and Innovation Commission shall hold at least one (1) regular meeting in each month at such time and place as designated in the Bylaws of the Commission. Regular meetings may be adjourned by public announcement to a specified date, time, and place, and any such adjourned meeting shall be deemed a regular meeting. All meetings shall be open to the public. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum. (Ord. 14-1546, § 1)

27107.5 Absence from Meetings.
If a member of the Technology Advancement and Innovation Commission is absent from three (3) successive regular meetings without being excused by the Commission, or is absent for any reason for more than six (6) regular meetings in any twelve (12) month period, the office of such member shall be vacated and the Chair shall immediately notify the City Manager, who shall notify the City Council that said office is vacant. Upon such notification, a successor for the remainder of the term of such member shall be appointed by the appointing authority for the member whose position is vacated. (Ord. 14-1546, § 1)

27107.6 Duties and Functions of Commission.
The Technology Advancement and Innovation Commission shall have the following authority and duties:

(a) Act in an advisory capacity to the City Council and the Information Technology Manager in all matters pertaining to information technology issues.

(b) Review and provide advice and recommendations concerning the City’s information technology systems and recommend to the full City Council enhancements to such systems and ways to enhance teaching of computer and information technology literacy for Carson residents. (Ord. 14-1546, § 1)

27107.7 Compensation and Expenses.
Each member and alternate member of the Technology Advancement and Innovation Commission shall receive compensation at the rate of $35.00 for each meeting of the Technology and Innovation Commission attended by such member, not to exceed a total compensation of $70.00 in any one (1) month. Such compensation shall be paid on the first register of the month. No additional compensation shall be paid for expenses incurred by the members of the Commission in the performance of their duties, except that the City Council may, from time to time, authorize in advance expenditures for attendance at seminars, institutes or other meetings which the City Council may find to be beneficial to the Commissioners in the performance of their duties, and in the best interests of the City. Claims for such expenses shall be filed with the Finance Officer and shall be subject to audit and approval by the City Council. (Ord. 14-1546, § 1)

27107.8 Membership Qualifications.
Each member of the Technology Advancement and Innovation Commission shall be and remain a resident of, or have a place of employment or business in, the City of Carson, and be at least eighteen (18) years of age at the time of the member’s appointment. (Ord. 14-1546, § 1)

V. Beautification Commission

27108.1 Beautification Commission – Establishment of.
There is hereby established a Beautification Commission. Said Commission may be known and referred to as the “Beautification Commission.” (Ord. 15-1549, § 2)

27108.2 Members.
The Beautification Commission shall consist of nine (9) members, and three (3) alternate members who shall be called upon, when necessary, in the order of their appointments as Alternate 1, 2 or 3, to substitute for any absent commissioner. Each member shall be a person having interest, experience or ability in community beautification. All members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. The tenure of any member of the Commission and any alternate shall be terminable at will, and without cause, by removal on the motion of any member of the Council, duly seconded, and with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. Subject to the provisions of this Section, the tenure of Commission members appointed on or after December 1, 2014, shall expire at midnight on the last day of the calendar month in which the next general municipal election after the member’s appointment is held for seats on the Carson City Council. Each Commission member shall continue to serve until a successor has been appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor, and has qualified unless the City Council declares the position to be vacant. Should any vacancy exist on the Commission, an appointment shall be made by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. All appointments shall be made in an open meeting of the City Council. (Ord. 15-1549, § 2)

27108.3 Organization.
The Beautification Commission shall elect a Chairperson and a Vice Chairperson from among its members, for terms of one (1) year, at its first regular meeting in July of each year. The Commission may also appoint such other officers as may be necessary or convenient for the administration of its business, at the same time and for like terms. Said officers shall enter in the duties of their office at the first regular meeting in July of each year. The Commission shall adopt Bylaws for the transaction of its business. The Bylaws, or any amendments thereto, shall become effective only upon approval by the City Council. The Commission shall keep a record of all its minutes, resolutions, actions, findings and determinations, all of which shall be filed with the City Clerk. Minutes, resolutions, and recommendations shall be filed with both the City Clerk and the City Manager. (Ord. 15-1549, § 2)

27108.4 Regular Meetings.
The Beautification Commission shall hold at least one (1) regular meeting in each month at such time and place as designated in the Bylaws of the Commission. Regular meetings may be adjourned by public announcement to a specified date, time, and place, and any such adjourned meeting shall be deemed a regular meeting. All meetings shall be open to the public. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum. (Ord. 15-1549, § 2)

27108.5 Absence from Meetings.
If a member of the Beautification Commission is absent from three (3) successive regular meetings without being excused by the Commission, or is absent for any reason for more than six (6) regular meetings in any twelve (12) month period, the office of such member shall be vacated and the Chair shall immediately notify the City Manager, who shall notify the City Council that said office is vacant. Upon such notification, a successor for the remainder of the term of such member shall be appointed by the appointing authority for the member whose position is vacated. (Ord. 15-1549, § 2)

27108.6 Duties and Functions of Commission.
The Beautification Commission shall have the following authority and duties:

(a) Act in an advisory capacity to the City Council, the City Manager and their designees in matters related to the beautification of the City of Carson.

(b) Review and provide advice and recommendations concerning beautification of the City of Carson and recommend to the full City Council enhancements to the aesthetics of the City of Carson and ways to enhance the beauty of the City of Carson for Carson residents. (Ord. 15-1549, § 2)

27108.7 Compensation and Expenses.
Each member and alternate member of the Beautification Commission shall receive compensation at the rate of $35.00 for each meeting of the Beautification Commission attended by such member, not to exceed a total compensation of $70.00 in any one (1) month. Such compensation shall be paid on the first register of the month. No additional compensation shall be paid for expenses incurred by the members of the Commission in the performance of their duties, except that the City Council may, from time to time, authorize in advance expenditures for attendance at seminars, institutes or other meetings which the City Council may find to be beneficial to the Commissioners in the performance of their duties, and in the best interests of the City. Claims for such expenses shall be filed with the Finance Officer and shall be subject to audit and approval by the City Council. (Ord. 15-1549, § 2)

27108.8 Membership Qualifications.
Each member of the Beautification Commission shall be and remain a resident of, or have a place of employment or business in, the City of Carson, and be at least eighteen (18) years of age at the time of the member’s appointment. (Ord. 15-1549, § 2)

W. Bullying Prevention Commission

27109.1 Bullying Prevention Commission – Establishment of.
There is hereby established a Bullying Prevention Commission. Said Commission may be known and referred to as the “Bullying Prevention Commission.” (Ord. 15-1560, § 2)

27109.2 Members.
The Bullying Prevention Commission shall consist of nine (9) members, and three (3) alternate members who shall be called upon, when necessary, in the order of their appointments as Alternate 1, 2 or 3, to substitute for any absent commissioner. Each member shall be a person having interest, experience or ability in the identification, education, and prevention of bullying, including cyber-bullying, and could be a credentialed educator, licensed psychologist, credentialed counselor who may work in the City of Carson or who may reside in the City of Carson; however, is not required to work or reside in the City. All members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. The tenure of any member of the Commission and any alternate shall be terminable at will, and without cause, by removal on the motion of any member of the Council, duly seconded, and with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. Subject to the provisions of this Section, the tenure of Commission members appointed on or after July 1, 2015, shall expire at midnight on the last day of the calendar month in which the next general municipal election after the member’s appointment is held for the seat of Mayor on the Carson City Council. Each Commission member shall continue to serve until a successor has been appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor, and has qualified unless the City Council declares the position to be vacant. Should any vacancy exist on the Commission, an appointment shall be made by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. All appointments shall be made in an open meeting of the City Council. (Ord. 15-1560, § 2)

27109.3 Organization.
The Bullying Prevention Commission shall elect a Chairperson and a Vice Chairperson from among its members, for terms of one (1) year, at its first regular meeting in July of each year. The Commission may also appoint such other officers as may be necessary or convenient for the administration of its business, at the same time and for like terms. Said officers shall enter in the duties of their office at the first regular meeting in July of each year. The Commission shall adopt Bylaws for the transaction of its business. The Bylaws, or any amendments thereto, shall become effective only upon approval by the City Council. The Commission shall keep a record of all its minutes, resolutions, actions, findings and determinations, all of which shall be filed with the City Clerk. Minutes, resolutions, and recommendations shall be filed with both the City Clerk and the City Manager. (Ord. 15-1560, § 2)

27109.4 Regular Meetings.
The Bullying Prevention Commission shall hold at least one (1) regular meeting in each month at such time and place as designated in the Bylaws of the Commission. Regular meetings may be adjourned by public announcement to a specified date, time, and place, and any such adjourned meeting shall be deemed a regular meeting. All meetings shall be open to the public. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum. (Ord. 15-1560, § 2)

27109.5 Absence from Meetings.
If a member of the Bullying Prevention Commission is absent from three (3) successive regular meetings without being excused by the Commission, or is absent for any reason for more than six (6) regular meetings in any twelve (12) month period, the office of such member shall be vacated and the Chair shall immediately notify the City Manager, who shall notify the City Council that said office is vacant. Upon such notification, a successor for the remainder of the term of such member shall be appointed by the appointing authority for the member whose position is vacated. (Ord. 15-1560, § 2)

27109.6 Duties and Functions of Commission.
The Bullying Prevention Commission shall have the following authority and duties:

(a) Act in an advisory capacity to the City Council, the City Manager, and their designees in matters related to the identification and prevention of bullying, including cyber-bullying, in the City of Carson.

(b) Review and provide advice and recommendations concerning a shared understanding of the causes and effects of bullying, to create a public service announcement (PSA) that would educate and create heightened awareness of the effects of bullying to the full City Council, to develop educational tools to be presented to students, parents, and other interested persons or entities about ways to identify and prevent bullying, including cyber-bullying, in the City of Carson.

(c) To perform such other tasks as may be assigned to the Commission by the City Council from time to time related to the identification and prevention of bullying, including cyber-bullying, in the City of Carson. (Ord. 15-1560, § 2)

27109.7 Compensation and Expenses.
Each member and alternate member of the Bullying Prevention Commission shall receive compensation at the rate of $35.00 for each meeting of the Bullying Prevention Commission attended by such member, not to exceed a total compensation of $70.00 in any one (1) month. Such compensation shall be paid on the first register of the month. No additional compensation shall be paid for expenses incurred by the members of the Commission in the performance of their duties, except that the City Council may, from time to time, authorize in advance expenditures for attendance at seminars, institutes or other meetings which the City Council may find to be beneficial to the Commissioners in the performance of their duties, and in the best interests of the City. Claims for such expenses shall be filed with the Finance Officer and shall be subject to audit and approval by the City Council. (Ord. 15-1560, § 2)

27109.8 Membership Qualifications.
Each member shall be a person having interest, experience or ability in the identification, education, and prevention of bullying, including cyber-bullying, and could be a credentialed educator, licensed psychologist, credentialed counselor who may work in the City of Carson or who may reside in the City of Carson; however, is not required to work or reside in the City. (Ord. 15-1560, § 2)

1
Editor’s Note: Ord. 14-1546 added Sections 27107.1 through 27107.8 as Subchapter T. It has been relettered as U to avoid duplication.


CHAPTER 8
NOTICES AND FILINGS
Sections:

§ 2800    Public Places for Posting Agendas and Notices.

§ 2801    Posting.

§ 2802    Additional Posting Location.

§ 2803    Filing Documents.

2800 Public Places for Posting Agenda and Notices.
The following are officially designated as public places for the posting of all ordinances, resolutions, agendas, or notices adopted or issued by the City in all cases where posting is provided for by laws:

(1)

Los Angeles County Regional Library at Carson

 

151 East Carson Street

 

Carson, California 90745 – (310) 830-0901

(2)

Dominguez Park

 

21330 Santa Fe Avenue

 

Long Beach, California 90810 –
(310) 549-3962

(3)

Los Angeles County Library

 

Victoria Park Branch

 

17906 South Avalon Boulevard

 

Carson, California 90746 – (310) 373-9640

(4)

Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department

 

Carson Station

 

21356 South Avalon Boulevard (at Desford Street)

 

Carson, California 90745 – (310) 830-1123

(Ord. 2, § 2800; Ord. 41, § 1; Ord. 69-105; Ord. 72-243, § 1; Ord. 93-999, § 1; Ord. 03-1280U, § 1; Ord. 03-1280, § 1)

2801 Posting.
All ordinances and all resolutions required by law to be published or posted shall be posted in at least three (3) public places as set forth in CMC 2800 in accordance with the provisions of Section 36933 of the Government Code. (Ord. 2, § 2801)

2802 Additional Posting Location.
The City Clerk shall post all ordinances, resolutions or notices adopted or issued by the City on the Bulletin Board provided for such purpose in the City offices located at 701 East Carson Street, Carson, California. Such posting location is for the purpose of public convenience and is in addition to the official public places for the posting of notices designated in CMC 2800 in accordance with the provisions of Section 36933 of the Government Code. (Ord. 72-243, § 3; Ord. 76-376U, § 2)

2803 Filing Documents.
The Mayor of the City of Carson, the City Clerk, the City Attorney and the Mayor Pro Tem are each appointed the authorized agent of the City of Carson for the filing, with such offices and officers of the State of California and of the County of Los Angeles, of certified copies of ordinances and resolutions and such other documents as may be required for the proper and efficient conduct of the City’s business. (Ord. 2, § 2802; Ord. 72-243, § 2)

CHAPTER 9
PERSONNEL SYSTEM
Sections:

§ 2900    Adoption of Personnel System.

§ 2901    Appointing Authority.

§ 2902    Repealed.

§ 2903    Competitive Services.

§ 2904    Adoption and Amendment of Rules.

§ 2905    Appointments.

2900 Adoption of Personnel System.
In order to establish an equitable and uniform procedure for dealing with personnel matters; to attract to municipal service the best and most competent persons available; to assure that appointments and promotions of employees will be based on merit and fitness; and to provide a reasonable degree of security for qualified employees, the following personnel system is hereby established. (Ord. 34, § 1; Ord. 77-406, § 2)

2901 Appointing Authority.
The City Manager shall be the appointing authority for all positions in the City Service except elective officers and those appointed by the City Council. The City Manager may delegate the appointing authority to the extent authorized by the City Council. (Ord. 77-406, § 2; Ord. 81-565, § 1; Ord. 98-1152U, § 1; Ord. 98-1152, § 1)

2902 Repealed.
Repealed by Ord. 82-605. (Ord. 34, § 1; Ord. 77-406, § 2; Ord. 80-546, § 2)

2903 Competitive Services.
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all offices, positions and employments in the service of the City except:

(a) Elective officers;

(b) Individuals serving on boards, commissions, committees and agencies;

(c) Individuals performing services under contract;

(d) City Attorney;

(e) Individuals performing services during a declared emergency;

(f) Individuals appointed to part-time or seasonal employment;

(g) City Manager and Assistant City Manager;

(h) Administrative Services General Manager, Development Services General Manager, Economic Development General Manager, Public Services General Manager, Director of Finance, Director of Human Resources, Director of Parks and Recreation, Director of Public Safety, Director of Public Works, and Council Field Representative;

(i) All volunteer personnel; and

(j) Individuals performing services on a temporary basis. (Ord. 77-500; Ord. 34, § 1; Ord. 77-406, § 2; Ord. 78-445; Ord. 79-500; Ord. 82-623, § 1; Ord. 87-805, § 1; Ord. 95-1066, § 1; Ord. 96-1096, § 3; Ord. 98-1152U, § 2; Ord. 98-1152, § 2; Ord. 99-1168U, § 1; Ord. 00-1190, § 22)

2904 Adoption and Amendment of Rules.
Personnel Rules shall be adopted by resolution of the City Council after notice of such action has been publicly posted at least five (5) days prior to City Council consideration. Amendments and revisions may be suggested by an interested party and shall be processed as provided in the Personnel Rules. The Rules shall establish regulations governing the personnel system.

The Personnel Rules shall not apply to the positions listed in CMC 2903, except as specifically made applicable by a memorandum of understanding or Resolution of the City Council.

(a) Annual Vacation Leave provided for in Rule X, Section 3;

(b) Sick Leave provided for in Rule X, Section 4;

(c) Disability Compensation provided for in Rule X, Section 5;

(d) Emergency Leave provided for in Rule X, Section 6;

(e) Military Leave provided for in Rule X, Section 7;

(f) Leave of Absence (without pay) provided for in Rule X, Section 8;

(g) Jury Duty provided for in Rule X, Section 9;

(h) Holidays provided for in Rule X, Section 10. (Ord. 34, § 1; Ord. 77-406, § 2; Ord. 78-445, § 2; Ord. 82-623, § 2)

2905 Appointments.
Appointments, demotions, dismissals, reductions in pay, suspensions or other actions regarding an employee shall be made in accordance with the Personnel Rules except as to those persons listed in CMC 2903. The Assistant City Manager and persons holding those positions listed in CMC 2903(h) shall serve the City at the pleasure of the City Manager and such persons may be discharged, demoted or otherwise disciplined without notice, hearing or stated cause. (Ord. 34, § 1; Ord. 77-406, § 2; Ord. 78-445, § 3; Ord. 82-623, § 3; Ord. 87-805, § 1; Ord. 98-1152U, § 3; Ord. 98-1152, § 3; Ord. 99-1168U, § 2)

CHAPTER 9.5
FISCAL ADMINISTRATION
Sections:

§ 2950    Fiscal Year.

§ 2951    City Budget.

§ 2952    Budget – Public Hearing.

§ 2953    Budget – Adoption.

§ 2954    Budget Appropriations.

§ 2955    Budget Amendments.

§ 2955.1    Budget Transfers.

§ 2956    Independent Audit.

2950 Fiscal Year.
The fiscal year shall begin on the first day of July of each year and end on the thirtieth day of June of the following year. (Ord. 69-92, § 1; Ord. 00-1193, § 1)

2951 City Budget.
The City Manager shall prepare a Preliminary Budget for a budget period consisting of either one (1) fiscal year or two (2) fiscal years as determined by the City Manager. The City Manager shall obtain from all groups, offices, and agencies the estimates of revenues and expenditures for the budget period together with any necessary supporting data. The City Manager shall assemble all proposed revenues and expenditures into a Preliminary Budget.

The City Manager shall submit the Preliminary Budget to the City Council not less than forty-five (45) days prior to the beginning of the budget period. After reviewing the Preliminary Budget and making such revisions as it may deem advisable, the City Council shall determine the time for the holding of a public hearing thereon and shall cause to have published a notice thereof at least once not less than ten (10) days prior to said hearing in a newspaper of general circulation published in the City, and if there is no such newspaper, shall cause such notice to be posted in the three (3) public places designated by this Code for posting notices. (Ord. 69-92, § 1; Ord. 00-1193, § 1)

2952 Budget – Public Hearing.
At the time advertised, the City Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed budget for the budget period. At this time, interested persons desiring to be heard shall be given such opportunity. (Ord. 69-92, § 1; Ord. 00-1193, § 1)

2953 Budget – Adoption.
After the conclusion of the public hearing, the City Council shall further consider the proposed budget and make any revisions thereof it may deem necessary, and on or before July 20th it shall, by resolution, adopt a balanced budget by the affirmative votes of at least three (3) members. Upon final adoption, the budget shall be in effect for the ensuing budget period and funds shall be appropriated for the first fiscal year only. In the case of a budget covering two (2) fiscal years, the City Council shall review the budget for the second fiscal year and make any revisions thereof it may deem necessary, and on or before July 20th of the second fiscal year it shall, by resolution, adopt a balanced budget for the second fiscal year by the affirmative votes of at least three (3) members. Upon final adoption, the budget shall be in effect for the second fiscal year and funds shall be appropriated for the second fiscal year.

A copy of the adopted budget document for the budget period, certified by the City Clerk, shall be filed with the person retained by the City Council to perform auditing functions for the Council. A certified copy of the adopted budget document shall also be placed on file in the office of the City Clerk, where it shall be available for inspection. The budget document so certified shall be posted to the City’s website for the use of all groups, offices, and agencies of the City. A certified copy of the budget document shall also be filed with the County Auditor within the time required by Government Code Section 53901. In the case of a two (2) fiscal year budget, any approved changes to the budget document shall be filed in the form of an addendum with the same groups, offices and agencies as required above. (Ord. 69-92, § 1; Ord. 90-929, § 1; Ord. 00-1193, § 1; Ord. 13-1528, § 2; Ord. 16-1591, § 2)

2954 Budget Appropriations.
From the effective date of the appropriation as set forth in CMC 2953, the amounts stated therein as proposed expenditures shall be and become appropriated to the several groups, offices and agencies for the respective objects and purposes therein named. (Ord. 69-92, § 1; Ord. 80-522, § 1; Ord. 00-1193, § 1; Ord. 16-1591, § 3)

2955 Budget Amendments.
At any meeting after the adoption of the budget, the City Council may amend or supplement the budget by a resolution adopted by the affirmative vote of at least three (3) members of the City Council. (Ord. 69-92, § 1; Ord. 98-1143, § 1; Ord. 00-1193, § 1; Ord. 16-1591, § 4)

2955.1 Budget Transfers.
Interdepartmental Budget Transfers. Any budget transfer in any amount between City departments shall require City Council approval.

Intradepartmental Budget Transfers. Any budget transfer within the same City department in an amount of up to $25,000, as a single transfer or as aggregate transfers within the same fiscal year, may be approved by the City Manager. The City Manager, at his or her discretion, may request City Council approval for any intradepartmental budget transfer of $25,000 or less.

Any budget transfer within the same City department in an amount over $25,000, as a single transfer or aggregate transfers within the same fiscal year, shall require City Council approval.

“Budget transfer” shall mean transfers of moneys between individual funds within the budget. Budget transfers shall not alter the City’s budget. (Ord. 16-1591, § 5)

2956 Independent Audit.
The City Council shall employ, at the beginning of each fiscal year, a qualified accountant who, at such time or times as may be specified by the City Council, shall examine the books, records, inventories and reports of all officers and employees who receive, handle or disburse public funds and all such other officers, employees or groups as the City Council may direct. As soon as practicable after the end of the fiscal year, a final audit and report shall be submitted by such accountant to the City Council, the City Manager, the Director of Finance and the City Attorney. The report shall be filed with the City Clerk’s office, available at City Hall for inspection by the general public, and posted to the City’s website. (Ord. 16-1591, § 6)

CHAPTER 10
RELOCATION APPEALS BOARD
Sections:

Part 1. Organization

§ 21000    Establishment and Designation of Board.

§ 21001    Membership – Appointment of Board.

§ 21002    Proceedings of the Board.

§ 21003    Compensation.

§ 21004    Purpose.

Part 2. Jurisdiction

§ 21020    Right of Review.

§ 21021    Subject Matter – Jurisdiction of Board.

§ 21022    Powers of Recommendation.

§ 21023    Exemption of Federal Grievance Procedures.

Part 3. Procedure

§ 21030    Compliance with Procedures.

§ 21031    Agency Determination.

§ 21032    Limitation on Appeals.

§ 21033    Request for Review.

§ 21034    Date of Hearing.

§ 21035    Notice of Hearing.

§ 21036    Right of Inspection of Files.

§ 21037    Public Hearing.

§ 21038    Report and Recommendations of Board.

§ 21039    Final Determination.

Part 4. Criteria for Review

§ 21040    Liberal Rule of Construction.

§ 21041    Compliance with Applicable Law.

§ 21042    Reasonableness of Determination.

§ 21043    Grounds for Reversal or Modification.

§ 21044    Establishment of Precedent.

Part 5. Miscellaneous

§ 21051    Judicial Review.

§ 21052    Savings Clause.

Part 1. Organization

21000 Establishment and Designation of Board.
The Relocation Appeals Board created by Health and Safety Code Section 33417.5, a section of the Community Redevelopment Law, is hereby established and, pursuant to Section 7266 of the Government Code, is hereby designated to hear appeals from the determinations of all officers, bodies, departments and agencies of the City of Carson and of the Carson Redevelopment Agency, as to the eligibility for, or the amount of, a payment authorized by Chapter 16 (Section 7260, et seq.), Division 7, Title 1, of the Government Code. Such Relocation Appeals Board is hereinafter denominated as “the Board.” (Ord. 74-313, § 1)

21001 Membership – Appointment of Board.
(1) The Board shall consist of nine (9) members, and three (3) alternate members who shall be called upon, when necessary, in the order of their appointments as Alternate 1, 2 or 3, to substitute for any absent commissioner, appointed by the Mayor and approved by the City Council.

(2) Each member of the Board shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council and shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years, except that in the first instance, two (2) members shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year, two (2) members shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years, and one (1) member shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years.

(3) No member of the Carson Redevelopment Agency, the City Council or of any City agency responsible directly or indirectly for the determination of relocation assistance claims shall serve on the Board. (Ord. 74-313; Ord. 13-1520, §§ 1, 3)

21002 Proceedings of the Board.
(1) The Board shall elect a chairman from its membership and shall appoint a secretary and other needful officers.

(2) The Board shall adopt rules for its procedure in harmony with the provisions of this Chapter. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairman. All hearings of the Board shall be public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact. Minutes and other official records of the Board shall be promptly filed with the Clerk of the City of Carson and shall be open to public inspection. (Ord. 74-313)

21003 Compensation.
Members and alternate members of the Board shall serve without compensation, except that each member shall be reimbursed for reasonable and necessary expenses incurred in performance of official duties, subject to the approval of the City Council. (Ord. 74-313; Ord. 13-1520, § 2)

21004 Purpose.
The purpose of the Board shall be promptly to hear all complaints providently filed and to review and recommend modifications, if necessary, in the decision of any City agency, including the Redevelopment Agency, regarding eligibility for relocation assistance payments, the amount of such payments, the adequacy of replacement quarters obtained for persons, businesses or farms displaced because of the acquisition of real property by a City agency for a public purpose, or any other complaints by residents of the several project areas within the City relating to relocation. (Ord. 74-313)

Part 2. Jurisdiction

21020 Right of Review.
Any person aggrieved by any determination of the Redevelopment Agency or of any City agency (hereinafter denominated as “agency”) regarding relocation or relocation assistance as provided by state or local law or regulation may appeal to the Board for a review of that decision. (Ord. 74-313)

21021 Subject Matter – Jurisdiction of Board.
The Board is empowered to hear and consider appeals from the determination of any agency regarding: (1) eligibility for relocation assistance; or (2) the amount of relocation assistance allowed; or (3) the adequacy or acceptability of replacement quarters obtained for displaced persons, businesses or farms; or (4) any allegation of substantial noncompliance by any agency with state or local law or regulation regarding relocation or relocation assistance. (Ord. 74-313)

21022 Powers of Recommendation.
After hearing and considering any appeal, the Board shall have the power, upon a majority vote of those present, to recommend that the determination of the agency in question be affirmed, reversed or modified by that agency. The decision of the Board shall be advisory only, but shall be duly and promptly considered by the agency whose determination is under review. (Ord. 74-313)

21023 Exemption of Federal Grievance Procedures.
There is exempted from the provisions of this Chapter any grievance procedure policy instituted by any agency pursuant to any federal regulation as a condition to federal financial participation, to the extent that such procedure is inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 74-313)

Part 3. Procedure

21030 Compliance with Procedures.
The Board shall act in accordance with the procedure specified by California law and by this Chapter. (Ord. 74-313)

21031 Agency Determination.
(1) If the agency should deny eligibility, disapprove the full amount of assistance claimed, or refuse to consider the merits of a claim because of untimely filing or for any other reason, the agency shall include in its written notification to the claimant the reasons for its decision and the procedures for appeal to the Board.

(2) Any claimant aggrieved by any determination of any agency may request a full written explanation of the agency’s determination and the basis therefor if he feels that the explanation offered with the notification of the determination is inadequate. Such request for a full written explanation must be responded to by the agency within fifteen (15) days of its receipt. (Ord. 74-313)

21032 Limitation on Appeals.
An aggrieved claimant must file a request for review of the determination of the agency with the Board within six (6) months of the date of receipt of the determination. (Ord. 74-313)

21033 Request for Review.
All requests for review made to the Board shall be in writing, and may be made on forms prescribed by the Board. The request for review shall state in ordinary terms the facts complained of, the error or other defect in the agency’s determination and the relief which the claimant seeks. If the claimant cannot prepare, or needs assistance in the preparation of, the written request for review, the agency which rendered the determination shall provide assistance and shall notify the claimant of other sources of assistance. The claimant may include in his written request for review any statement of fact within his knowledge or any other information which may have a bearing on his appeal. Requests for review shall be liberally construed and shall be deemed sufficient if adequate to apprise the Board and agency of the general nature of the complaint. (Ord. 74-313)

21034 Date of Hearing.
Upon receipt of a conforming request for review the Board shall set a date for a public hearing at the earliest practicable time to consider the aggrieved party’s claim. In no event shall the hearing be scheduled later than ninety (90) days after the receipt of the request for review; however, the claimant may be granted thirty (30) days from the date of his request for review in order to gather and prepare additional material and information, if a reasonable basis can be shown justifying such extension. (Ord. 74-313)

21035 Notice of Hearing.
No action shall be taken on any appeal until after proper notice of public hearing has been given and a public hearing has been held. Proper notice of a hearing before the Board shall consist of “public notice” by posting in three (3) public places in the City, and written notice by registered mail to the claimant or his agent, to the agency responsible for the determination, and to any other interested party, given at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing and specifying the date, time and place of the hearing. (Ord. 74-313)

21036 Right of Inspection of Files.
Subject to such reasonable limitations as may be prescribed by the City Council or the agency in question, the claimant or his agent shall be allowed to inspect all files and official records in the custody of the City or agency which bear upon his appeal, except that such right of inspection shall not extend to material the disclosure of which is prohibited by law or other “confidential” materials. (Ord. 74-313)

21037 Public Hearing.
A claimant may present his appeal personally or may be represented at any and all stages of the appeal proceedings by an attorney, at claimant’s expense. Claimant or his agent may make an oral presentation to the Board, call witnesses, cross-examine opposing witnesses, and offer documentary evidence and affidavits. The Board may take such oral or written statements from such other parties, including representatives of the agency responsible for the determination, as may be helpful in its deliberations. The Board shall make a written summary of the oral presentation and shall include it in the claimant’s file. The proceedings of the Board shall be conducted informally. Rules of evidence applicable in court proceedings shall not apply. The oath or affirmation shall be administered to all witnesses. (Ord. 74-313)

21038 Report and Recommendations of Board.
(1) The Board, within fifteen (15) days after the public hearing, shall transmit its report and recommendations, in writing, to the agency responsible for the determination which was the basis of the appeal.

(2) The written report of the Board shall include (a) the name and address of the aggrieved party, and his agent, if any; (b) a summary of the complaint and a copy of the complaint; (c) a summary of the facts developed at the public hearing and a copy of the notification; (d) comments on the impact of the case, if any, on the project of the City or agency; and (e) recommendations of the Board, supported by specific findings of fact and conclusions of law to enable an adequate reconsideration by the agency.

(3) The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Board present shall be sufficient to recommend affirmance, reversal or modification of any determination. No recommendation shall issue except upon a majority vote of the Board. (Ord. 74-313)

21039 Final Determination.
(1) The agency responsible for the determination shall expeditiously proceed to give the report and recommendations of the Board all due consideration and shall, within thirty (30) days of their receipt, render a final determination on the matters appealed from.

(2) The final determination shall include the agency’s decision on reconsideration of the claim, in light of the report and recommendations of the Board.

(3) The final determination shall include a statement of the factual and legal basis of the agency’s decision, including any pertinent explanation or rationale for any conclusion which differs from the Board’s report.

(4) If the claim is dismissed on grounds not reaching the merits of the claim or the substance of the Board’s report, the agency shall issue a statement explaining the dismissal to the claimant.

(5) Notice of the final determination of the agency shall be sent promptly to the claimant, the Board and any other interested parties. (Ord. 74-131)

Part 4. Criteria for Review

21040 Liberal Rule of Construction.
All guidelines and regulations shall be liberally construed by the Board so as to fulfill the legislative purpose of fair and equitable treatment in order that displaced persons not suffer injury as a result of programs designed for the benefit of the public as a whole. (Ord. 74-313)

21041 Compliance with Applicable Law.
The Board shall make inquiry as to whether all relevant provisions of Federal, State and local law relative to Relocation Assistance have been complied with substantially by the agency. (Ord. 74-313)

21042 Reasonableness of Determination.
The Board shall consider all the material evidence before it, including written and oral statements submitted by the claimant and the agency, and determine whether, under the circumstances, the determination was reasonable and whether there are exigent circumstances which were not before the agency at the time of its determination. (Ord. 74-313)

21043 Grounds for Reversal or Modification.
The determination should be modified or reversed if (1) there is found a substantial noncompliance with some applicable law or regulation, or (2) the determination was unreasonable under the circumstances, or (3) exigent circumstances which were not before the agency at the time of the determination warrant a modification or reversal. (Ord. 74-313)

21044 Establishment of Precedent.
The principles established in a final determination shall be applied to all similar cases, regardless of whether or not a written request for review is submitted to the Board. (Ord. 74-313)

Part 5. Miscellaneous

21051 Judicial Review.
Upon exhaustion of administrative remedies, nothing in this Chapter shall preclude or limit in any way a claimant’s right to seek judicial review of the agency’s final determination. (Ord. 74-313)

21052 Savings Clause.
If any of the provisions of this Chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or application. (Ord. 74-313)

CHAPTER 11
DISCRIMINATION AND HARASSMENT PREVENTION POLICY
Sections:

§ 21100    Purpose and Scope.

§ 21101    Discrimination and Harassment.

§ 21102    Sexual Harassment.

§ 21103    Procedure.

§ 21104    Exceptions.

21100 Purpose and Scope.
A. To reinforce the City of Carson’s commitment to equal employment opportunity and a work environment free of discrimination and harassment, including sexual harassment. This policy is designed to attempt to prevent discrimination or harassment from occurring, and if it does occur, to stop any further discrimination or harassment and correct any effects of discrimination or harassment.

B. This policy and procedure will apply to all personnel that are employed by the City of Carson, those persons who volunteer or serve as unpaid interns for the City of Carson, any “special employees” as defined by law, any elected or appointed officials, and any persons providing services pursuant to a contract as described in Government Code Section 12940(j)(1).

C. This policy is also intended to apply to non-employees to the extent that they are discriminated against or harassed by City of Carson employees, any persons serving on the City Council, a City board or a commission, special employees, or any persons providing services pursuant to a contract with the City as described in Government Code Section 12940(j)(1).

D. It shall be deemed a violation of this policy to engage in the conduct described herein even if it does not rise to the level of legally actionable harassment or discrimination. (Ord. 16-1581, § 2)

21101 Discrimination and Harassment.
A. Under this policy, “discrimination” includes, but is not limited to:

1. Any practice, process or action in the workplace which works against equality of opportunity and against the ability of each person to be employed and to advance on the basis of merit without regard to the following protected categories/status:

a. Age (forty (40) and over);

b. Ancestry;

c. Color;

d. Religious creed (including religious dress and grooming practices);

e. Denial of family and medical care leave;

f. Disability (mental and physical) including HIV and AIDS;

g. Marital status;

h. Medical condition (cancer and genetic characteristics);

i. Genetic information;

j. Military and veteran status;

k. National origin (including language use restrictions);

l. Race;

m. Sex (which includes pregnancy, childbirth, breastfeeding and medical conditions related to pregnancy, childbirth or breastfeeding);

n. Gender, gender identity, and gender expression;

o. Sexual orientation;

p. Any other basis protected by Federal and/or State law.

2. Basing an employment decision affecting a job applicant or employee (e.g., decision to hire, promote, transfer, terminate, etc.) on one’s protected status.

3. Treating an applicant or employee differently with regard to any aspect of employment because of his or her protected status.

4. Taking adverse employment action (e.g., demotion, transfer, discipline, termination) against an employee based on the employee opposing discrimination and/or harassment in the workplace, assisting, supporting, or associating with a member of a protected category/status who complains about discrimination and/or harassment, or assisting in an investigation of discrimination and/or harassment.

B. Under this policy, “harassment” is defined by the existence of the following elements:

1. Conduct that is based on a protected category/status;

2. Conduct that is unwelcome;

3. Workplace harm that creates a hostile work environment or results in a tangible employment action (quid pro quo).

C. Even if conduct does not constitute a hostile work environment, it still may be misconduct that is cause for discipline. Examples of actions that may lead to workplace harassment complaints based on a hostile work environment and which are prohibited include, but are not limited to, the following:

1. Visual harassment, such as posters, photographs, letters, notes, email, cartoons, or drawings related to the person’s protected category/status.

2. Verbal harassment, such as epithets, derogatory comments/statements, vulgar, racist or other discriminatory jokes, or slurs based upon a person’s protected category/status.

3. Physical harassment, such as assault, blocking or impeding access or other physical interference, sabotaging work or imposing demeaning work tasks based upon a person’s protected category/status. (Ord. 16-1581, § 2)

21102 Sexual Harassment.
A. Sexual harassment includes harassment based on sex or of a sexual nature, gender harassment, and harassment based on pregnancy, childbirth, or related medical conditions.

B. The definition of sexual harassment includes many forms of offensive behavior, including harassment of a person of the same gender as the harasser.

C. Sexual harassment can take the form of, but is not limited to:

1. Unwanted sexual advances.

2. Offering employment benefits in exchange for sexual favors.

3. Making or threatening reprisals after a negative response to sexual advances.

4. Visual conduct, including leering, making sexual gestures, displaying of suggestive objects or pictures, cartoons or posters.

5. Verbal conduct, including making or using derogatory comments, epithets, slurs, and jokes.

6. Verbal abuse of a sexual nature, graphic verbal commentaries about an individual’s body, sexually degrading words used to describe an individual, suggestive or obscene letters, notes or invitations.

7. Physical conduct, including touching, assault, impeding or blocking movements.

D. Sexual harassment can occur in a variety of circumstances, including but not limited to the following:

1. The victim as well as the harasser may be a woman or a man. The victim does not have to be of the opposite sex.

2. The harasser can be the victim’s supervisor, a supervisor in another area, a manager, a co-worker, or a non-employee.

3. The victim does not have to be the person harassed but could be anyone affected by the offensive conduct.

4. Unlawful sexual harassment may occur without economic injury to or termination of the victim.

E. “Hostile work environment” cases are a type of sexual harassment that can result from various forms of conduct, including, but not limited to, the following:

1. Visual harassment: leering/staring, making sexual gestures, inappropriate gifts, and displaying suggestive or pornographic objects, pictures, magazines, cartoons, posters, letters, notes, or emails.

2. Verbal harassment: making or using derogatory comments, epithets, slurs and jokes. Comments about body parts or physical appearance, innuendo, unwanted sexual advances, unfulfilled threats of employment benefits/detriments in exchange for favors, pressure for dates, discussion of a sexual nature, questioning a person’s sexual practice or history, and sexually degrading words used to describe an individual.

3. Physical conduct: touching, assault, impeding or blocking movements.

F. “Quid pro quo (‘this for that’) harassment” cases are another type of sexual harassment. “Quid pro quo” harassment can occur when submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the basis for employment decisions affecting that individual, such as a promotion, raise, hiring, or performance appraisals. This kind of sexual harassment can only be perpetrated by a supervisor, manager or other person who has the authority to affect the employee’s terms and conditions of employment.

G. Examples of actions that may lead to sexual harassment complaints and which must be avoided include, but are not limited to, those listed below:

1. Unwanted sexual advances or pressure for dates or sexual favors.

2. Making implicit or explicit offers of employment benefits in exchange for sexual favors.

3. Making implicit or explicit threats of retaliation for negative responses to sexual advances.

4. Leering, sexual looks or sexual gestures with hands or through body movements.

5. Unwanted touching, including hugging, kissing, patting or stroking.

6. Pinching, grabbing, assaulting, impeding or blocking movements.

7. Sexually suggestive objects or pictures, cartoons or posters in the workplace or on computer systems (including email and the Internet).

8. Graphic verbal commentaries about an individual’s body.

9. Sexually degrading words used to describe an individual, including inappropriate sex oriented comments about appearance, including dress or physical features.

10. Lewd propositioning.

11. Unwanted written communications, telephone calls, or personal gifts.

12. Sexual teasing, jokes, remarks or questions.

13. Referring to an adult as a “girl,” “hunk,” “doll,” “babe,” or “honey” or whistling at someone.

14. Sexual innuendos or stories.

15. Asking about sexual fantasies, preferences or history.

16. Questions about sexual life.

17. Sexual comments about a person’s clothing, anatomy or looks.

18. Telling lies or spreading rumors about a person’s personal sex life.

19. Giving massages, touching a person’s clothing, hair or body.

H. Even if conduct does not constitute sexual harassment, it may still be misconduct that is cause for discipline.

I. Employers must take all reasonable steps to prevent discrimination and harassment from occurring. To that end, the City has prepared this policy, distributed a brochure on sexual harassment, and posted in the workplace a poster made available by the Department of Fair Employment and Housing. The City further provides training and education to managers and supervisors regarding sexual harassment as required by law. (Ord. 16-1581, § 2)

21103 Procedure.
A. Complaints of Discrimination or Harassment.

1. If any City employee, volunteer, intern, or applicant believes that he or she has been subjected to discrimination or harassment, including sexual harassment, he or she has the right to report the incident to any manager or supervisor, and the right to file a complaint with the Department of Human Resources. The Director of Human Resources or his or her designee shall interview the individual filing a complaint and the individual may be accompanied by a person of his or her choice, as long as that person is not an involved party or a witness. Other individuals will be interviewed as necessary. If the complaint is against the Director of Human Resources, then the complaint should be filed with the City Attorney’s office.

2. Complaints of acts of discrimination or harassment, including sexual harassment, that are in violation of the City’s discrimination and harassment prevention policy will be accepted in writing or orally, and any anonymous complaint will be taken seriously and investigated. Anyone who has observed or been the target of discrimination or harassment, including sexual harassment, should report it to the Director of Human Resources.

3. Additionally, individuals can also file complaints with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission within three hundred (300) days and with the Department of Fair Employment and Housing within three hundred sixty-five (365) days of the most recent alleged event of discrimination or harassment, including sexual harassment.

B. Investigation.

1. When the Department of Human Resources receives a complaint, the allegations will be promptly investigated in a fair and expeditious manner. The investigation will be conducted in such a way as to maintain confidentiality to the extent practicable, but confidentiality is neither guaranteed nor likely if discipline is ultimately determined necessary because any employee being so disciplined has the right to a full copy of the investigation report upon which the discipline is based.

2. If it is determined that a violation of this policy has occurred, the City will act promptly to correct the offending conduct, and where it is appropriate, disciplinary action will be imposed.

C. Disciplinary Action.

1. If it is determined that a violation of this policy has been committed by a City employee, the City will take such action as is appropriate under the circumstances. Such action may range from counseling to termination from employment, and may include such other forms of disciplinary action as is appropriate under the circumstances.

2. If it is determined that a violation of this policy has been committed by a non-City employee, the City will take such action as is appropriate under the circumstances. Such action may range from notifying the non-City employee’s employer, filing a complaint with said employer, or other such reasonable action designed to stop the offending conduct.

D. Duties of Supervisors and Managers.

1. Inform all employees of City policy and their rights and recourse for activities which come under the discrimination and harassment prevention policy.

2. Immediately take action when informed of any alleged violations of the discrimination and harassment prevention policy by informing the Director of Human Resources and seek consultation regarding any remedial or investigative response needed to immediately stop continued alleged violations.

3. Recognize that managers and supervisors should report to the Department of Human Resources any instances of discrimination or harassment, including sexual harassment, of which they are aware, and instances of discrimination or harassment, including sexual harassment, of which they should be aware in the normal course and scope of their management responsibility.

4. Recognize that managers and supervisors should report to the Department of Human Resources any instances of discrimination or harassment, including sexual harassment, of which they are aware, and instances of harassment of which they should be aware in the normal course and scope of their management responsibility even if the employee being subject to alleged discrimination or harassment, including sexual harassment, asks that it not be reported or that no action be taken. (Ord. 16-1581, § 2)

21104 Exceptions.
None. (Ord. 16-1581, § 2)

CHAPTER 12
TERM LIMITS FOR MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
Sections:

§ 21200    Term Limits.

§ 21201    Elected Officials.

§ 21202    Partial Terms of Office.

§ 21203    Application.

§ 21204    Amendments.

§ 21205    Severability.

21200 Term Limits.
No person shall be elected or appointed to more than three (3) terms as an elected official, or in any combination of elected offices, in the City of Carson. (Ord. 16-1598, § 1)

21201 Elected Officials.
The term “elected officials” as used in this Chapter includes the office of:

A. Mayor;

B. Member of the City Council;

C. City Clerk; and

D. City Treasurer. (Ord. 16-1598, § 1)

21202 Partial Terms of Office.
A. The limitation on terms of office described in CMC 21200 shall not apply to any unexpired term to which a person is elected or appointed if the remainder of the term is less than one-half of the full term of office.

B. Notwithstanding subsection (A) of this section, if an elected official is elected Mayor, his or her uncompleted term of office shall not count towards the term limits established in CMC 21200, provided that:

1. The elected official is elected to the Office of Mayor at a general municipal election; and

2. The elected official’s office is not scheduled for election at such general municipal election. (Ord. 16-1598, § 1)

21203 Application.
The term limits described in this Chapter shall apply to terms of office beginning on or after the general election held on November 8, 2016. (Ord. 16-1598, § 1)

21204 Amendments.
The City Council may by majority vote amend the provisions of this Chapter contained in CMC 21202 to implement the substantive provisions of this Chapter; provided, that such amendments are consistent with and further the purposes and intent of this Chapter. (Ord. 16-1598, § 1)

21205 Severability.
If any subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Chapter or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unenforceable or otherwise invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of this Chapter or any part thereof. (Ord. 16-1598, § 1)

ARTICLE III
PUBLIC SAFETY
Chapters:

1    Fire Prevention

2    Traffic Regulations

2.5    Preferential Parking Zones

3    Pound Regulations

4    General Hazards

5    Business Regulations

6    Watercourses

7    Emergency Organization

8    News Racks

9    City Tree Preservation and Protection

10    Sidewalk Vending

CHAPTER 1
FIRE PREVENTION
Sections:

§ 3100    Fire Prevention Code Adopted.

§ 3100.1    Amendments to Fire Code.

§ 3100.2    Repealed.

§ 3101    Fireworks Regulation.

§ 3101.0    Fireworks.

§ 3101.05    Definitions.

§ 3101.07    Liability of Resident Where an Illegal Use of Fireworks Occurs.

§ 3101.1    Fireworks – Sale of – Permit Required.

§ 3101.2    Persons Eligible.

§ 3101.3    Application Requirements.

§ 3101.4    Issuance of Permit.

§ 3101.5    General Provisions.

§ 3101.6    Regulations for Temporary Stands.

§ 3101.7    Wholesale Permit.

§ 3101.8    Storage of Fireworks.

§ 3101.9    Public Display.

§ 3101.10    Violations of Fireworks Regulations.

§ 3102    Violations of Fire Code.

§ 3103    Responsibility.

§ 3104    List of Infractions.

§ 3105    Repealed.

§ 3106    Adoption of Regulations by City Manager.

3100 Fire Prevention Code Adopted.
Except as hereinafter provided in this Chapter, Title 32, Fire Code (“Fire Code” herein), of the Los Angeles County Code, as amended and in effect on January 24, 2017, which constitutes an amended version of the California Fire Code, 2016 Edition (Part 9 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations), including Appendices 1-C, 11-C, 11-D, and VI-A, and excluding all other appendices, is hereby adopted by reference and shall constitute and may be cited as the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Carson.

In the event of any conflict between provisions of the California Fire Code, 2016 Edition, Title 32 of the Los Angeles County Code, and/or any amendment to the Fire Code contained in the Carson Municipal Code, the provision contained in the latter listed document shall control.

A copy of Title 32 of the Los Angeles County Code, along with a copy of the California Fire Code, 2016 Edition, has been deposited in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Carson and shall be at all times maintained by the City Clerk for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 2, § 3100; Ord. 29, § 1; Ord. 72-209, § 1; Ord. 78-441, § 1, Ord. 86-761, § 1; Ord. 91-994, § 1; Ord. 92-986U, § 1; Ord. 95-1081U, § 1; Ord. 99-1165U, § 1; Ord. 99-1165, § 1; Ord. 03-1277U, § 1; Ord. 03-1277, § 1; Ord. 08-1411, § 5; Ord. 17-1613, § 2; Ord. 17-1617, § 5)

3100.1 Amendments to Fire Code.
Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 3100, the Fire Code is amended by deleting Article 89. (Ord. 86-761, § 1; Ord. 92-986U, § 3; Ord. 95-1081U, § 2; Ord. 99-1165U, § 1; Ord. 99-1165, § 1; Ord. 03-1277U, § 1; Ord. 03-1277, § 1; Ord. 17-1613, § 2)

3100.2 Repealed.
(Ord. 86-761, § 1)

3101 Fireworks Regulation.
(Ord. 70-122, § 1; Ord. 92-986U, § 3; Ord. 95-1081U, § 3; Ord. 03-1277U, § 1; Ord. 03-1277, § 1; Ord. 17-1613, § 2)

3101.0 Fireworks.
(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, safe and sane fireworks may be sold, pursuant to the provisions of CMC 3101 to 3101.10, within the City of Carson only during the period designated in subsections (c)(i) and (c)(ii) of this Section.

(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or use safe and sane fireworks within the City of Carson at any time except during the following time periods:

(i) 12:00 noon to 10:00 p.m. on June 28th;

(ii) 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. on June 29th;

(iii) 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. on June 30th;

(iv) 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. on July 1st;

(v) 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. on July 2nd;

(vi) 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. on July 3rd; and

(vii) 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight on July 4th.

(c) Safe and sane fireworks may only be sold at a properly permitted stand within the City of Carson during the following hours:

(i) On June 28th from 12:00 noon to 10:00 p.m.; and

(ii) From June 29th through July 4th from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.

(d) It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge, use or possess illegal fireworks within the City of Carson. (Ord. 21, § 1; Ord. 69-86, § 3101; Ord. 70-122, § 1; Ord. 91-936, § 1; Ord. 92-986U, § 3; Ord. 95-1081U, § 3; Ord. 99-1165U, § 1; Ord. 99-1165, § 1; Ord. 99-1167U, § 2; Ord. 03-1277U, § 1; Ord. 03-1277, § 1; Ord. 06-1345, § 1; Ord. 07-1372, § 2; Ord. 17-1613, § 2; Ord. 18-1809U, § 2; Ord. 18-1810,§ 2)

3101.05 Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to the provisions of CMC 3101, including all subsections thereunder:

(a) “Fire Chief” shall mean the Chief of the Los Angeles County Fire Department or his/her duly authorized designee.

(b) “Fire Marshal permit” shall mean a permit issued by the California State Fire Marshal for the public display of fireworks in accordance with the State Fireworks Law.

(c) “Fireworks” shall mean and include all of the items listed in California Health and Safety Code Section 12511 or any successor provision thereto.

(d) “Illegal fireworks” shall mean any fireworks other than safe and sane fireworks. Illegal fireworks include but are not limited to sky rockets, bottle rockets, Roman candles, mortars, M-80, M-100, firecrackers, cherry bombs, palomitas and “helicopters.”

(e) “Permit” shall mean the nontransferable permission granted by the City for the purpose of establishing and maintaining a place where fireworks are manufactured, constructed, produced, packaged, stored, sold, exchanged, discharged or used.

(f) “Public display of fireworks” shall have the meaning given in California Health and Safety Code Section 12524 or any successor provision thereto.

(g) “Pyrotechnic operator” shall have the meaning given in California Health and Safety Code Section 12527 or any successor provision thereto.

(h) “Safe and sane fireworks” shall have the meaning given in California Health and Safety Code Section 12529 or any successor provision thereto.

(i) “State Fireworks Law” shall refer to California Health and Safety Code Section 12500 et seq. and Title 19 of the California Code of Regulations, at Division 1, Chapter 6.

(j) “Venue operator” shall mean any person owning, leasing, renting, managing, operating, or otherwise having legal control of the use of any real property, building, lot, site or other venue in the City of Carson from which a public display of fireworks is proposed. (Ord. 04-1307, § 3; Ord. 06-1345, § 2; Ord. 09-1437, § 1; Ord. 17-1613, § 2)

3101.07 Liability of Resident Where an Illegal Use of Fireworks Occurs.
Any resident of premises on which illegal fireworks are found or from which fireworks are illegally discharged or sold shall be subject to the same civil liability or criminal penalty that may be imposed by the City’s fireworks regulations on the person selling, discharging or possessing the fireworks, as applicable, if the person selling, discharging or using the fireworks is on the premises by the resident’s invitation or consent. (Ord. 07-1372, § 3; Ord. 17-1613, § 2)

3101.1 Fireworks – Sale of – Permit Required.
Except as provided herein, no person shall offer for sale or sell at retail any fireworks of any kind in the City of Carson without having first applied for and received a retail sales permit therefor. (Ord. 21, § 1; Ord. 70-122, § 1; Ord. 92-986U, § 3; Ord. 95-1081U, § 3; Ord. 17-1613, § 2)

3101.2 Persons Eligible.
A permit for the retail sale of fireworks shall be issued only to such applicants who meet the following qualifications and requirements:

(a) A nonprofit, charitable corporation or association currently recognized as a Section 501(c)(3) organization under the Internal Revenue Code or as a Section 27301(d) organization under the Revenue and Taxation Code.

(b) Said corporation or association has its principal and permanent meeting place in the City of Carson, and at least fifty (50) percent of its members reside in the City, and it has been organized and established in the City, as such, for a minimum of one (1) year continuously preceding the filing of the application for the permit, and has a bona fide membership of at least twenty (20) members.

(c) A permit shall not be issued unless the person, association or organization applying for the permit has first obtained a permit from the State Fire Marshal under Section 12500 et seq. of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California.

(d) The City Council may, by the affirmative vote of three-fifths (3/5) of the members of the City Council, waive, in whole or in part, the qualifications and requirements of subsection (a) or (b) of this Section for any applicant which the City Council finds is affiliated with a program or activity which is officially sponsored or operated by the City of Carson. (Ord. 21, § 1; Ord. 69-86, § 6; Ord. 70-122, § 1; Ord. 92-986U, § 3; Ord. 94-1036, § 1; Ord. 95-1081U, § 3; Ord. 98-1129, § 1; Ord. 17-1613, § 2)

3101.3 Application Requirements.
A permit may be issued for the sale of fireworks in a temporary fireworks stand in accordance with the following:

(a) Application for a permit shall be made by filing with the City Revenue Division a written application, in the form required herein, not earlier than March 1st and not later than April 1st of the year for which a permit is sought.

(b) Every application for a permit shall be accompanied by a permit application fee, established by City Council resolution, which shall not be refundable.

(c) Every application for a permit shall be upon a form furnished by the City Revenue Division and shall contain such information as shall be required by this Section.

(d) Every application shall set forth:

(1) The name and address of the applicant and the name of each of the principal officers of the organization, with the residence and business address and telephone number of each.

(2) Written evidence of the applicant’s status as a Section 501(c)(3) organization under the Internal Revenue Code or as a Section 27301(d) organization under the Revenue and Taxation Code.

(3) The date of organization of the applicant and length of continual existence.

(4) The location of the applicant’s principal and permanent meeting place.

(5) A sworn statement that at least fifty (50) percent of the applicant’s members reside in the City of Carson, and that the applicant has a bona fide membership of at least twenty (20) members.

(6) The purpose for which the applicant primarily exists and for which it was organized.

(7) The applicant’s intended use for any funds realized from the sale by such organization.

(8) The proposed location of the fireworks stand together with four (4) copies of a plot plan showing its location in relation to existing structures and the public right-of-way. The plot plan shall be drawn on a sheet of paper no larger than eight and one-half (8-1/2) inches by eleven (11) inches. Plot plans must be reviewed and approved by the County of Los Angeles Fire Department and the Planning Division for compliance with existing fire codes and planning regulations.

(9) The name and address of the owner of the designated location of the fireworks stand. The applicant shall supply a copy of a recorded deed evidencing its ownership of the designated location, or an executed lease, rental, or license agreement evidencing the agreed upon rental fee, and that the applicant has the legal authority to locate and operate a fireworks stand at the designated location. An applicant may request that the proposed location of its stand be changed if such request is made prior to June 1st and the applicant pays the transfer fee established by resolution of the City Council, provides the ownership or lease documents required by this subsection, and timely complies with all other inspection and permitting requirements required by law for the new location.

(10) A statement that the person signing the application has read and is familiar with the terms of this Chapter regarding the nature of the permit granted, the location of fireworks stands, and the permitted times of storage and sale of fireworks at such location.

(11) A statement that the applicant agrees to comply strictly with the terms of any permit granted, and to account to the City for transactions engaged in pursuant to the permit and for the use and distribution of funds realized from the holding of such permit.

(12) The signatures of the presiding officer of the organization and one (1) additional officer of the organization. (Ord. 21, § 1; Ord. 70-122, § 1; Ord. 88-828, § 1; Ord. 92-986U, § 3; Ord. 95-1081U, § 3; Ord. 98-1129, §§ 2 – 4; Ord. 99-1167U, §§ 4, 6; Ord. 10-1444, § 1; Ord. 17-1613, § 2)

3101.4 Issuance of Permit.
Applicants for such permit shall be notified by the City Revenue Division of the acceptance or rejection of such application for a permit on or before May 7th.

(a) Upon approval of such application, the applicant shall complete the following prior to the issuance of a permit:

(1) Pay a permit fee established by City Council resolution.

(2) Post a cash deposit with the City in an amount established by City Council resolution to guarantee that all litter shall be cleared from the premises of the temporary fireworks stand by the date so stipulated in this Section. If the City incurs site-clearing costs in excess of the deposit, the permittee will be billed accordingly. Failure to pay the excess cost within thirty (30) days will disqualify the permittee from applying for a permit for a period of one (1) year.

(3) File with the City Revenue Division a certificate of general liability and property damage insurance, in an aggregate amount of not less than $1,000,000. The insurance shall cover the operation and premises of the temporary fireworks stand and shall name the City of Carson, its officers and employees as an additional insured.

(b) The City Revenue Division shall forward a copy of the application and plot plan to the Los Angeles County Fire Department to review and inspect the location of the proposed fireworks stand for compliance with existing fire regulations.

(c) A copy of the application and plot plan shall also be forwarded to the Sheriff’s Department for permit investigation.

(d) Upon final inspection by appropriate departments and compliance with these regulations, a permit shall be granted by the City Revenue Division. (Ord. 21, § 1; Ord. 70-122, § 1; Ord. 88-828, § 2; Ord. 91-936, § 2; Ord. 92-986U, § 3; Ord. 95-1081U, § 3; Ord. 99-1167U, §§ 8, 10, 12; Ord. 10-1444, § 3; Ord. 17-1613, § 2)

3101.5 General Provisions.
(a) The permittee shall use the net proceeds derived from its operations under such permit only for such nonprofit, charitable, or religious service projects that shall be of direct benefit to the City of Carson and for no other purpose. Specifically, such net proceeds shall not be used (1) to support political activities (including, but not limited to, contributions to legal defense organizations); (2) for property-related expenditures (including, but not limited to, mortgage payments and property taxes) related to properties located outside of the City; (3) for contributions to national or regional organizations (contributions to Carson-based units of such organizations are permitted if the funds will be expended locally as required by this Section); or (4) for any other purpose unrelated to a service project that directly benefits the City. The City Manager shall have final authority to determine whether each use of such net proceeds complies with this provision.

(b) Upon the expiration of the retail sales permit granted for the operation of a fireworks stand, but prior to the first Tuesday of September, the permittee shall file a statement of accounting and report with the City Revenue Division stating the gross funds derived from the sale of fireworks, costs of fireworks inventory sold, and itemized operating expenses. The City Revenue Division shall have the right to request and review supporting documentation for all fireworks sales receipts and expenses.

(c) On or before the first Thursday of March of the following year, the permittee shall file a report with the City Revenue Division giving a description of such service projects together with an accounting of the funds derived from the sale of fireworks for the previous year. The permittee shall fully expend the net proceeds derived from its operations under such permit, in accordance with the provisions of subsection (a) of this Section, prior to the filing of the report. The City Manager may grant an extension, not to exceed one (1) year, for the expending of the proceeds upon receiving satisfactory proof that the funds are earmarked for specific service projects that will take place after the March filing date. No such extension shall be granted unless the permittee specifically identifies the proposed expenditures and the projected dates of completion. Upon completion of such service projects, the permittee shall file an amended financial report that accounts for the use of the proceeds.

(d) No one (1) organization may receive more than one (1) permit for a fireworks stand during any one (1) calendar year.

(e) No organization shall receive a permit for a fireworks stand if such organization received a permit for the previous year and has failed to file the reports required in subsections (b) and (c) of this Section or otherwise violated any provisions of the Carson Municipal Code relating to such prior year’s permit or to the permittee’s operations thereunder.

(f) Every fireworks stand operator (nonprofit organizations selling fireworks) shall designate two (2) or more responsible individuals who shall attend a Fireworks Stand Operators Safety Seminar and Orientation Session, which is conducted by the wholesale distributors of fireworks. Such seminar shall be subject to prior review by, and shall incorporate the recommendations of, the Los Angeles County Fire Department. Failure of an organization to have two (2) or more responsible individuals attend said safety program and orientation session shall be grounds for revocation of the organization’s eligibility for a fireworks permit in the City of Carson that year.

(g) No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be allowed to purchase fireworks.

(h) All permits shall expire at 12:00 midnight on July 4th of the year in which the permit was granted.

(i) The total number of permits for fireworks stands issued in the City of Carson in any one (1) calendar year shall not exceed twenty (20). The maximum number of licenses issued shall annually be adjusted downward to the number of licenses issued in the preceding year to a minimum of not less than ten (10).

(j) Permits shall be issued first to applicants which held a permit during the immediately preceding Fourth of July season and faithfully complied with all requirements of this Code in connection therewith. Any remaining permits shall thereafter be granted to qualified applicants in the order in which their applications are filed with the City. In the event that there are more applications than permits available, applicants not receiving permits will be placed on a waiting list in the order their applications are filed with the City. The waiting list will be maintained from year to year; provided, that the waiting list applicants continue to annually file a timely application and pay the required application fee in accordance with CMC 3101.3. Any permits which become available after the establishment of the waiting list shall be granted to qualified applicants in the order in which their names appear on the waiting list. (Ord. 70-122, § 1; Ord. 70-130, § 1; Ord. 71-156, § 1; Ord. 88-828, § 3; Ord. 91-936, § 3; Ord. 92-986U, § 3; Ord. 95-1081U, § 3; Ord. 96-1087U; Ord. 98-1129, § 5; Ord. 98-1145, §§ 2, 3; Ord. 99-1167U, §§ 14, 16, 18, 20, 21; Ord. 06-1345, § 3; Ord. 10-1444, § 3; Ord. 17-1613, § 2)

3101.6 Regulations for Temporary Stands.
All temporary stands for the sale of fireworks shall be located, maintained, and operated subject to the following provisions:

(a) Fireworks stands shall be capable of resisting wind loads without collapsing, sliding, or overturning. Such stands shall be installed in conformance with the recommendation of a licensed civil engineer, structural engineer, or architect. A plan showing the recommended installation requirements shall be subject to the review and approval of the Building and Safety Division. The plan shall be approved prior to the installation of the stand. All necessary hold-downs shall be installed when the stand is initially erected. Fireworks stands, as temporary structures, need not comply with other provisions of the Building Code of the City of Carson; provided, however, that all stands shall be erected to the satisfaction of the Building Official or his/her designee who shall require that stands be constructed in such a manner as to reasonably ensure the safety of attendants and patrons. All utilities shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable governmental laws, statutes, ordinances, codes and regulations.

A certificate of occupancy shall be issued upon approval of the stand and any utilities installed therein by the Building and Safety Division and Fire Department. The certificate of occupancy or a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous location within the stand. It shall be unlawful to sell any fireworks from a stand that does not have a valid certificate of occupancy. Utilities shall not be connected, added, or modified in an approved stand after the issuance of a certificate of occupancy without the approval of the Building and Safety Division.

No person shall install any electrical wiring within a fireworks stand until any appropriate electrical permit has been obtained from the Building and Safety Division.

(b) No fireworks stand shall be erected within one hundred (100) feet of any gasoline station or commercial garage nor within twenty-five (25) feet of any other structure. Minimum setback from the street curbing shall be ten (10) feet.

(c) No fireworks stand shall be located within a residential zone without prior approval of the City Council by minute order. The City Council may approve the placement of a fireworks stand within an RM Zone upon finding that the proposed stand will not detrimentally impact the surrounding residential neighborhood.

(d) All permits shall be posted in a conspicuous place.

(e) Permittees shall strictly comply with all the provisions of the State Fireworks Law.

(f) No fireworks stand shall be installed prior to 12:00 noon on June 21st and each stand shall be removed from the temporary location by 12:00 noon on July 12th, and all accompanying litter, debris, building materials, utility connections and other facilities or equipment or materials shall be cleared from said location by said time and date to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works. In the event the premises have not been cleared by said date, the Department of Public Works shall charge the cost thereof to the cash deposit submitted pursuant to Section 3101.4, and the balance unexpended shall be returned to the permittee.

(g) All weeds and combustible material, not including structures, shall be cleared from the location of the stand, and for a distance of at least fifty (50) feet surrounding the stand.

(h) All trash shall be removed from the premises and the fireworks stand each evening at the close of business.

(i) There shall be maintained in each premises or stand within which fireworks are sold or offered for sale two (2) fire extinguishers approved by the Los Angeles County Fire Department.

(j) No person shall light, or cause or permit to be lighted, any fireworks or any other article or material within any such stand, or within fifty (50) feet thereof.

(k) No smoking shall be allowed in any structure used for the sale and display of fireworks nor within fifty (50) feet of said structure. “No Smoking” signs shall be prominently displayed both inside and outside the fireworks stand.

(l) There shall be at least one (1) adult in attendance during the open or sale hours of the fireworks stand. No person under eighteen (18) years of age shall be permitted in a stand.

(m) The permittee shall provide an adult night watchman to act and serve during the hours of storage. Under no circumstances shall the night watchman sleep within the fireworks stand.

(n) No alcoholic beverages shall be allowed on the premises. No person who is under the influence of alcoholic beverages shall enter, or be allowed in, the sales booth.

(o) Fireworks stands shall have exits at least thirty (30) inches in width at both ends of the structure, and one (1) thirty (30) inch exit every twenty (20) feet on the rear wall of the structure. No supplies or other materials shall be stored in front of exit doors. All exit doors shall remain unlocked and unlatched whenever the stand is occupied.

(p) A minimum distance shall be maintained between fireworks stands. No fireworks stand shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of another stand on the same side of the street. No fireworks stand shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of another stand on the opposite side of a street or highway. During the initial implementation of this provision, if multiple fireworks stands are located within the new distance limits, the organization with the most seniority at the location will be given first choice to remain at said location.

(q) Fireworks on the sale site shall be stored and kept only in the permittee’s sales booth. It shall be unlawful to store any fireworks in any other place within the City of Carson except as provided in CMC 3101.8.

(r) All unsold stock shall be removed from the location by 12:00 noon of July 7th.

(s) The retail sales permittee shall not pay more than ten (10) percent of the gross sales from the previous season for that location or $5,000, whichever is less, for the rental payment for the location to the fireworks wholesaler. (Ord. 21, § 1; Ord. 69-86, § 2; Ord. 70-122, § 1; Ord. 82-600U, § 1; Ord. 82-608U; Ord. 83-658U, §§ 1, 2; Ord. 84-689U, §§ 1, 2; Ord. 88-844U, § 1; Ord. 90-909U, § 1; Ord. 91-936, § 4; Ord. 91-938U, § 1; Ord. 92-980U, §§ 1, 2; Ord. 92-986U, § 3; Ord. 93-1005U, § 1; Ord. 94-1038U; Ord. 95-1059U, § 1; Ord. 95-1081U, § 3; Ord. 95-1074, § 1; Ord. 97-1114U, § 1; Ord. 98-1142U* § 1; Ord. 99-1167U, §§ 23, 25, 27; Ord. 01-1225, § 1; Ord. 09-1437 § 1; Ord. 10-1444, § 3; Ord. 13-1512, § 1; Ord. 17-1613, § 2)

*Code reviser’s note: This ordinance expired on July 4, 1998.

3101.7 Wholesale Permit.
No person shall engage in the possession and wholesale distribution of safe and sane fireworks within the City of Carson without having first applied for and received a business license pursuant to CMC 6310 and wholesale permit pursuant to the provisions of this Section:

(a) The City Council may, at its discretion, from time to time grant a wholesale permit for the possession and wholesale distribution of safe and sane fireworks within the City to any person permitted by the State Fire Marshal as a manufacturer, importer, exporter or wholesaler of fireworks. Any such permit shall be upon the terms and conditions hereafter provided in this Section, and shall contain the provisions herein set forth.

(b) Such wholesale permits may, unless revoked by the City Council, be reissued annually; provided, however, that the permittee shall, on or before March 31st of each year, file an application therefor in the same form as an application for the original permit, and shall pay the application fee required by subsection (c) of this Section.

(c) An application by a manufacturer, importer, exporter or wholesaler for a wholesale permit to engage in the possession and wholesale distribution of safe and sane fireworks in the City shall conform to the following requirements:

(1) It shall be in writing, verified, and accompanied by a nonrefundable permit application fee established by City Council resolution.

(2) It shall be filed with the City Revenue Division on or before March 31st of the year in which such permit is to be effective.

(3) It shall be accompanied by a statement that upon issuance of a permit, the applicant will deliver to the City certificates of product liability, general liability and property damage insurance in an aggregate amount of not less than $1,000,000. Such insurance coverage shall be with a corporate insurance company, and in such form as shall be approved by the City Attorney, and shall name the City, its officers and employees as additional insured.

(4) It shall contain such other information as may be required by the City Manager.

(5) It shall set forth the name, principal place of business and telephone number of the applicant, its State fireworks permit number or numbers, the names and addresses of its principal partners, owners or officers, and the name, residence address, and capacity of the person signing the application.

(6) It shall contain a statement that fireworks will not be furnished, sold, distributed or placed in the possession of any person or organization in the City, or for sale, use or distribution in the City, unless such person or organization holds a valid and unrevoked permit from the City to so possess, sell, use or distribute said fireworks.

(d) Upon approval of the application for a permit, a wholesale permittee shall:

(1) Furnish plans and specifications for temporary fireworks stands for the retail sale of fireworks distributed by the wholesaler, and no sale, distribution or storage of fireworks shall be made except to and from, or at, a temporary fireworks stand. Such temporary stands shall be subject to the provisions of CMC 3101.6.

(2) Pay a permit fee established by City Council resolution for each fireworks stand that sells the wholesaler’s product in the City. The permit fee shall offset the City’s costs to issue the permit; conduct investigations, inspections and audits; conduct a Fireworks Stand Operators Safety Seminar and Orientation Session; and retain the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department to conduct a Fireworks Compliance Program. The permit fee shall be payable within five (5) business days from the date the City Revenue Division provides notification of application approval pursuant to this Section.

(e) No fireworks wholesaler shall deliver or sell fireworks in the City of Carson without a City approved fireworks wholesale permit.

(f) Every shipment or load of fireworks distributed to any retail permittee shall be accurately inventoried, and a copy of the inventory furnished to the retail permittee at the time of such distribution. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to furnish to any retail permittee any materially false or inaccurate inventory. A copy of each such inventory shall be filed with the City Revenue Division not later than July 31st of the year that the distribution is made.

(g) No fireworks shall be distributed within the City to any retail permittee or other person prior to June 27th of the year for which the permit is issued.

(h) Every wholesale permittee shall:

(1) Provide two (2) fire extinguishers at no charge to each fireworks retail permittee who sells the wholesaler’s product.

(2) Provide a temporary fireworks sales stand, free of charge, to each fireworks retail permittee who sells the wholesaler’s product.

(3) Make fireworks deliveries to fireworks retail permittees free of a delivery charge.

(4) Provide two (2) credit card processing machines at no charge to each fireworks retail permittee who sells the wholesaler’s product. The wholesale permittee may charge credit card transaction fees to the fireworks retail permittee(s).

(5) Submit a public education plan to the City no later than 5:00 p.m. on the day prior to the last City business day in May. The public education plan shall outline the public safety and education efforts to be conducted and paid for by the wholesale permittee, including the extent of public safety and education distribution, and samples of the public safety and education materials to be distributed. Each wholesale permittee shall pay a pro rata share of the City facility room rental to host the Fireworks Stand Operators Safety Seminar and Orientation Session, based upon the number of permitted stands supplied by the wholesaler, divided by the total number of permitted stands.

(6) Deliver to the City certificates of product liability, general liability and property damage insurance in an aggregate amount of not less than $1,000,000. Such insurance coverage shall be with a corporate insurance company and in such form as shall be approved by the City Attorney, and shall name the City, its officers and employees as additional insured.

(7) Deliver to the City a copy of each rental agreement entered into by the wholesaler for use of privately or publicly owned space in the City for the purposes of selling fireworks.

(i) Any wholesale permittee failing to comply with the above requirements shall be prohibited from applying for any permit or license under this Section through CMC 3101.9 for a period of one (1) year.

(j) Every wholesale permit issued shall expire on December 31st of the year for which such permit is issued. (Ord. 70-122, § 1; Ord. 92-986U, § 3; Ord. 95-1081U, § 3; Ord. 04-1307, § 4; Ord. 17-1613, § 2)

3101.8 Storage of Fireworks.
It shall be unlawful to store any fireworks in any residence, home, garage, or automobile within the City of Carson. It shall also be unlawful to store any fireworks in any building or other place within the City of Carson without having first applied for and received a business license pursuant to CMC 6310 and a permit therefor pursuant to the provisions of this Section from the City Council. This Section is not applicable to temporary storage of fireworks in temporary retail sales stands. An application for such a permit shall be filed with the City Council along with payment of a nonrefundable application fee established by City Council resolution no later than the last City business day in May. The City Council shall cause an investigation to be made of the place where it is proposed to store such fireworks. Notwithstanding the foregoing, storage of fireworks in connection with a public display of fireworks by a pyrotechnic operator shall be governed by permit issued under CMC 3101.9.

(a) Prior to initiating the storage of fireworks at the permitted location, the permittee shall procure general liability and property damage insurance covering its operation in and about said premises in a minimum aggregate amount of $1,000,000; in addition, the City of Carson, its officers and employees shall be named as an additional insured on such insurance. The permittee shall file a certificate of such insurance with the City Revenue Division within seven (7) days after Council approval of such storage operation.

(b) No fireworks shall be stored within one hundred (100) feet of any gasoline service station or any garage located within twenty-five (25) feet of any other structure. Any facility for the storage of fireworks shall maintain a minimum setback from the street curbing of ten (10) feet.

(c) There shall be maintained at each location where fireworks are stored at least two (2) fire extinguishers approved by the Los Angeles County Fire Department; provided, however, that if more than one (1) room at any location is used for fireworks storage, there shall be at least one (1) approved fire extinguisher per room.

(d) No person shall light, or cause, or permit to be lighted, any fireworks, or any other article or material, within any structure approved for fireworks storage, or within fifty (50) feet thereof.

(e) No smoking shall be allowed in any structure used for the storage of fireworks nor within fifty (50) feet of said structure. “No Smoking” signs shall be prominently displayed.

(f) No minor, under the age of eighteen (18), shall be in the fireworks storage structure.

(g) No alcoholic beverages shall be allowed on the premises. No person who is under the influence of alcoholic beverages shall enter or be allowed in the building or structure used for fireworks storage.

(h) The permittee shall provide an adult night watchman to act and serve during all hours other than normal business hours. Under no circumstances shall the night watchman sleep within the building in which the fireworks are stored.

(i) All permits must be posted in a conspicuous place at the storage site.

(j) The permittee shall strictly comply with all the provisions of the State Fireworks Law. (Ord. 69-86, § 4; Ord. 69-94, § 1; Ord. 70-122, § 1; Ord. 92-986U, § 3; Ord. 95-1081U, § 3; Ord. 04-1307, § 5; Ord. 17-1613, § 2)

3101.9 Public Display.
No person shall engage in the public display of fireworks within the City of Carson without having first applied for and received a business license pursuant to CMC 6310 and permit pursuant to the provisions of this Section. Upon application by a pyrotechnic operator or venue owner for one (1) or more public display events (to an annual maximum of six (6) public display events per venue), an authorized representative of the City’s Revenue Division shall grant a permit provided all of the following criteria are met:

(a) Such display(s) shall not take place on Monday through Thursday, unless the day falls on July 4th. Any request for public displays at any other times shall be subject to the approval of the City Council within its discretion.

(b) The public display of fireworks shall be performed by a pyrotechnic operator holding a current and valid Fire Marshal permit for the public display of fireworks under Health and Safety Code Section 12575, 12576 or 12577.

(c) The applicant shall file a written application on a form provided by the City for such permit accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee established by City Council resolution for each event.

(d) The application shall be filed with the City Revenue Division at least two (2) weeks prior to the public display of fireworks event.

(e) The application shall be accompanied by an insurance certificate for general liability and property damage insurance in an aggregate amount of not less than $1,000,000, and proof that workers’ compensation insurance is carried for all employees in compliance with Labor Code Section 3700. Such policy shall be issued by a corporate insurance company authorized to conduct business in the State of California, and shall name the City, its officers and employees as additional insureds.

(f) The application shall set forth the name, principal place of business and telephone number of the applicant, the names and addresses of its principal partners, owners or officers, the name, residence address, and capacity of the person signing the application and the name and address of the venue operator.

(g) The application shall set forth the dates and hours of operation, including the schedule for setup and testing, along with the name and contact information for the State Fire Marshal assigned to oversee the public display of fireworks event. The application shall certify that the public display of fireworks shall not occur after 11:00 p.m. on any approved date.

(h) The application shall be accompanied by copies of the pyrotechnic operator’s permit issued by the State Fire Marshal or Fire Chief, as applicable, to conduct the proposed public display of fireworks at the proposed venue in the City.

(i) The application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the grounds on which the display is to be held approved by the State Fire Marshal or Fire Chief, as applicable, showing the point at which the fireworks are to be discharged, the location of all buildings, roads, and other means of transportation, the lines behind which the audience will be restrained, the location of all nearby trees, telegraph or telephone lines, or other overhead obstruction.

(j) The application shall describe the proposed storage location for fireworks on the site and provide an emergency response plan describing the resources available to the applicant and methods for using such resources to respond to any emergency created by the proposed use of fireworks.

(k) No pyrotechnic display shall be conducted within five hundred (500) feet of any residence, unless the applicant for the permit has first sent or had delivered written notification to all of the owners or tenants of any residence within a five hundred (500) foot radius of the discharge site.

(l) Any duly approved permit shall be displayed at all times on the premises of the venue operator.

(m) The applicant shall certify to the truth of all matters in the application. The City may refuse to issue or revoke any permit for the public display of fireworks at any time upon discovery of any misrepresentation or false statement in the application or failure by the applicant to meet the requirements of this Section. (Ord. 69-86, § 1; Ord. 70-122, § 1; Ord. 92-986U, § 3; Ord. 95-1081U, § 3; Ord. 04-1307, § 6; Ord. 17-1613, § 2)

3101.10 Violations of Fireworks Regulations.
(a) Any person violating any provision of CMC 3101 to 3101.9, inclusive, or knowingly or intentionally misrepresenting to any officer or employee of the City any material fact in procuring the permit herein provided for, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

(b) In addition thereto, any such misrepresentation or violation shall constitute grounds for revocation of the permit by the City Council, on twenty-four (24) hours’ notice to the permittee, or if any such violation is committed in the presence of the Sheriff, or any deputy, or Fire Chief, or any other City officer, the City Manager shall be empowered, upon receiving a written and signed report thereof from any such officer, to close any such sales booth or stand forthwith.

(c) Any person violating the provisions of CMC 3101.7 to 3101.9 shall be subject to a penalty of $1,000 for a first-time violation, and thereafter $1,000 for each additional violation of such provisions. Any person found to have violated the provisions of CMC 3101.7, 3101.8, or 3101.9, or any combination of the same, more than two (2) times in a single year shall be prohibited from applying for any permit under CMC 3101.7 through 3101.9 for a period of one (1) year.

(d) If any provision(s) of this Chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any other provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this Chapter are declared to be severable. The City Council hereby declares that they would have adopted this Chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, part or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more sections, subsections, clauses, phrases, parts or portions thereof be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 69-86, § 3; Ord. 70-122, § 1; Ord. 92-986U, § 3; Ord. 95-1081U, § 3; Ord. 04-1307, § 7; Ord. 06-1345, § 4; Ord. 17-1613, § 2)

3102 Violations of Fire Code.
(a) Every person violating any provision of the Fire Code, or any rule, regulation or policy promulgated pursuant hereto, is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in CMC 1200(a), unless such violation is otherwise declared to be an infraction by CMC 3104. Each such violation is a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which such violation is committed.

(b) Every violation determined to be an infraction hereunder is punishable in such manner and to such extent as is provided by CMC 1200(b).

(c) For the purposes of this Section a forfeiture of bail shall be equivalent to a conviction. (Ord. 86-761, § 1; Ord. 91-944, § 1; Ord. 92-986U, Ord. 95-1081U, § 4; Ord. 99-1165U, § 2; Ord. 99-1165, § 2; Ord. 03-1277U, § 2; Ord. 03-1277, § 2; Ord. 17-1613, § 2)

3103 Responsibility.
Any person who personally or through another willfully, negligently, or in violation of law sets a fire, allows a fire to be set, or allows a fire kindled or attended by such person to escape from his or her control, allows any hazardous material to be handled, stored or transported in a manner not in accordance with nationally recognized standards, allows any hazardous material to escape from his or her control, neglects to properly comply with any written notice of the Chief, or willfully or negligently allows the continuation of a violation of the Fire Code and amendments thereto is liable for the expense of fighting the fire or for the expenses incurred during a hazardous materials incident, and such expense shall be a charge against that person. Such charge shall constitute a debt of such person and is collectible by the public agency incurring such expenses in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under a contract, expressed or implied. (Ord. 86-761, § 1; Ord. 92-986U, § 4; Ord. 95-1081U, § 4; Ord. 99-1165U, § 2; Ord. 99-1165, § 2; Ord. 03-1277U, § 2; Ord. 03-1277, § 2; Ord. 17-1613, § 2)

3104 List of Infractions.
In accordance with CMC 3102, the violation of the following sections or subsections of the Fire Code shall be infractions:

 

Section

Offense

901.4.4

Premises identification

902.2.4

Obstructing and control of fire apparatus access

1001.5.1

Maintenance of fire-protection systems and equipment

1001.5.3

Systems out of service

1001.6.2

Fire hydrant and fire appliances

1002

Portable fire extinguishers

1102.3

Open burning

1103

Combustible materials

1105

Asphalt kettles

1109.4

Smoking

1109.5

Burning objects

1109.6

Hot ashes and spontaneous ignition sources

1115.3

Fire prevention regulations

1115.5

Portable fire protection equipment

1115.7

Maintenance of access

1117.2

Structures

1118.17

Fire roads and firebreaks

1207.3

Locking devices

1207.6

Door identification

1210.3

Storage under stairways

1212.4

Illumination

2401.9

Smoking

2901.6.2

Lubricating oil

3004.3

Waste removal

3008.5

Combustible waste

3213

Means of egress illumination

3221.2

Vegetation removal

3221.3

Storage

3404

Fire apparatus access roads

3601.6

Fire protection

3601.7

Smoking

4501.4

Smoking

4501.5

Welding warning signs

4502.3.3

Filter disposal

4502.8.2

Fire extinguishers

4502.9

Operations and maintenance

4503.7.1

General

4503.8

Dip tank covers

4504.3.2

Signs

4504.4

Maintenance

4505.6.1

Dust accumulation

4506.6

Sources of ignition

4606.2

Smoking

4607

Housekeeping

5201.7

Sources of ignition

7401.5.1

General

7401.6

Security

7607

Smoking and open flames

7901.7.2

Maintenance and operating practices

7901.10

Sources of ignition

7902.5.3

Empty containers and portable tanks

7904.3.2.1

Storage tanks and sources of ignition

7904.4.7

Sources of ignition

7904.4.9

Fire protection

7904.6.4

Smoking

8001.8

Signs

8003.1.12

Clearance from combustibles

8004.1.8

Signs

8004.3.5

Clearance from combustibles

8208

Smoking and other sources of ignition

8209

Clearance to combustibles

8506

Extension cords and flexible cords

(Ord. 86-761, § 1; Ord. 91-944, § 1; Ord. 92-986U, § 2; Ord. 95-1081U, § 5; Ord. 99-1165U, § 2; Ord. 99-1165, § 2; Ord. 03-1277U, § 2; Ord. 03-1277, § 2; Ord. 17-1613, § 2)

3105 Repealed.
Repealed by Ord. 92-986U. (Ord. 91-944, § 1)

3106 Adoption of Regulations by City Manager.
The City Manager is empowered to make such regulations and interpretive rules as are not inconsistent with this Chapter as may be necessary or desirable to aid in the enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 17-1613, § 2)

CHAPTER 2
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS*
Sections:

Part 1. General Provisions and Violations

§ 3200    Short Title.

§ 3201    Continuation.

§ 3202    Traffic Enforcement Agency.

§ 3203    City Traffic Engineer.

§ 3204    Violations.

Part 2. Definitions

§ 3210    Generally.

§ 3211    Definitions.

Part 3. Miscellaneous

§ 3220    Removal of Vehicles.

§ 3221    Removal of Illegally Parked Vehicles.

Part 4. Traffic Control Devices

§ 3230    Authority to Install Official Traffic Control Devices.

§ 3231    Official Traffic Control Devices Required for Enforcement Purposes.

§ 3232    Installation of Traffic Control Signals.

§ 3233    Authority to Remove Relocate and Discontinue Traffic Control Devices.

§ 3234    Traffic Control Devices – Hours of Operation.

§ 3235    Unauthorized Markings of Curbs and Roadways.

Part 5. Traffic Regulations

§ 3240    Speed Zones.

§ 3241    Regulation of Turns.

§ 3242    Authority for STOP or YIELD.

§ 3243    Pedestrians.

§ 3244    Bicycle Regulations.

§ 3244.1    Bikeways.

§ 3244.2    Riding on Sidewalks.

§ 3244.3    Riding Prohibited in Specific Locations.

§ 3245    Cruising Regulations.

§ 3245.1    Cruising Prohibited.

§ 3245.2    Definitions.

§ 3245.3    Establishment of Traffic Control Points.

§ 3245.4    Exceptions.

§ 3245.5    Penalty for Cruising and Successive Violations.

Part 6. Parking Regulations

§ 3251    Parking Restrictions.

§ 3251.1    Authority of Public Works Director.

§ 3251.2    Temporary Parking Restrictions Not Requiring City Council Direction.

§ 3251.3    Permanent Parking Prohibitions Not Requiring City Council Direction.

§ 3251.4    Parking on Grades.

§ 3251.5    Parking for Certain Purposes Prohibited.

§ 3251.6    Time Limit Parking.

§ 3251.7    Parking for Street Sweeping.

§ 3251.8    Parking in Parkway.

§ 3251.9    Parking on Private Property.

§ 3251.10    Parking Space Markings.

§ 3252    Loading Regulations.

§ 3252.1    Commercial and Passenger Loading Zones.

§ 3252.2    Stopping in Alleys.

§ 3252.3    Bus and Taxi Zones.

§ 3253    Disabled Person Parking.

§ 3253.1    On-Street Disabled Person Parking.

§ 3253.2    Disabled Person Parking in Publicly Owned Off-Street Facilities.

§ 3253.3    Identification of Disabled Person Parking Spaces.

§ 3254    Commercial Vehicle Parking.

§ 3254.1    Parking of Detached Trailers.

§ 3254.2    Truck Parking.

§ 3255    Parking of Oversized Vehicles.

§ 3255.1    Definitions.

§ 3255.2    Oversized Vehicle Parking Prohibited – Enforcement.

§ 3255.3    Exceptions.

§ 3255.4    Oversized Vehicle Parking Permits.

§ 3255.5    Permit Application – Permit Renewal – Permit Fee.

§ 3255.6    Permit Denial or Revocation.

§ 3255.7    Violations.

Part 7. Truck Regulations

§ 3260    Truck Routes.

§ 3260.1    Prohibition of Commercial Vehicles or Vehicles Exceeding 6000 Pounds Gross Weight Except on Designated Routes.

§ 3260.2    Designated Routes.

§ 3260.3    Exceptions.

§ 3260.4    Designated Route Signs.

§ 3261    Oversize Vehicles.

§ 3261.1    Definitions.

§ 3261.2    Length Prohibition.

§ 3261.3    Exceptions.

§ 3261.4    Width Prohibition.

§ 3261.5    Application For Establishment of Designated Oversized Truck Routes to Terminal Facilities.

§ 3261.6    Fees and Costs.

§ 3261.7    Revocation of Designation.

§ 3261.8    Appeal.

§ 3261.9    Service Facilities.

§ 3261.10    Prohibited Routes for Vehicles with a Kingpin Setting of from Thirty-Eight (38) Feet Through and Including Forty (40) Feet.

§ 3262    Overweight Vehicle Special Permit Program.

§ 3262.1    Definitions.

§ 3262.2    Special Permit Required.

§ 3262.3    Designated Streets.

§ 3262.4    Authority to Issue Special Permit.

§ 3262.5    Application Required.

§ 3262.6    Special Permit Conditions.

§ 3262.7    Revocation of Permit.

§ 3262.8    Rules and Regulations.

§ 3262.9    Display and Special Permit.

§ 3262.10    Other Permits.

Part 8. Hazardous Materials

§ 3270    Vehicles Transporting Hazardous Materials.

Part 9. Trespass by Motor Vehicle

§ 3281    Private Street Defined.

§ 3282    Private Property – Operating Vehicle Without Permission Prohibited.

§ 3283    Public Property – Operating Vehicle Without Permission Prohibited.

§ 3284    Possession of Written Permission Required by Vehicle Operator.

§ 3285    Exceptions – Emergency, Commercial and Other Vehicles.

§ 3286    No Conflict with State Law.

Part 10. Parking Citation Processing

§ 32101    Title.

§ 32102    Definitions.

§ 32103    Authority to Contract with Outside Agencies.

§ 32104    Authority to Conduct Administrative Review Process – Hearing Officer – Procedures.

§ 32105    Process by Which Parking Citations Must Be Issued.

§ 32106    Parking Penalties.

§ 32107    Parking Penalties Received by Date Fixed – No Contest – Request to Contest.

§ 32108    Parking Penalties Not Received by Date Fixed.

§ 32109    Notice of Delinquent Parking Violation – Contents.

§ 321010    Copy of Citation upon Request by Registered Owner.

§ 321011    Affidavit of Nonliability – Leased or Rented Vehicle.

§ 321012    Affidavit of Nonliability – Sale.

§ 321013    Contesting Parking Citation – Procedure.

§ 321014    Collection of Unpaid Parking Penalties.

§ 321015    Obligation of Processing Agency Once Parking Penalty Paid.

§ 321016    Deposit of Parking Penalties with the City.

§ 321017    Filing of Annual Reports.

*Editor’s Note: Prior ordinances codified herein include portions of Ordinance Nos. 2, 29, 45, 69-67, 69-81, 69-97, 69-

103, 72-219, 72-231, 73-253, 74-296, 75-351, 75-352, 80-508, 82-619, 83-660, 84-676, 84-693, 87-804, 87-817, 04-1313, 04-1326.

Part 1. General Provisions and Violations

3200 Short Title.
This Chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as the “Traffic Code.” (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3201 Continuation.
All traffic control devices existing in the City at the time of adoption of this Chapter, which were placed by officers and officials of the County of Los Angeles prior to incorporation of the City or by the City subsequent to incorporation and all matters pertaining thereto are hereby ratified and confirmed. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3202 Traffic Enforcement Agency.
The Sheriff’s Department of the County of Los Angeles shall be the traffic enforcement agency of the City. It shall be the duty of the traffic enforcement agency to enforce the traffic regulations of the City and all provisions of the California Vehicle Code applicable in the City, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate traffic accidents, to cooperate with the City Traffic Engineer and other officers of the City in administration of the traffic laws and improvement of traffic conditions, and to carry out the duties and responsibilities imposed by this Chapter. The City Council may also designate City employees or contractors to have concurrent authority with the Sheriff’s Department of Los Angeles County to enforce specified provisions of the Traffic Code or the Vehicle Code and such employees or contractors shall also be considered as the traffic enforcement agency for such purposes. Code Enforcement Officers and Public Safety Department Security Officers shall have concurrent authority with the Sheriff’s Department to enforce the provisions of the Traffic Code and all parking provisions of the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3203 City Traffic Engineer.
The position of City Traffic Engineer is hereby established. It shall be the duty of the City Traffic Engineer to advise the Public Works Director on the installation, operation and maintenance of traffic control devices, to prepare engineering analyses of traffic accidents, to recommend traffic remedial measures and to investigate traffic conditions. The Engineer shall also review development proposals for traffic-related impacts, cooperate with the traffic enforcement agency and other officers of the City in improvement of traffic conditions, advise the City of locations where traffic control signals are appropriate in accordance with standards and instructions set forth in the California Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, and carry out those duties and responsibilities imposed by ordinances and resolutions of the City and directions of the City Council and the Public Works Director. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1; Ord. 13-1509, § 2)

3204 Violations.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this Traffic Code or any sign posted pursuant to the authority of the Traffic Code shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and shall be punished as provided in CMC 1200(b). (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

Part 2. Definitions

3210 Generally.
Words and phrases not specifically defined herein shall have the meanings provided by the California Vehicle Code or, if not so defined, common usage. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3211 Definitions.
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number.

(a) “Block” shall mean, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the portion of a public street or alley between two (2) intersecting streets or between an intersecting street and the terminus of the public street or alley. Where a “block” would otherwise exceed one thousand (1,000) feet in length, a length of one thousand (1,000) feet shall constitute a “block” for purposes of this Chapter.

(b) “Public Works Director” shall mean the City of Carson’s Director of Public Works or the Public Works Director’s designee.

(c) “Safe place” shall mean, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, any garage, parking lot, or open space, owned by, maintained by, or under the jurisdiction of the City, and shall include every privately owned garage, the owner or proprietor of which will accept vehicles removed by the traffic enforcement agency.

(d) “Vehicle Code” shall mean the Vehicle Code of the State of California. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

Part 3. Miscellaneous

3220 Removal of Vehicles.
(a) The traffic enforcement agency shall remove to a safe place every vehicle which has been parked or left standing upon a public street or alley for seventy-two (72) or more consecutive hours without being moved under its own motive power more than one (1) block.

(b) Vehicles displaying a current and valid resident or accessibility oversized vehicle parking permit are exempt from this limitation, but shall not be exempt from all other parking prohibitions and limitations, including, but not limited to, street cleaning, red zones, preferential parking, and fire hydrants. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1; Ord. 18-1815, § 1)

3221 Removal of Illegally Parked Vehicles.
Any peace officer as defined in Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 830) of Title 3 of Part 2 of the California Penal Code, or any regularly employed and salaried employee who is engaged in the directing of traffic or enforcing parking laws and regulations of the City of Carson, may remove any vehicle parked or left standing in violation of this Chapter 2. Removal of a vehicle may be requested by the Traffic Enforcement Agency and shall be conducted in compliance with the provisions of this Section and Division 11, Chapter 10, of the California Vehicle Code. (Ord. 04-1312U, § 3; Ord. 04-1312, § 2; Ord. 04-1324, § 2)

Part 4. Traffic Control Devices

3230 Authority to Install Official Traffic Control Devices.
The Public Works Director shall cause to be placed and maintained official traffic control devices upon streets and highways required to enforce the provisions of the Vehicle Code and Traffic Code. The Director shall also cause to be placed and maintained such appropriate official traffic control devices as deemed necessary to properly indicate and carry out the provisions of the Codes, or to warn or guide traffic. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3231 Official Traffic Control Devices Required for Enforcement Purposes.
No provision of the Vehicle Code or of the Traffic Code requiring official traffic control devices shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate official traffic control devices are in place giving notice of such provision or requirement. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3232 Installation of Traffic Control Signals.
The Public Works Director, as authorized by the City Council, shall install and maintain official traffic control signals at those intersections and other places where traffic conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately interrupted and released. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3233 Authority to Remove Relocate and Discontinue Traffic Control Devices.
The Public Works Director is authorized to remove, relocate or discontinue the operation of any traffic control device not specifically required by the Vehicle Code or the Traffic Code whenever the conditions which warranted or required the installation no longer exist. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3234 Traffic Control Devices – Hours of Operation.
The Public Works Director shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those cases where such hours are specified in the Vehicle or Traffic Codes or by the City Council. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3235 Unauthorized Markings of Curbs and Roadways.
No person or agency, unless authorized by the Public Works Director, shall mark any street or curb surface; provided, however, that this Section shall not apply to the marking of house numbers on a curb surface. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

Part 5. Traffic Regulations

3240 Speed Zones.
On the basis of an Engineering and Traffic Survey an intermediate speed zone may be established by action of City Council on any street pursuant to provisions of the California Vehicle Code. The speed limit in the zone shall be effective when signs giving due notice are erected on the street. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3241 Regulation of Turns.
The Public Works Director is authorized to place or cause to be placed official traffic control devices where necessary to regulate or prohibit turning movements during certain hours of any day or at all times. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3242 Authority for STOP or YIELD.
The Public Works Director shall place and maintain STOP or YIELD signs and markings at the locations designated by City Council at which vehicular traffic shall stop or yield, respectively, before proceeding. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3243 Pedestrians.
The Public Works Director may establish, designate and maintain crosswalks marked by devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway where there is particular need to guide pedestrians in crossing the roadway or, install signs at or near an intersection directing that pedestrians shall not cross in any crosswalk so signed. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3244 Bicycle Regulations.
(Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3244.1 Bikeways.
When established by action of the City Council, bikeways shall be installed and maintained by the Public Works Director in conformity with the provisions of Chapter 8 of Division 3 of the California Streets and Highways Code. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3244.2 Riding on Sidewalks.
No person shall ride a bicycle on any sidewalk in a business district. Any person riding a bicycle on a sidewalk in any area where riding is permitted shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3244.3 Riding Prohibited in Specific Locations.
The Public Works Director, pursuant to City Council action, shall erect and maintain signs on a public sidewalk or roadway regulating or prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon, except no signs need be posted in order to enforce CMC 3244.2. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3245 Cruising Regulations.
(Ord. 07-1382, § 1)

3245.1 Cruising Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to engage in cruising, as defined in CMC 3245.2, upon any of the streets or highways within the City of Carson. (Ord. 07-1382, § 1)

3245.2 Definitions.
(a) “Cruising” means (1) the driving of a motor vehicle two (2) or more times within a six (6) hour period past a traffic control point in traffic that is congested at or near a traffic control point, as determined by the ranking Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Deputy on duty within, or near, the area affected by traffic congestion, or his or her designee, (2) after the vehicle’s operator has been given an adequate written notice that further driving past the traffic control point will be in violation of CMC 3245, et seq., and (3) when the vehicle is being driven on a portion of a street identified as being subject to cruising controls by signs posted at the beginning and end of the controlled portion of the roadway, which signs clearly state the appropriate provisions of CMC 3245, et seq., and California Vehicle Code Section 21100(k).

(b) A “traffic control point” means a location utilized as an observation point by the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department to monitor traffic for potential violations of CMC 3245, et seq. (Ord. 07-1382, § 1)

3245.3 Establishment of Traffic Control Points.
The ranking Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Deputy, having determined that an area is affected by traffic congestion, may establish one (1) or more traffic control points at or near such area to regulate cruising.

Every traffic control point shall be evidenced by the placement of signs prohibiting cruising and briefly stating the appropriate provisions of CMC 3245, et seq., and California Vehicle Code Section 21100(k) at the beginning and at the end of the street or highway or portion of street or highway subject to cruising controls. The ranking Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Deputy within, or near, the area affected by traffic congestion, or his or her designee, shall be empowered to post any signs required to implement the provisions of CMC 3245, et seq. (Ord. 07-1382, § 1)

3245.4 Exceptions.
CMC 3245, et seq., shall not apply to:

(a) Any authorized emergency vehicle as defined in Section 165 of the California Vehicle Code;

(b) Any publicly owned vehicle of any City, county, district, State or Federal agency;

(c) Any vehicle licensed for public transportation or vehicles which are normally used for business purposes and are engaged in such business use; or

(d) Any person operating a motor vehicle or passenger therein whose residence or place of employment is either located upon property immediately contiguous to or is directly accessed from any street or highway subject to cruising controls if such person displays satisfactory proof of such residence or place of employment at the traffic control point. (Ord. 07-1382, § 1)

3245.5 Penalty for Cruising and Successive Violations.
Any person convicted of cruising, as defined in CMC 3245.2, shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable pursuant to the provisions of CMC 1200.

Each successive time, within a six (6) hour period, that a vehicle is driven past a traffic control point following receipt of the written notice described in CMC 3245.2(a) shall constitute a separate violation of CMC 3245, et seq., and no additional notice to the driver of such vehicle shall be required prior to the issuance of a subsequent citation, or arrest. (Ord. 07-1382, § 1)

Part 6. Parking Regulations

3251 Parking Restrictions.
(Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3251.1 Authority of Public Works Director.
The Public Works Director shall place and maintain signs or markings restricting or limiting the stopping or parking of vehicles in those locations where directed by the City Council, or as otherwise authorized by this Chapter. When appropriate signs and markings are placed, no person shall stop or park any vehicle except in conformity with the signs or markings. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3251.2 Temporary Parking Restrictions Not Requiring City Council Direction.
The Public Works Director may, without City Council authorization, prohibit stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles on any street or highway or portion thereof where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for:

(a) The cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway,

(b) The installation of underground utilities,

(c) The movement of equipment, articles, or structures of unusual size,

(d) A special event or for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic, or

(e) Where an emergency or other event is likely to cause traffic congestion.

This Section shall not be enforced unless signs giving notice of such prohibition are erected or posted. Except in emergency situations described in subsection (e) of this Section, the signs must be erected at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the enforcement of the prohibition. It shall be unlawful to stop, park or leave standing any vehicle contrary to any sign erected or posted pursuant to this Section except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or as directed by a peace officer. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3251.3 Permanent Parking Prohibitions Not Requiring City Council Direction.
The Public Works Director may, without City Council authorization, prohibit the stopping of vehicles by causing appropriate signs or markings to be placed and maintained in the following circumstances:

(a) At any place within thirty (30) feet of a marked crosswalk,

(b) Within thirty (30) feet on the approach to any traffic control signal, stop or yield sign, or flashing beacon, or

(c) At any place for a distance not to exceed one hundred (100) feet (or one-half (1/2) block, whichever is less) where stopped vehicles would unduly hamper free flow of traffic, impair visibility, or endanger public safety or welfare. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 04-1312U, §§ 1, 2; Ord. 04-1312, §§ 1, 2; Ord. 04-1324, §§ 1, 2; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3251.4 Parking on Grades.
No person driving, in control of, or in charge of, a motor vehicle shall permit the vehicle to stand on any highway unattended when upon any grade exceeding three (3) percent without blocking the wheels of the vehicle by turning them against the curb or by other means. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3251.5 Parking for Certain Purposes Prohibited.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the purpose of washing, polishing, greasing, or repairing such vehicle except for repairs necessitated by an emergency. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3251.6 Time Limit Parking.
When appropriate signs or markings are placed, no person shall park any vehicle for a period of time in excess of that permitted as indicated on the signs or markings. For time limits of less than one (1) hour, green paint on the curb in the zones, with the time limit stenciled in white, may be used in lieu of signs. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3251.7 Parking for Street Sweeping.
When appropriate signs prohibiting parking for purposes of street sweeping are posted, no person shall park any vehicle on the day or days during the hours designated on the signs. This Section shall not apply to any commercial vehicle making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares, or merchandise from or to any building or other structure, or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the repair, alteration, remodeling, or reconstruction of any building or structure for which a building permit has previously been obtained. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3251.8 Parking in Parkway.
No person shall park any vehicle between any highway curb and the adjacent property line without permission of the City Council. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3251.9 Parking on Private Property.
No person shall park any vehicle, whether attended or not, in any private driveway or on any private property, without the express or implied consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of the driveway or property. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3251.10 Parking Space Markings.
When public streets or off-street parking lots are marked with lines designating parking spaces, all vehicles are required to park entirely within the marked spaces. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3252 Loading Regulations.
(Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3252.1 Commercial and Passenger Loading Zones.
The Public Works Director, without City Council direction, may determine the location of commercial and passenger loading zones and place and maintain appropriate signs or marking identifying the zones as provided below:

(a) Commercial loading zones may be established to permit loading or unloading of persons or goods for the time necessary to do so, but in no event for more than twenty (20) minutes and only between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. each day. Such spaces shall be signed or identified with yellow curb paint.

(b) A passenger loading zone shall permit stopping only for loading or unloading of persons for the time necessary to do so, but in no event for more than three (3) minutes, and shall be signed or marked with white curb paint stenciled “Passenger Loading.”

(c) A mailbox zone shall permit stopping only for the time necessary to deposit mail in the box, but in no event for more than three (3) minutes, and shall be signed or marked with white curb paint stenciled “Mailbox.” (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3252.2 Stopping in Alleys.
No person shall stop a vehicle in an alley other than for loading or unloading of persons or goods for the time necessary to do so, but in no event for more than twenty (20) minutes. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3252.3 Bus and Taxi Zones.
The Public Works Director may, without City Council direction, designate and establish bus and/ or taxi zones. When such zones are established:

(a) No bus operator shall stop to load or unload other than at a bus stop or passenger loading zone except in an emergency.

(b) No taxi operator shall park an in-service cab other than in a designated taxi zone except for loading or unloading of passengers where stopping is not otherwise prohibited.

(c) No person shall stop any vehicle other than a bus in a bus zone or a taxi in a taxi zone when such zone has been appropriately signed or marked. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3253 Disabled Person Parking.
(Ord. 05-1334, § 1; Ord. 13-1509, § 3)

3253.1 On-Street Disabled Person Parking.
The Public Works Director may, without City Council direction, designate curb parking spaces for exclusive use of vehicles displaying a distinguishing license plate or placard issued for disabled persons by the Department of Motor Vehicles. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1; Ord. 13-1509, § 3)

3253.2 Disabled Person Parking in Publicly Owned Off-Street Facilities.
The Public Works Director may, without City Council direction, designate parking spaces in City-owned, leased, or controlled off-street parking facilities for the exclusive use of vehicles displaying a distinguishing license plate or placard issued for disabled persons by the Department of Motor Vehicles. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1; Ord. 13-1509, § 3)

3253.3 Identification of Disabled Person Parking Spaces.
Parking spaces designated for exclusive use of vehicles displaying a distinguishing license plate or placard issued for disabled persons by the Department of Motor Vehicles shall be marked as required by the California Vehicle Code. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1; Ord. 13-1509, § 3)

3254 Commercial Vehicle Parking.
(Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3254.1 Parking of Detached Trailers.
No person shall park or stop any commercial semi-trailer or commercial trailer, boat trailer, vehicle trailer or any other type of trailer on any highway, street, or alley in the City unless such semi-trailer or trailer is, at all times while so parked or stopped, attached to a vehicle capable of moving the semi-trailer or trailer in a normal manner upon the public streets and highways. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3254.2 Truck Parking.
The parking of any commercial vehicle with a gross weight of over six thousand (6,000) pounds, length of over twenty-five (25) feet, or width of over ninety-six (96) inches (total outside width of vehicle or load or combined) is prohibited at all times on any street in the City of Carson except:

(a) At locations and for the time period authorized by City Council and posted by the Public Works Director;

(b) For such time as is reasonably necessary to deliver to or collect goods from or provide a service to a property in the block in which the vehicle is parked. At locations where parking of commercial vehicles with a gross weight of over six thousand (6,000) pounds is permitted overnight, illuminated clearance lights or safety reflectors must be provided and utilized. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3255 Parking of Oversized Vehicles.
(Ord. 18-1815, § 2)

3255.1 Definitions.
“Inoperable” means any vehicle: (a) lacking a current and valid vehicle registration; or (b) in such a condition that it cannot self-propel on City streets. Inoperable vehicles include, but are not limited to, vehicles that have planned nonoperation tags, and vehicles that are on cinder blocks or have flat tires.

“Oversized vehicle” means any vehicle or combination of attached vehicles that exceeds twenty (20) feet in length, eighty (80) inches in width, or eighty-five (85) inches in height (exclusive of lights, mirrors, antennas, or other legal projections), including, but not limited to, motor homes, recreational vehicles, trailers, boats, truck tractors, decommissioned mail trucks, and fifth-wheel travel trailers. An oversized vehicle does not include pickup trucks or sport utility vehicles that are less than twenty-five (25) feet in length. (Ord. 18-1815, § 2)

3255.2 Oversized Vehicle Parking Prohibited – Enforcement.
No person shall park or leave standing any oversized vehicle on any public street, highway, alley, or other public way or public place in the City of Carson, except as provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 18-1815, § 2)

3255.3 Exceptions.
The prohibition contained in CMC 3255.2 shall not apply to any of the following:

(a) An oversized vehicle displaying a valid and current oversized vehicle parking permit issued pursuant to CMC 3255.4, for the duration of the permit.

(b) Commercial vehicles making pick-ups or delivery of goods, wares, or merchandise, or while providing services to a residence, including, but not limited to, yard maintenance, pool care and maintenance, repairs, and construction services.

(c) Tow trucks and similar vehicles that are in the course of providing services.

(d) Public or utility vehicles that are in the course of providing services.

(e) Any emergency vehicle. (Ord. 18-1815, § 2)

3255.4 Oversized Vehicle Parking Permits.
(a) Oversized vehicle parking permits may only be issued for addresses in residential zones.

(b) Resident Oversized Vehicle Parking Permit.

(1) An annual resident oversized vehicle parking permit may be issued to a resident of Carson who owns or leases an operable oversized vehicle that is registered at his or her residence. The purpose of the permit is to allow the oversized vehicle to be parked directly in front of the permittee’s residence. Oversized vehicles must park directly in front of the property for which the permit has issued (or on the side of the property if it is a corner lot).

(2) No resident permit will issue for properties that can accommodate the parking of such vehicles on the property itself; prior to issuance of the permit, the City will inspect the property to ensure on-site parking is not available. If available parking is being used for storage, or if available parking has been improperly converted to living space, no permit shall issue.

(3) Resident permits shall issue only to persons whose primary residence is within the City of Carson, at the address of their primary residence. No more than one (1) permit shall issue per property and/or property owner.

(c) Accessibility Oversized Vehicle Parking Permit.

(1) Accessibility permits are available to residents under the following conditions:

(A) The applicant must be entitled to receive a handicapped placard or license plate pursuant to the provisions of the California Vehicle Code;

(B) The oversized vehicle is the only vehicle owned by the resident and is required to meet the daily transportation needs of the resident.

(2) Accessibility permits shall not be subject to permit fees.

(3) An oversized vehicle with a current and valid accessibility permit shall not be subject to the restrictions of subsection (f)(A) of this Section relating to schools and parks.

(d) Guest Oversized Vehicle Parking Permit. A guest permit may be issued to a resident of Carson for an oversized vehicle that is registered at an address outside of Carson. The purpose of the guest permit is to allow out-of-town guests to park an oversized vehicle directly in front of the property to which the permit is issued (or on the side of the property if it is a corner lot). Each guest permit shall have a duration of twenty-four (24) hours and a maximum of twenty (20) such permits can be obtained each calendar year for any particular address. No guest permits shall issue for any property for which a current annual oversized vehicle parking permit exists.

(e) Permit Placement. Oversized vehicle parking permits shall be displayed in the lower driver’s side of the windshield of the vehicle for which the permit has been issued so that it is clearly visible from the exterior of the vehicle. Failure to properly display the permit is not a correctable violation and may subject the vehicle to citation and/or towing.

(f) Permit Parking Limitations.

(A) Except for any oversized vehicle with a current and valid accessibility permit, oversized vehicles shall not be parked within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of any daycare or school, or within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of any park where children regularly gather.

(B) No person shall run electrical cords, extension cords, hoses, cables, or other items across, above, or on the parkway or sidewalk from a residential or commercial property to an oversized vehicle parked on a public street or highway.

(C) Oversized vehicles shall not create a public nuisance because of noise, accumulation of trash and debris, improper disposal of human refuse, odor, damage or destruction of property or landscaping, or leaking of fuel or fluids.

(D) Oversized vehicles shall not impair traffic visibility, block a street sign or hydrant, or otherwise create a safety hazard.

(E) Oversized vehicles shall not create a disturbance, nuisance, or any condition that is a threat to the public health, safety, and welfare, as determined by the City Manager or the Chief of Police.

(F) Oversized vehicles must be operable and must be kept clean and in good condition.

(G) Oversized vehicles shall not encroach on any private or public property, including but not limited to sidewalks, parkways, or driveways. (Ord. 18-1815, § 2)

3255.5 Permit Application – Permit Renewal – Permit Fee.
(a) Permit applications shall be filed with the City Manager (which shall include his/her designee) on a form provided by the City, accompanied by a permit fee established by City Council resolution.

(b) The permit applicant must be the resident owner or legal tenant of the property with which the permit application is associated.

(c) The application shall include the following information:

(1) Applicant’s name, mailing address, telephone number, and email address.

(2) Name, address, telephone number, email address of the owner of the vehicle, and address where the vehicle is registered, if different.

(3) Year, make, and model of the vehicle, license plate number, and vehicle identification number.

(4) A statement that no other active oversize vehicle parking permits exist for this vehicle or this property.

(5) Proof that the oversized vehicle is operable and has a current registration.

(6) For an accessibility permit, proof of handicap status and an affirmation that the applicant meets the requirements of CMC 3255.4(c).

(d) The City Manager shall review and respond to applications within ten (10) days. If all the requirements of CMC 3255 et seq. are met, the City Manager shall issue an oversized vehicle parking permit, subject to subsection (e) of this Section. If the application is incomplete, the City Manager shall request additional information. A second incomplete application shall be deemed abandoned. No response shall be deemed a denial.

(e) The City Manager may add reasonable conditions to the permit to protect the health, safety, and welfare.

(f) Renewal applications will require that the applicant submit any new or changed information in writing, and the applicant’s affirmation that their primary residence is at the address to which the permit is issued.

(g) Oversized vehicle parking permit applications are subject to a permit fee, as may be established by City Council resolution. (Ord. 18-1815, § 2)

3255.6 Permit Denial or Revocation.
(a) The City Manager may deny or revoke an oversized vehicle parking permit based on any one (1) or more of the following grounds:

(1) The permit applicant is no longer a City resident.

(2) The permit applicant made a material misrepresentation on his or her application.

(3) The oversized vehicle to which the permit relates has been parked in violation of the provisions of this Chapter three (3) or more times within a ninety (90) day period.

(4) The oversized vehicle has created a public nuisance because of noise, accumulation of trash and debris, improper disposal of human refuse, odor, damage or destruction of property or landscaping, or leaking of fuel or fluids.

(5) The permit holder, or any other person, has run electrical cords, extension cords, hoses, cables, or other items across, above, or on the parkway or sidewalk from a residential or commercial property to an oversized vehicle parked on a public street or highway.

(6) The oversized vehicle impairs traffic visibility, blocks a street sign or hydrant, or otherwise creates a safety hazard.

(7) Except for accessibility permits, the oversized vehicle is being parked within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of a daycare or school, or within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of any park where children regularly gather.

(8) A City inspection reveals that adequate parking is available on the property itself, as articulated in CMC 3255.4(b)(2).

(9) The vehicle is creating a disturbance, nuisance, or any condition that is a threat to the public health, safety, and welfare, as determined by the City Manager or the Chief of Police.

(10) The oversized vehicle is inoperable or is not kept clean and in good condition.

(11) The oversized vehicle encroaches, or would encroach, on any private or public property, including but not limited to sidewalks, parkways, or driveways.

(b) Revocation Procedure.

(1) The City Manager shall issue a permit revocation notice, which shall be placed on the oversized vehicle and sent by U.S. first class mail to the permittee’s mailing address as provided on the permit application. The permit revocation notices shall provide the specific articulable facts in support of the revocation, and shall state that the permit holder may appeal the revocation, in writing, within fifteen (15) days of the date of the revocation notice.

(2) Failure to request an appeal within fifteen (15) days shall result in the immediate revocation of the permit.

(3) If the permittee appeals the revocation, the City Manager shall schedule an appeal hearing within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the appeal. The hearing may be continued once upon a showing of good cause.

(4) The hearing officer will provide a decision in writing within five (5) days of the hearing, which will articulate the hearing officer’s findings of fact and conclusions of law. The hearing officer’s decision is final and may be challenged pursuant to Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure.

(5) In the event a permit is revoked, the oversized vehicle will be subject to the City’s already existing parking restrictions.

(c) Application for a New Permit after Revocation or Denial. In the event a permit is denied or revoked, no new application can be made for the same property and/or the same vehicle for a minimum of ninety (90) days. (Ord. 18-1815, § 2)

3255.7 Violations.
(a) Any person who parks or leaves standing an oversized vehicle on a public street or highway in violation of any of the provisions of CMC 3255 et seq. is guilty of an infraction and will be subject to citation, towing, or both.

(b) Any person who knowingly creates or displays a fraudulent, forged, altered, or counterfeit oversized vehicle parking permit is guilty of a misdemeanor.

(c)  Any violation of the provisions of this Chapter is deemed a public nuisance.

(d) Each day that a violation continues shall be a new and separate offense.

(e) Violations of any provision of this Chapter may be punished in accordance with CMC 1200, 1201, and 1203 et seq., as well as any remedy at equity or at law available to the City. (Ord. 18-1815, § 2)

Part 7. Truck Regulations

3260 Truck Routes.
(Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3260.1 Prohibition of Commercial Vehicles or Vehicles Exceeding Six Thousand (6,000) Pounds Gross Weight Except on Designated Routes.
Any commercial vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of six thousand (6,000) pounds is hereby prohibited from using any street in the City of Carson other than those listed in CMC 3260.2, or as permitted by CMC 3260.3. All streets in the City not designated in CMC 3260.2 shall be restricted streets for the purposes of this Section. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3260.2 Designated Routes.
Commercial vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight of six thousand (6,000) pounds shall use only the following streets or portions of streets within the City of Carson:

(1) Alameda Street.

(2) Albertoni Street.

(3) Alondra Boulevard.

(4) Artesia Boulevard.

(5) Avalon Boulevard between Alondra Boulevard and Victoria Street, and between 223rd Street and south city limits.

(6) Broadway.

(7) Carson Street between I-405 southbound on/off ramps and Alameda Street connector road.

(8) Central Avenue between Victoria Street and north city limits.

(9) Del Amo Boulevard.

(10) Figueroa Street.

(11) Lomita Boulevard.

(12) Main Street between Alondra Boulevard and Victoria Street, between Broadway and Torrance Boulevard, and between Sepulveda Boulevard and Lomita Boulevard.

(13) Santa Fe Avenue.

(14) Sepulveda Boulevard.

(15) Torrance Boulevard between Main Street and west city limits.

(16) Victoria Street between Figueroa Street and Main Street, and between Central Avenue and Wilmington Avenue.

(17) Walnut Street between Broadway and Main Street, and between Avalon Boulevard and Central Avenue.

(18) Wilmington Avenue.

(19) 223rd Street. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1; Ord. 13-1509, § 1)

3260.3 Exceptions.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Part nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit any vehicle coming from an unrestricted street having ingress or egress by direct route to and from a restricted street when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares, and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on the restricted street or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling, or construction of any building or structure upon the restricted street for which a building permit has previously been obtained, nor shall any provision of this Section apply to any vehicle owned by a public utility or licensed contractor vehicle necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility, or to any vehicle (passenger stage) subject to the provisions of Sections 1031 to 1036, inclusive, of the California Public Utilities Code. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3260.4 Designated Route Signs.
The City Council of the City of Carson hereby determines that the erection of appropriate signs on those streets designated in CMC 3260.2 will best serve to give notice of this Part. This Part shall not be effective until such time as said signs have been erected. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3261 Oversize Vehicles.
(Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3261.1 Definitions.
For the purposes of this Part the following terms, words, phrases and their derivation shall have the meaning given herein:

(a) “Approved ingress or egress point” shall mean an exit or entrance to or from a highway in the National System of Interstate and Defense highways or a federal-aid primary highway which has been designated and signed by the State of California Department of Transportation for use by vehicles or combinations of vehicles exceeding the limitations of Sections 35400, 35401 or 35411, or subdivisions (b) to (e), inclusive, of Section 35402 of the California Vehicle Code.

(b) “Designated oversized truck route” shall mean a route approved and signed by the City of Carson pursuant to this Part between an approved ingress or egress point and a terminal or service facility.

(c) “Oversized vehicle” shall mean any vehicle or combination of vehicles with a kingpin setting in excess of forty (40) feet or an overall length greater than sixty-five (65) feet.

(d) “Service facility” shall mean an area located within one-half (1/2) mile of an approved ingress or egress point where in addition to repair services for oversized vehicles are available at least two (2) of the following three (3) services – diesel fuel, food, and/or lodging.

(e) “Terminal facility” shall mean a facility at which freight is consolidated to be shipped and where full load consignments may be on-loaded, off-loaded, or at which oversized vehicles are regularly maintained, stored, or manufactured. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3261.2 Length Prohibition.
(a) No person may operate any oversize vehicle on any street within the City of Carson except when traveling along a designated oversized truck route, or as provided in CMC 3261.3.

(b) No person may operate a vehicle or combination of vehicles with a kingpin setting greater than thirty-eight (38) feet and not more than forty (40) feet on any street in the City of Carson or any street where such operation is prohibited and signs giving notice thereof have been erected.

(c) No person may operate a vehicle or combination of vehicles in excess of sixty (60) feet on any street where such operation is prohibited and signs giving notice thereof have been erected. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3261.3 Exceptions.
This Part shall not apply to:

(a) Licensed carriers of household goods if travel on streets other than designated oversized truck routes is necessary and incidental to the shipment of the household goods; or

(b) Persons operating vehicles traveling between an approved service facility ingress and egress point and a service facility located not more than one-half (1/2) mile from an approved ingress or egress point if the City has not designated an oversized truck route between the service facility and the approved ingress or egress point, and if such access is consistent with the safe operation of vehicles or combinations of vehicles exceeding sixty (60) feet in total length. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3261.4 Width Prohibition.
No person may operate any vehicle or combination of vehicles in excess of ninety-six (96) inches in width on any street within the City of Carson, without first obtaining a Moving Permit pursuant to the Highway Permit Ordinance. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3261.5 Application For Establishment of Designated Oversized Truck Routes to Terminal Facilities.
(a) Any person owning and operating a terminal facility desiring to have a designated oversized truck route to or from said facility established by the City shall submit to the Public Works Department an application on a form provided by the Department. The applicant shall also pay the requisite application fee established by the Director of Public Works and provide such information as may be requested by the Department.

(b) The Director of Public Works will determine if the facility constitutes a terminal and, if so, whether there exists a route over which oversized vehicles may safely travel between the facility and approved ingress and egress points. In determining whether a safe route exists, the Public Works Director shall consider turning radii and lane widths of ramps, intersections, highways and driveways and general traffic conditions such as sight distance, speed and traffic volumes. If a route or routes to and from a terminal is or are found to be safe, the Director of Public Works shall apply to the California Department of Transportation for approval of egress and ingress points and concurrence in the oversized truck route tentatively designated by the City. If the California Department of Transportation approves ingress and egress points and concurs in the oversized truck route tentatively designated by the City, a designated oversized truck route shall be established by the City.

(c) The City may establish a designated oversized truck route conditioned upon the applicant taking certain corrective actions necessary for the designated oversized truck route to be safe. The Director of Public Works may apply for approval of the California Department of Transportation prior to undertaking said corrective action. No designated oversized truck route shall be signed until all corrective work has been completed to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works. The cost of all corrective work, including time for review and inspection by the City, shall be borne by the applicant.

(d) Should the safest oversized truck route between an approved egress and ingress point involve streets or highways outside the City, no oversized truck route shall be established without a condition that the oversized truck route outside the City be approved by the appropriate jurisdiction for the establishment to be effective and prior to the oversized truck route being signed by the City. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3261.6 Fees and Costs.
(a) The applicant shall pay a nonrefundable application fee, as established by the Director of Public Works, to pay for the investigation and processing of the application provided for in CMC 3261.5.

(b) Upon establishment of a designated oversized truck route, the applicant shall deposit with the City sufficient funds as determined by the Director of Public Works to pay the cost of purchase and installation of route signing. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3261.7 Revocation of Designation.
The Director of Public Works may revoke the designation of any oversized truck route if he or she finds that the route is unsafe for use by oversized vehicles. If the designated oversized truck route serves a terminal facility, the owner or operator of the terminal facility shall be notified in writing of the grounds of the revocation ten (10) days prior to the effective date of the revocation. The effective date of the revocation shall be stayed if an appeal of the revocation is filed within said ten (10) day period. Service of the notice of revocation shall be effective on the date the notice is deposited in the United States Postal Service by certified mail or personally delivered to the terminal address. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3261.8 Appeal.
If an application is not approved or approval of a previously designated oversized truck route is revoked, any interested person may, within ten (10) days following such denial or revocation, file a written appeal with the City Council. The appeal shall specifically state the grounds for the appeal. The City Council shall consider the appeal and its determination shall be final. If an application is not approved or a designated oversized truck route revoked, no person may apply for establishment of an oversized truck route to serve the same terminal for a period of one (1) year from the date of said disapproval or revocation. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3261.9 Service Facilities.
Whenever the California Department of Transportation establishes approved ingress and egress and points for access to a service facility, the Department of Public Works shall establish a designated oversized truck route between the approved ingress and egress points and the service facility. Said designated oversized truck route shall be consistent with the safe operation of oversized vehicles. The Director of Public Works shall petition the California Department of Transportation to rescind the approved ingress and egress points for access to a service facility if the Director determines that no safe oversized truck route exists between the approved ingress and egress points and the service facility or that the service facility is not located within one-half (1/2) mile of approved ingress and egress points. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3261.10 Prohibited Routes for Vehicles with a Kingpin Setting of from Thirty-Eight (38) Feet Through and Including Forty (40) Feet.
The Director of Public Works shall recommend to the City Council the designation of streets where the operation of trucks with kingpin lengths from thirty-eight (38) feet through and including forty (40) feet shall be prohibited. The City Council shall prohibit travel by such trucks on any street where it finds such travel to be unsafe based upon such factors. No prohibition enacted pursuant to this Section shall be enforced until the Public Works Director or his designee has erected signs giving notice thereof. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3262 Overweight Vehicle Special Permit Program.
3262.1 Definitions.
For the purposes of this Section, the following words, phrases, and their derivation shall have the meaning given herein:

(a) “Designated streets” means those City streets or portions thereof that have been designated by the City Council by resolution or ordinance as being open to travel by overweight vehicles pursuant to a special permit issued under the provisions of this Section.

(b) “Director” means the Public Works Director of the City of Carson.

(c) “Overweight vehicle” means a vehicle, combination of vehicles, or mobile equipment which, in combination with its load, has a maximum gross weight in excess of the weight limit of vehicles and loads specified in the California Vehicle Code, but does not exceed ninety-five thousand (95,000) pounds gross vehicle weight, and is capable of transporting an ocean shipping container.

(d) “Person” means any natural person, firm, association, organization, partnership, corporation, public corporation, political subdivision, or any department or agency thereof.

(e) “Residential street” means a public or private right-of-way or portion thereof providing access to one or more dwellings.

(f) “Year” means calendar year commencing January 1st and ending the following December 31st. (Ord. 12-1502, § 1)

3262.2 Special Permit Required.
No person shall operate or move an overweight vehicle on any City street except pursuant to a special permit issued under the provisions of this Section (unless otherwise authorized). A special permit shall be required for each overweight vehicle to be moved or operated on City streets. (Ord. 12-1502, § 1)

3262.3 Designated Streets.
A special permit will be issued for operation or movement of an overweight vehicle upon streets and highways designated by the City Council by ordinance or resolution (unless otherwise authorized). For purposes of this Section, the designated streets or portions thereof are as follows:

(a) Alameda Street between the south city limit and Sepulveda Boulevard.

(b) Sepulveda Boulevard between Avalon Boulevard and Alameda Street.

(c) Wilmington Avenue between Sepulveda Boulevard and 223rd Street.

(d) Watsoncenter Road between Avalon Boulevard and Wilmington Avenue.

(e) 230th, 233rd, and 236th Streets between Banning Boulevard and Wilmington Avenue.

(f) 238th Street between Banning Boulevard and the cul-de-sac.

(g) Bonita Street between Watsoncenter Road and 223rd Street.

(h) Lucerne Street between Watsoncenter Road and 223rd Street.

(i) Utility Way between 230th Street and Watsoncenter Road.

(j) Banning Boulevard between Sepulveda Boulevard and 230th Street. (Ord. 12-1502, § 1)

3262.4 Authority to Issue Special Permit.
The California Department of Transportation, the Director, or the Director’s designee is authorized to issue special permits under this Section for either a single movement or on a yearly basis for continuous operations. For the permits issued by the Director or the designee, every permit issued for continuous operations shall expire on December 31st of the year for which it is issued. The permitting agency may issue or withhold the permit at its discretion or do any of the following when necessary to protect against injury to roads, foundations, surfaces, or structures:

(a) Limit the number of trips.

(b) Establish seasonal or other time limitations within which the overweight vehicle may be operated on the designated streets.

(c) Otherwise limit or prescribe conditions of operation of the vehicle.

(d) Require proof of financial responsibility in an amount required for compliance with California Vehicle Code Section 16500.5.

(e) Condition the operation of the overweight vehicle as may be necessary to assure against damage to the road foundations, surfaces, bridges, or other structures. (Ord. 12-1502, § 1)

3262.5 Application Required.
A special permit will be issued only upon receipt of a signed and verified application describing the vehicle and load, including weight, and stating whether the special permit is requested for a single trip or for continuous operations. Each application shall be accompanied with a fee as determined by the California Department of Transportation and/or the California Vehicle Code Section 35795. (Ord. 12-1502, § 1)

3262.6 Special Permit Conditions.
Every special permit issued pursuant to this Section shall comply with the requirements of the California Vehicle Code and shall provide the following:

(a) The maximum allowable gross combined vehicle weight to be permitted may not exceed ninety-five thousand (95,000) pounds with appropriate equipment and the vehicle, combination of vehicles, or mobile equipment shall conform to the axle weight limits specified in Section 35550 of the California Vehicle Code.

(b) The maximum speed limit for any overweight vehicle shall be thirty (30) miles per hour.

(c) Special permits shall be issued for the movement of ocean shipping containers only.

(d) Each person to whom a special permit is issued shall agree to defend and indemnify City, its boards, officers, and employees from any and all damages, costs, and expenses sustained or incurred by City, its boards, officers, and employees resulting from or arising out of the issuance of a special permit and the use of City streets whether designated or nondesignated. Each such person shall further agree to be responsible for all injuries or death of persons and for all damages to property of every kind caused by or resulting from or arising out of this issuance of a special permit and the use of City streets, whether designated or nondesignated.

(e) No detour from a permitted route may be made without prior permission of the Director or his designee. No detour route shall be on residential streets. Nothing contained in the Section shall prohibit an overweight vehicle for which a special permit has been issued from operating or moving upon a nondesignated street to a designated street by the most direct route when necessary for the purpose of picking up or delivering an ocean shipping container.

(f) Every overweight vehicle permitted under this Section and each special permit issued pursuant hereto shall be subject to inspection by the permitting agency and any peace officer at any time it is on a City street within the limits of the City for the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of the special permit.

(g) As a condition precedent to the issuance of a special permit, the applicant shall furnish the permitting agency evidence that each driver of an overweight vehicle shall have completed training in the operation of an overweight vehicle.

(h) The person to whom a special permit is issued shall furnish evidence satisfactory to the permitting agency that the overweight vehicle has undergone a safety inspection by a governmental agency having jurisdiction within ninety (90) days preceding the issuance of the special permit and at least once each ninety (90) days during the permit period.

(i) Each person to whom a special permit is issued shall at all times comply with all laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations of all Federal, State, and local governmental authorities having jurisdiction over the operation and maintenance of the overweight vehicle.

(j) The permit shall not authorize the movement of hazardous materials or hazardous wastes, as defined by local, State, and Federal law.

(k) A description shall be provided of the loads and vehicles to be operated under the permit. (Ord. 12-1502, § 1)

3262.7 Revocation of Permit.
The permitting agency shall revoke all continuous operation special permits issued to a person, if the person, his employee or agent shall violate any two (2) special permit conditions or violate the same special permit condition on two (2) occasions within any ninety (90) day period. No special permit shall be issued to a person whose special permit has been revoked pursuant to this Section for ninety (90) days following such revocation. Nothing contained in this Section shall be deemed or construed as limiting the power of a peace officer to issue a citation for or otherwise enforce violations of law with respect to operation of an overweight vehicle upon designated City streets upon discovery of a violation of a condition of a special permit. (Ord. 12-1502, § 1)

3262.8 Rules and Regulations.
The City Council may adopt, repeal, amend, and modify regulations implementing the provisions of this Section, including but not limited to the amount of the application fee, trailer requirements, special driver training requirements, designated truck routes, and any other matter deemed necessary for the effective administration of this Section. (Ord. 12-1502, § 1)

3262.9 Display and Special Permit.
No overweight vehicle shall be operated or moved upon designated streets without having a banner designating the load as an “oversize load” placed on the front and back of the overweight vehicle identifying the overweight vehicle as one for which a special permit has been issued pursuant to this Section. A copy of the special permit shall at all times be kept in the overweight vehicle and shall be presented to any peace officer upon demand. (Ord. 12-1502, § 1)

3262.10 Other Permits.
A special permit issued pursuant to this Section shall be in addition to and obtained prior to applying for any other permit which may be required by law for the operation or movement of an overweight vehicle upon public streets. (Ord. 12-1502, § 1)

Part 8. Hazardous Materials

3270 Vehicles Transporting Hazardous Materials.
(a) No person operating a vehicle transporting a hazardous material or substance as identified in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations shall park the vehicle on any highway, highway shoulder, street, alley, public way or public place, or within five (5) feet of the traveled portion thereof, within a residential zone or within one thousand (1,000) feet of any school or within three hundred (300) feet of any bridge or tunnel, except for brief periods when mechanical or equipment failure or disablement or malfunction of the vehicle, or the necessities of operation require the vehicle to be parked and make it impractical to park the vehicle in the other place.

(b) Repair, maintenance, refuse, utility, termite and pesticide vehicles, fuel delivery vehicles, and vehicles delivering life support and health commodities are exempt from the provisions of subsection (a) of this Section while the drivers are performing duties that are evident and necessary as the operator of the vehicle or the provider of the service.

(c) This Section does not relieve a driver from complying with Federal, State or local laws relating to the transportation of hazardous materials or explosives, or motor carrier safety regulations. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

Part 9. Trespass by Motor Vehicle

3281 Private Street Defined.
As used in this Chapter, “private street” means a street over which private persons have an easement to travel, and does not include driveways, paths or other ways over which no one has a right to travel except by license. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3282 Private Property – Operating Vehicle Without Permission Prohibited.
A person shall not operate any type of motor vehicle upon the private property of another within six hundred (600) feet of any building or structure designed for or used for residential or commercial purposes, except a highway or private street, without first obtaining the written permission of the person in lawful possession of the property or, if the property is unoccupied, of the owner. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3283 Public Property – Operating Vehicle Without Permission Prohibited.
A person shall not operate any type of motor vehicle upon any public property within six hundred (600) feet of any building or structure designed for or used for residential or commercial purposes, except a highway or private street, without first obtaining the written permission of the public entity which is in possession of such property or, if the property is unoccupied, of the public entity which owns such property. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3284 Possession of Written Permission Required by Vehicle Operator.
Every person who operates any type of motor vehicle upon the private property of another or upon any public property and within six hundred (600) feet of any building or structure designed for or used for residential or commercial purposes, except a highway or private street, at all times while so operating shall maintain in his possession the written permission required by this Part, except that if the same document grants such permission to two (2) or more persons, a person named in such document need not have such document in his possession while another person named in the same document, riding in the same group, and not more than three hundred (300) feet from such person, has such document in his possession. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3285 Exceptions – Emergency, Commercial and Other Vehicles.
This Part does not prohibit the use of such property by:

(a) Emergency vehicles;

(b) Vehicles of commerce in the course of the conduct of normal business;

(c) Vehicles being operated on property devoted to commercial or industrial purposes where such operation is in conjunction with commercial or industrial use and where such operation is expressly or implicitly given by the person in possession of the property;

(d) Vehicles operating on property actually used for residential purposes and where such vehicles are there at the express or implied invitation of the owner or occupant;

(e) Vehicles being operated on public or private parking lots where permission to so operate is expressly or implicitly given by the person in possession of the lot. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

3286 No Conflict with State Law.
This Part does not prohibit any act, either expressly authorized or expressly prohibited by either Section 602 of the Penal Code, or Section 21 of the Vehicle Code of the State of California, or by any other State law. (Ord. 92-969, § 1; Ord. 05-1334, § 1)

Part 10. Parking Citation Processing

32101 Title.
This Section shall be known as the Parking Citation Processing and Administrative Adjudication Ordinance of the City of Carson. (Ord. 93-1011, § 2)

32102 Definitions.
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions provided in this Section shall govern the construction of this Part.

(a) “Agency” shall mean the “processing agency” as defined below.

(b) “City” shall at all times refer to the City of Carson.

(c) “Contestant” shall mean any “operator” or “registered owner” as defined in this Section who contests a parking citation.

(d) “County” shall mean the County of Los Angeles.

(e) “Department” shall mean the Department of Motor Vehicles.

(f) “Hearing Examiner” shall mean any individual selected by the City, or if the City elects to contract for parking citation processing services, that individual selected by the processing agency authorized to administratively adjudicate parking citation contests.

(g) “Issuing Agency” shall mean the City or its authorized agent that issues parking citations.

(h) “Issuing Officer” shall mean a peace officer as defined in Chapter 4.5 (commencing with section 830) of Title 3 of the California Penal Code, or the successor statutes thereto, or other individual authorized to issue a parking citation.

(i) “Operator” shall mean the “registered owner” or any other individual driving and/or in possession of a vehicle at the time a citation is issued.

(j) “Parking Citation” shall mean a notice that is personally given or mailed to the operator, or attached to the operator’s vehicle, informing the operator of a parking, equipment and/or other vehicle violation and the operator’s right to elect to pay the “parking penalty” for the violation or contest the citation.

(k) “Parking Penalty” includes, but is not limited to, the parking penalty for the particular violation, as well as late payment penalties, administrative fees, assessments, costs of collection as provided by law, and other related fees.

(l) “Processing Agency” shall mean the City or its authorized agent that processes parking citations and issues notices of delinquent parking violations on behalf of the City.

(m) “Registered Owner” shall mean the individual or entity whose name is recorded with the Department of Motor Vehicles as having ownership of a particular vehicle.

(n) “Vehicle” shall mean any self-propelled vehicle operated or suitable for operation on a highway.

(o) “Violation” shall mean any parking, equipment or other vehicle violation established pursuant to state law or City ordinance. (Ord. 93-1011, § 2)

32103 Authority to Contract with Outside Agencies.
The City may issue and/or process parking citations and notices of delinquent parking violations, or it may enter into a contract with a private parking citation processing agency, or with another city, county, or other public issuing or processing agency.

Any contract entered into pursuant to this Section shall provide for monthly distribution of amounts collected between the parties, except amounts payable to the County pursuant to Chapter 12 (commencing with section 76000) of Title 8 of the California Government Code, or the successor statutes thereto, and amounts payable to the Department pursuant to California Vehicle Code section 4763 or the successor statute thereto. (Ord. 93-1011, § 2)

32104 Authority to Conduct Administrative Review Process – Hearing Officer – Procedures.
The processing agency may review appeals or other objections to a parking citation pursuant to the procedures set forth in this Section.

(a) For a period of twenty-one (21) days from the issuance of the parking citation, or ten (10) days from the mailing of the notice of delinquent parking citation, an operator may request initial review by the processing agency. The request for initial review may be made in writing, by telephone or in person.

(b) The initial review by the processing agency shall consist of those procedures outlined in CMC 321013(a)(1).

(c) If the operator is dissatisfied with the results of the initial review, the operator may contest the parking citation or notice of delinquent parking violation through an administrative hearing review process as outlined in CMC 321013.

In order to contest the parking citation, the operator must deposit with the processing agency the full amount of the parking penalty on or before the fifteenth day following the mailing to that operator of the results of the processing agency’s initial review. At the same time, the operator must provide a written explanation of the reason or reasons for contesting the parking citation on a form provided by the processing agency. If the operator is unable to deposit the full amount of the parking penalty, the operator must provide verifiable and substantial proof of an inability to deposit the parking penalty. Upon presentation of such proof, the processing agency shall proceed with the contest procedure despite the operator’s failure to deposit the full amount of the parking penalty. If it is ultimately determined that the operator is not liable for the parking violation, then the full amount of the parking penalty deposited shall be refunded.

The contestant may contest the parking citation either by written declaration, on forms provided by the processing agency, or by personal appearance before a hearing examiner.

(d) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (c) of this Section, if the vehicle has been immobilized or impounded for unpaid parking citations, the processing agency shall permit the registered owner of the vehicle to contest the parking citations upon which the seizure was based, without requiring a deposit of the parking penalty; provided, that the vehicle remains under the control of the immobilizing or impounding agency.

(e) The processing agency shall provide, through an administrative policy, a procedure for contesting parking citations and notices of delinquent parking violations. (Ord. 93-1011, § 2)

32105 Process by Which Parking Citations Must Be Issued.
Parking citations shall be issued in accordance with the following procedures:

(a) If a vehicle is unattended at the time that the parking citation is issued for a parking violation, the issuing officer shall securely attach to the vehicle the parking citation setting forth the violation, including reference to the section of the California Vehicle Code, the City’s Municipal Code, or other parking regulation violated; the approximate time of the violation; the location of the violation, and the date by which the operator is to deposit the parking penalty or contest the parking citation pursuant to CMC 321013. The citation shall state the amount of the parking penalty and the address of the agency authorized to receive deposit of the parking penalty.

The parking citation shall also set forth the vehicle license number and registration expiration date, if such date is visible; the last four (4) digits of the vehicle identification number, if that number is visible through the windshield; the color of the vehicle; and, if possible, the make of the vehicle.

(b) The parking citation, or copy thereof, shall be considered a record kept in the ordinary course of business of the issuing agency and the processing agency, and shall be prima facie evidence of the facts contained therein.

(c) Once the parking citation is prepared and attached to the vehicle pursuant to subsection (a) of this Section, the issuing officer shall file notice of the parking violation with the processing agency.

(d) If during issuance of the parking citation, without regard to whether the vehicle was initially attended or unattended, the vehicle is driven away prior to attaching the parking citation to the vehicle, the issuing officer shall file the notice with the processing agency. The processing agency shall mail, within fifteen (15) days of issuance of the parking citation, a copy of the parking citation to the registered owner.

(e) If after a copy of the parking citation is attached to the vehicle, or personally given to the operator, the issuing agency determines that the issuing officer was in error in issuing the parking citation, the issuing agency may, based on a written recommendation by the issuing officer, recommend that the parking citation be canceled. The recommendation shall state the reason or reasons for cancellation and shall be filed with the processing agency.

Under no circumstance shall a personal relationship with any public official, officer, issuing officer, or law enforcement agency be grounds for cancellation.

(f) If a processing agency makes a finding that there are grounds for cancellation as set forth in the City’s administrative policy, or pursuant to any other basis provided by law, then the finding or findings shall be filed with the processing agency, and the parking citation shall be canceled pursuant to CMC 321013(a)(1). (Ord. 93-1011, § 2)

32106 Parking Penalties.
(a) Parking penalties shall be established by resolution of the City Council.

(b) All parking penalties received by the processing agency shall accrue to the benefit of the City. (Ord. 93-1011, § 2)

32107 Parking Penalties Received by Date Fixed – No Contest – Request to Contest.
If the parking penalty is received by the processing agency and there is no contest by the date fixed on the parking citation, all proceedings as to that parking citation shall terminate.

If the operator contests the parking citation, the processing agency shall proceed in accordance with CMC 321013. (Ord. 93-1011, § 2)

32108 Parking Penalties Not Received by Date Fixed.
If payment of the parking penalty is not received by the processing agency by the date fixed on the parking citation, the processing agency shall deliver to the registered owner a notice of delinquent parking violation pursuant to CMC 32109.

Delivery of a notice of delinquent parking violation may be made by personal service or by first class mail addressed to the registered owner of the vehicle as shown on the records of the Department. (Ord. 93-1011, § 2)

32109 Notice of Delinquent Parking Violation – Contents.
The notice of delinquent parking violation shall contain the information required to be included in a parking citation pursuant to CMC 32105. The notice of delinquent parking violation shall also contain a notice to the registered owner that, unless the registered owner pays the parking penalty or contests the citation within ten (10) days after mailing the notice of delinquent parking violation or completes and files an affidavit of nonliability form that complies with CMC 321011 or 321012, the vehicle registration shall not be renewed until the parking penalties have been paid. In addition, the notice of delinquent parking violation shall contain, or be accompanied by, an affidavit of nonliability and information of what constitutes nonliability, information as to the effect of executing an affidavit, and instructions for returning the affidavit to the issuing agency.

If the parking penalty is paid within ten (10) days after the mailing of the notice of delinquent parking violation, no late penalty or similar fee shall be charged to the operator. (Ord. 93-1011, § 2)

321010 Copy of Citation upon Request by Registered Owner.
(a) Within fifteen (15) days of request, made by mail or in person, the processing agency shall mail or otherwise provide to the registered owner, or the registered owner’s agent, who has received a notice of delinquent parking violation, a copy of the original parking citation. The issuing agency may charge a fee sufficient to cover the actual cost of copying and/or locating the original parking citation, not to exceed $2.00. Until the issuing or processing agency complies with a request to provide a copy of the parking citation, the processing agency may not proceed to immobilize the vehicle in question merely because the registered owner has received five (5) or more outstanding parking violations over a period of five (5) or more days.

(b) If the description of the vehicle on the parking citation does not substantially match the corresponding information on the registration card for that vehicle the processing agency shall, on written request of the operator, cancel the notice of parking violation. (Ord. 93-1011, § 2)

321011 Affidavit of Nonliability – Leased or Rented Vehicle.
A registered owner shall be released from liability for a parking citation if the registered owner files with the processing agency an affidavit of nonliability satisfactory to the processing agency and such affidavit is returned within thirty (30) days after the mailing of the notice of delinquent parking violation together with proof of a written lease or rental agreement between a bona fide rental or leasing company and its customer which identifies the renter or lessee and provides the operator’s driver’s license number, name and address. The processing agency shall serve or mail to the renter or lessee identified in the affidavit of nonliability a notice of delinquent parking violation. The processing agency shall inform the renter or lessee that he or she must pay the full amount of the parking penalty, or provide notice to the processing agency that he or she intends to contest the parking citation pursuant to CMC 321013 within fifteen (15) days of the mailing of the notice of delinquent parking violation. If the processing agency does not receive payment of the parking citation or does not receive notice of intent to contest within fifteen (15) days, the processing agency may proceed against the renter or lessee pursuant to CMC 321014. (Ord. 93-1011, § 2)

321012 Affidavit of Nonliability – Sale.
A registered owner of a vehicle shall be released from liability for a parking citation issued to that vehicle if the registered owner served with a notice of delinquent parking violation files with the processing agency, within thirty (30) days of receipt of the notice of delinquent parking violation, an affidavit of nonliability together with proof that such registered owner had made a bona fide sale or transfer of the vehicle and has delivered possession thereof to the purchaser prior to the date of the alleged violation. The processing agency shall obtain verification from the Department that the former owner has complied with the requirements necessary to release the former owner from liability pursuant to California Vehicle Code section 5602 or the successor statute thereto.

If the registered owner has complied with California Vehicle Code section 5602, or the successor statute thereto, the processing agency shall cancel the notice of delinquent parking violation with respect to the registered owner.

If the registered owner has not complied with the requirements necessary to release the owner from liability pursuant to California Vehicle Code section 5602, or the successor statute thereto, the processing agency shall inform the registered owner that the citation must be paid in full or contested pursuant to CMC 321013. If the registered owner does not comply, the processing agency shall proceed pursuant to CMC 321014. (Ord. 93-1011, § 2)

321013 Contesting Parking Citation – Procedure.
(a) If an operator or registered owner contests a parking citation or a notice of delinquent parking violation, the processing agency shall do all of the following:

(1) First, either investigate with its own records and staff or request that the issuing agency investigate the circumstances of the citation with respect to the contestant’s written explanation of the reason or reasons for contesting the parking citation.

If, based on the results of that investigation, the processing agency is satisfied that the violation did not occur, or the registered owner was not responsible for the violation by virtue of having sold, rented or leased the vehicle, or because legally supportable or mitigating circumstances as set forth in the City’s administrative policy warrant a dismissal, the processing agency shall cancel the parking citation, and make an adequate record of the reason or reasons for canceling the parking citation. The processing agency shall mail the results of the investigation by first class mail to the contestant within ten (10) days of the decision.

(2) If the contestant is not satisfied with the results of the investigation provided for in subsection (a)(1) of this Section, the contestant may, within fifteen (15) days of the mailing of the results of the initial investigation, deposit the amount of the parking penalty and other related fees or provide proof of inability to deposit the parking penalty, and request an administrative review.

(3) If the contestant prevails at the administrative hearing, then the full amount of the parking penalty deposited shall be refunded.

(b) The administrative review procedure shall consist of the following:

(1) The contestant shall make a written request for administrative review on a form and in a manner satisfactory to the processing agency, and may request to contest the parking citation either in person or by written declaration.

(2) If the contestant is a minor, that person shall be permitted to appear at a hearing or admit responsibility for a parking citation without the necessity of the appointment of a guardian. The processing agency may proceed against the minor in the same manner as if the minor were an adult.

(3) The administrative review shall be conducted before an examiner designated to conduct the review by the City Council or by the processing agency.

(c) The issuing officer shall not be required to participate in an administrative review. The issuing agency shall not be required to produce any evidence other than the parking citation or copy thereof, and information received from the Department, identifying the registered owner of the vehicle. Such documentation in proper form shall be considered prima facie evidence of the violation.

(d) The processing agency’s final decision shall be in writing and delivered personally to the contestant or the contestant’s agent, or delivered by first class mail within ten (10) working days following the hearing.

(e) If the contestant is not the registered owner of the vehicle, all notices to the contestant required under this Section shall also be given to the registered owner by first class mail. (Ord. 93-1011, § 2)

321014 Collection of Unpaid Parking Penalties.
Except as otherwise provided below, the processing agency shall proceed under subsection (a) or (b) of this Section, but not both, in order to collect an unpaid parking penalty:

(a) File an itemization of unpaid parking penalties and other related fees with the Department for collection pursuant to the California Vehicle Code section 4760 or the successor statute thereto.

(b) If more than $400.00 in unpaid parking penalties and other related fees have been accrued by any one (1) registered owner or the registered owner’s renter, lessee, or sales transferee, proof thereof may be filed with the municipal court which has the same effect as a civil judgment. Execution may be levied and such other measures may be taken for the collection of the judgment as are authorized for the collection of unpaid civil judgments entered against a defendant in an action against a debtor.

The processing agency shall send notice by first-class mail to the registered owner or renter, lessee, or sales transferee indicating that a civil judgment has been filed and the date that the judgment shall become effective. The notice shall also indicate the time: that execution may be levied against that person’s assets, that liens may be placed against that person’s property, that the person’s wages may be garnished, and that other steps may be taken to satisfy the judgment. The notice shall also state that the processing agency will terminate the civil judgment proceeding if all parking penalties and other related fees are paid prior to the date set for hearing. If judgment is entered, then the City may file a writ of execution or an abstract with the municipal court clerk’s office identifying the means by which the civil judgment is to be satisfied.

If a judgment is rendered for the processing agency, that agency may contract with a collection agency licensed pursuant to Chapter 8 (commencing with section 6850) of Division 3 of the California Business and Professions Code, or the successor statutes thereto, to collect the judgment.

The processing agency shall pay the established first paper civil filing fee at the time an entry of civil judgment is requested.

(c) If the registration of the vehicle has not been renewed for sixty (60) days beyond the renewal date, and the citation has not been collected by the Department pursuant to the California Vehicle Code section 4760, or the successor statute thereto, then the processing agency may file proof of unpaid penalties and fees with the municipal court which has the same effect as a civil judgment as provided above in subsection (b) of this Section.

(d) The processing agency shall not file a civil judgment with the municipal court relating to a parking citation filed with the Department unless the processing agency has determined that the registration of the vehicle has not been renewed for sixty (60) days beyond the renewal date and the citation has not been collected by the Department pursuant to the California Vehicle Code section 4760 or the successor statute thereto. (Ord. 93-1011, § 2)

321015 Obligation of Processing Agency Once Parking Penalty Paid.
(a) If the operator or registered owner served with notice of delinquent parking violation, or any other person who presents the parking citation or notice of delinquent parking violation, deposits the penalty with the person authorized to receive it, the processing agency shall do both of the following:

(1) Upon request, provide the operator, registered owner, or the registered owner’s agent with a copy of the citation information presented in the notice of delinquent parking violation. The processing agency shall, in turn, obtain and record on its records the name, address and driver’s license number of the person actually given the copy of the citation information.

(2) Determine whether the notice of delinquent parking violation has been filed with Department or a civil judgment has been entered pursuant to CMC 321014.

(b) If the processing agency receives full payment of all parking penalties and other related fees and the processing agency has neither filed a notice of delinquent parking violation nor entered a civil judgment, then all proceedings for that citation shall cease.

(c) If the notice of delinquent parking violation has been filed with the Department and has been returned by the Department pursuant to the provisions of the California Vehicle Code and payment of the parking penalty has been made, along with any other related fees, then the proceedings for that citation shall cease.

(d) If the notice of delinquent parking violation has been filed with the Department and has not been returned by the Department, and payment of the parking penalty along with any other fees applied by either the Department or the processing agency or both have been made, the processing agency shall do all of the following:

(1) Deliver a certificate of payment to the operator, or other person making payment,

(2) Within five (5) working days transmit information payment to the Department in the manner prescribed by the Department,

(3) Terminate proceedings on the notice of delinquent parking violation,

(4) Deposit all parking penalties and other fees as required by contract. (Ord. 93-1011, § 2)

321016 Deposit of Parking Penalties with the City.
All parking penalties collected, including process service fees and costs related to civil debt collection, shall be deposited to the account of the processing agency, and then remitted to the City, if the City is not also the processing agency.

If the City is not the processing agency, then the City shall enter into an agreement with the processing agency for periodic transfer of parking citation receipts, along with a report setting forth the number of cases processed and the sums received. (Ord. 93-1011, § 2)

321017 Filing of Annual Reports.
The processing agency shall prepare an audited report at the end of each fiscal year setting forth the number of cases processed, and all sums received and distributed, together with any other information that may be specified by the City or its authorized issuing agency or the State Controller. The report is a public record and shall be delivered to the City and its authorized issuing agency. (Ord. 93-1011, § 2)

CHAPTER 2.5
PREFERENTIAL PARKING ZONES
Sections:

§ 32500    Short Title.

§ 32501    Purpose.

§ 32502    Establishment and Termination of Preferential Parking Zones.

§ 32502.1    Petition Forms.

§ 32502.2    Establishment of a Preferential Parking Zone.

§ 32502.3    Termination of a Preferential Parking Zone.

§ 32502.4    Preferential Parking Zones Near National Training Center.

§ 32503    Permits – Issuance.

§ 32504    Permits – Fees.

§ 32505    Permits – Display.

§ 32506    Permits – Revocation.

§ 32507    Notice of Preferential Parking Zones.

§ 32508    Enforcement Hours.

§ 32509    Parking Privileges of Permit Holders.

§ 32510    Designation of Zones.

§ 32511    Exemptions.

§ 32512    Violations.

32500 Short Title.
This Chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as the “Preferential Parking Code.” (Ord. 92-987, § 1)

32501 Purpose.
This Chapter is enacted pursuant to authority granted by Sections 22507 and 22507.5 of the California Vehicle Code. Preferential parking zones are necessary to alleviate serious problems in certain residential areas of the City due, in part, to the parking of motor vehicles on streets by nonresidents of the immediate area for extended periods of time and the nonuse of available public transit alternatives to automobile travel by nonresidents which has resulted in neighborhood decline in affected areas because of traffic congestion, noise, air pollution, traffic hazards, and inability of residents to park their vehicles reasonably close to their residences. (Ord. 92-987, § 1)

32502 Establishment and Termination of Preferential Parking Zones.
32502.1 Petition Forms.
The Department of Public Works shall provide petition forms for preferential parking zones upon the written request of any five (5) residents of a proposed zone, one (1) of whom shall be designated in the request as the official representative of the zone advocates. (Ord. 92-987, § 1)

32502.2 Establishment of a Preferential Parking Zone.
(a) Proceedings for establishment of a preferential parking zone may be initiated by petition containing the signatures of at least sixty (60) percent of the residents of all units of occupancy fronting curbs proposed to be included in the zone. The petition shall include a description of the proposed zone boundaries, the proposed restriction, and the days and hours the restriction is proposed to be effective. The petition shall state that all signators desire to have preferential parking restrictions imposed and that all signators are willing to pay associated administrative costs necessary to establish such zone. Each signator shall affix their signature, printed name, and address to the petition which petition shall be circulated by the zone advocates. Not more than sixty (60) days after the petition form is provided by the Public Works Department pursuant to CMC 32502.1, the signed and completed petition shall be submitted to the Public Works Committee.

(b) The Public Works Committee shall set a place and time for a public discussion on the proposed zone. The Public Works Director shall mail notice of the hearing at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing to all property owners, residents, and other occupants within the proposed zone and within three hundred (300) feet of the boundaries of the proposed zone.

(c) Following public discussion, the Public Works Committee shall make a recommendation to the City Council regarding whether the preferential parking zone should be established. Following receipt of the recommendation of the Public Works Committee, the City Council shall, by resolution, determine whether the preferential parking zone shall be established. Said determination shall be based upon factors which may include but are not limited to, the following:

(1) High Demand: More than seventy-five (75) percent of the on-street spaces are occupied during the days and hours proposed for parking restriction; and

(2) Self Contained Area: The zone, alone or in combination with other existing or potential preferential parking zones, constitutes a self contained area of parking demand and supply. For purposes of this Section, “self contained area” shall mean an area of sufficient size to allow for resident parking, using boundaries such as major streets, nonresidential land uses, transition to higher or lower density residential areas, water bodies and other natural features; and using surveys of existing conditions to determine the extent of the area impacted by nonresident parking.

(d) Each preferential parking zone shall be identified by a letter or combination of letters which shall be the official designation of the zone. (Ord. 92-987, § 1)

32502.3 Termination of a Preferential Parking Zone.
The City Council may terminate a preferential parking zone upon receipt of a petition calling for termination which has been received and transmitted by the City Clerk, and which contains the signatures and corresponding printed name and address representing a majority (fifty (50) percent plus one (1)) of the dwelling units in the zone. The City Council may also terminate a preferential parking zone, without submission of a petition requesting termination, by resolution setting forth the reasons for such termination which reasons may include, but are not limited to, changes in circumstances which led to the original establishment of the zone. (Ord. 92-987, § 1)

32502.4 Preferential Parking Zones Near National Training Center.
(a) Notwithstanding CMC 32502.2, the Public Works Director may initiate proceedings for the establishment of a preferential parking zone in a residential neighborhood near the National Training Center at California State University Dominguez Hills. The proceedings shall be initiated by the submission of a recommendation to the City Council.

(b) Following receipt of the recommendation of the Public Works Director, the City Council shall, by resolution, determine whether the preferential parking zone shall be established. The determination shall be based on the likelihood of extraordinary parking demand attributable to events at the National Training Center. If a preferential parking zone is established, the parking restrictions shall be in effect only on those days on which an event is held at the National Training Center.

(c) Each preferential parking zone established pursuant to this Section shall be identified by a letter or combination of letters that shall be the official designation of the zone.

(d) Preferential parking zones established pursuant to this Section may be terminated in accordance with the procedure set forth in CMC 32502.3. (Ord. 03-1283U, § 1; Ord. 03-1283, § 1)

32503 Permits – Issuance.
(a) Parking permits for preferential parking zones shall be issued by the Department of Finance. No more than one (1) permit shall be issued for each vehicle for which application is made. Each permit issued shall show by code, color or both, the particular preferential parking zone for which it has been issued and resident permits shall include the license plate number of the motor vehicle for which it was issued.

(b) Preferential parking permits for residents shall be issued only upon application of a legal resident of the established zone who is the registered owner or has exclusive use and control of the vehicle for which application is made. Proof of residency and ownership or exclusive use and control shall be demonstrated as determined by the Finance Director.

(c) The number of preferential parking permits, if any, that may be issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be determined and calculated as follows:

(1) Residents: No more than three (3) permits for residents shall be issued to any one (1) residence. Permits issued to residents shall remain valid while the applicant continues to reside at the address set forth on the application and remains the owner of the vehicle for which the permit is issued.

(2) Visitors: Not more than two (2) Visitor Preferential Parking Permits shall be issued to any one (1) residence for the use of visitors to the home of the applicant. Visitor permits shall remain valid while the applicant continues to reside at the address set forth on the application. (Ord. 92-987, § 1)

32504 Permits – Fees.
Applications for issuance of initial permits or transfer permits when the holder of a permit in one (1) zone moves to another zone and desires a permit for the new zone, or a replacement permit in the case of a lost or mutilated permit, shall be filed with the Department of Finance and shall be accompanied by the fee established by Resolution of the City Council. Fees may be prorated for periods of less than one (1) year except that no refund shall be issued for cancellation of a permit unless the zone is terminated by City Council action. The Director of Finance shall not issue a replacement permit unless the Director has received satisfactory evidence that the permit being replaced has been lost or mutilated. (Ord. 92-987, § 1)

32505 Permits – Display.
Preferential parking permits for residents shall be prominently displayed and firmly attached to the left side of the rear bumper of the vehicle for which the permit was issued. Permits for visitors shall be prominently displayed either on the left side of the rear window of the vehicle or hanging from the interior rear view mirror. (Ord. 92-987, § 1)

32506 Permits – Revocation.
(a) The Director of Finance is authorized to revoke the preferential parking permit of any person found to be in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter and, upon written notification, that person must surrender the permit to the Director or prove its destruction or disfigurement to the Director’s satisfaction.

(b) Any person whose preferential parking permit has been revoked shall not be issued a new permit for one (1) calendar year following revocation and must submit a new application and pay the fee required for a new permit. (Ord. 92-987, § 1)

32507 Notice of Preferential Parking Zones.
The Public Works Director shall place and maintain, or cause to be placed and maintained, on each street or portion of street designated to be within a preferential parking zone, appropriate signs giving notice that vehicles must display preferential parking permits and any applicable time limits for parking of vehicles without permits. (Ord. 92-987, § 1)

32508 Enforcement Hours.
Preferential parking in the zones established by the City Council shall be in effect on those days and during those hours as shall be determined by the City Council when the zone is established. (Ord. 92-987, § 1)

32509 Parking Privileges of Permit Holders.
Any vehicle properly displaying a valid preferential parking permit issued for that vehicle may be parked on any street or portion of street within the zone for which the permit was issued without being limited by the time restrictions imposed pursuant to this Chapter. Permit holders shall be subject to parking restrictions imposed pursuant to any other Chapter of the Carson Municipal Code or other state law provisions. Preferential parking permits shall not guarantee or reserve to the holder any specific on-street parking space. (Ord. 92-987, § 1)

32510 Designation of Zones.
The streets and/or portions of streets established as preferential parking zones for the purposes of this Chapter shall be designated by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 92-987, § 1)

32511 Exemptions.
The following vehicles are exempt from the parking restrictions imposed pursuant to this Chapter:

(a) Vehicles in use for the construction or repair of any utility;

(b) Vehicles engaged in official government business;

(c) Vehicles from which persons or goods are being loaded or unloaded;

(d) Vehicles engaged in construction, repairs, or similar services on property within the preferential parking zone; or

(e) Emergency vehicles. (Ord. 92-987, § 1)

32512 Violations.
(a) No vehicle shall be parked or stopped adjacent to any curb in a preferential parking zone in violation of any posted restrictions during the time preferential parking is in effect, unless such vehicle shall have the permit prominently displayed in accordance with CMC 32505.

(b) No person shall falsely represent that he or she is eligible for preferential parking permit(s) or furnish false information in an application for a permit.

(c) No person shall park or leave standing in a preferential parking zone, any vehicle which displays a preferential parking permit issued for a different vehicle.

(d) No person shall park or leave standing in a preferential parking zone any vehicle which displays a facsimile or counterfeit preferential parking permit.

(e) No person whose preferential parking permit has been revoked shall refuse or fail to surrender the permit when requested to do so in writing by the Director of Finance.

(f) No resident or visitor preferential parking permit issued pursuant to this Chapter shall thereafter be assigned, transferred, sold or used for any consideration, monetary or otherwise. (Ord. 92-987, § 1)

CHAPTER 3
POUND REGULATIONS*
Sections:

§ 3300    Adoption of Animal Control Ordinance.

§ 3301    Addition to Animal Control Ordinance.

§ 3303    Violations – Penalty.

§ 3304    Repealed.

§ 3305    Wild Animals – Definition.

§ 3306    License Requirements.

§ 3307    Proper Confinement.

§ 3308    Licensing – Dogs and Cats.

§ 3309    Spaying or Neutering.

§ 3310    Fee Schedule.

§ 3311    Dog Control.

*Editor’s Note: Prior ordinances codified herein include Ordinance Nos. 2, 29, 72-222, 87-799, 91-933U and 91-933.

3300 Adoption of Animal Control Ordinance.
Title 10, Animals, of the Los Angeles County Code, as amended and in effect on January 5, 1993, is hereby adopted by reference as the Animal Control Ordinance of the City of Carson.

A copy of the Animal Control Ordinance has been deposited in the office of the City Clerk and shall at all times be maintained by the Clerk for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 91-943, § 1; Ord. 95-1052, § 1)

3301 Addition to Animal Control Ordinance.
Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 3300, the Animal Control Ordinance is amended by adding Section 10.40.110 to read as follows:

10.40.110 Dogs – Prohibited in Public Parks.

A. It shall be unlawful for the owner or person having custody of any dog to allow said animal to enter upon any public park, except as otherwise provided in this Section.

B. The provisions of this Section shall not prohibit the use of dogs on park property for teaching uses when approved by the Director of Community Services.

C. The provisions of this Section do not prohibit the use of Service Dogs in any public park, to the extent such use is protected by applicable state and federal law. For purposes of this section, “Service Dog” means a dog that constitutes a service animal, as defined in Section 35.104 of Title 28 of the Code of Federal Regulations, and as amended, or a dog trained as a guide dog, signal dog, or service dog, as such terms are defined in Section 54.1 of the California Civil Code, and as amended.

D. Dogs that constitute service animals, as defined in Section 35.104 of Title 28 of the Code of Federal Regulations, and as amended, shall not be excluded from public parks except to the extent consistent with 28 C.F.R. 35.136(b)–(c), and as amended.

E. Dogs that do not constitute service animals, as defined in Section 35.104 of Title 28 of the Code of Federal Regulations, and as amended, shall be leashed at all times while in public parks.

F. At all times while in public parks, dogs that constitute service animals, as defined in Section 35.104 of Title 28 of the Code of Federal Regulations, and as amended, shall be:

(1) under the control of their handler, and

(2) harnessed, leashed, or tethered, unless either the handler is unable because of a disability to use a harness, leash, or other tether, or the use of a harness, leash, or other tether would interfere with the service animal's safe, effective performance of work or tasks, in which case the service animal must be otherwise under the handler’s control (e.g., voice control, signals, or other effective means).

G. Nothing in this Section shall be deemed to preclude the use of a miniature horse in a public park by an individual with a disability if the miniature horse has been individually trained to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of the individual with a disability, provided the City has made a determination, as a matter of policy, practice or procedure, that the miniature horse can be allowed in the subject public park facility, based on the assessment factors set forth in Section §35.136(i) of Title 28 of the Code of Federal Regulations, and as amended.

(Ord. 91-943, § 1; Ord. 18-1812, § 2)

3303 Violations – Penalty.
(a) Except as provided in subsection (b), any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter is guilty of an infraction which is punishable as provided in CMC 1200(b).

(b) Violation of Sections:

10.12.190

10.12.200

10.12.210(B)

10.20.280

10.20.310

10.28.060

10.28.100

10.32.020

10.32.040

10.32.070

10.32.080

10.37.030

10.37.040(c)

10.37.050(C)

10.37.050(F)

10.40.010

10.40.040

10.40.050

10.40.065(b)

10.48.060

10.72.040

10.76.050

10.80.020

10.84.030

10.86.010

10.86.020

of the Animal Control Ordinance is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 91-943, § 1)

3304 Repealed.
Repealed by Ord. 91-943.

3305 Wild Animals – Definition.
Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 3300, the Animal Control Ordinance of the City of Carson is amended by amending Section 10.08.250 thereof to read:

10.08.250 Wild Animal. “Wild animal” means any wild, exotic, dangerous, or nondomestic animal, including but not limited to mammals, fowl, fish or reptiles, except alligators which have been kept as pets within single family residential property occupied by the owners thereof located in the area now within the city limits of the City of Carson continuously since a date prior to the incorporation of the City of Carson on February 20, 1968.

(Ord. 91-943, § 1)

3306 License Requirements.
Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 3300, the Animal Control Ordinance of the City of Carson is amended by adding to the list of animals set forth in Section 10.28.060 which do not require a license from the Director of the Department of Animal Care and Control as tax collector, as item 20 thereof, the following.

20. Alligators which have been kept as pets within single family residential property occupied by the owners thereof located in the area now within the City limits of the City of Carson continuously since a date prior to the incorporation of the City of Carson on February 20, 1968.

(Ord. 91-943, § 1)

3307 Proper Confinement.
Every person owning and keeping an alligator referred to in Section 10.28.060, item 20, as herein amended, shall keep such animal under proper confinement within the private residential property of the owner and shall not cause, permit or allow such animal to be or to run at large, and shall maintain such animal in all respects in the manner prescribed for the keeping of animals by Section 10.32.080. (Ord. 91-943, § 1)

3308 Licensing – Dogs and Cats.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 3300, Chapter 10.20 of Division 1, Title 10, of the Los Angeles County Code, is amended by amending Parts 1 and 2 to read as follows:

Chapter 10.20

DOGS AND CATS

Part 1

LICENSING

10.20.010 License tags – Issuance – Fee. Pursuant to Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 30801) of Division 14 and Section 31751 of Division 14.5 of the Food and Agricultural Code, the director shall issue serially numbered metallic dog and cat license tags stamped with the name of the City of Carson and shall collect for each such tag the sum of $1.00.

10.20.011 License – Issuance by veterinarians and other qualified persons in unincorporated areas of the county – Conditions. The director may authorize the issuance of dog licenses and cat licenses, as required by Section 10.20.010, by persons practicing veterinary medicine in the City of Carson, or other persons approved by the director who meet the qualifications established by the department. Said persons shall transmit records and negotiable papers to the department of animal care and control at intervals as established by the director, and collect and transmit to the director the fee required by this chapter for the issuance of such licenses.

10.20.020 Person deemed custodian when. Any person keeping or harboring any dog or cat for fifteen (15) consecutive days shall be deemed to be the custodian thereof and subject to licensing provisions within the meaning of this Division 1.

10.20.030 License – Required – Costs. Every person owning or having custody or control of any dog or cat over the age of four (4) months in the City of Carson shall obtain a license from the director for each of such dogs and cats and shall pay the fees for such licenses as set forth in Section 10.90.010.

10.20.035 Senior citizen – Defined – Reduced rates. A fee of one-half of the amount for dog licenses and cat licenses stated in Section 10.90.010 shall be charged to persons presenting proof and qualifying for senior citizen status. For purposes of this Title 10, persons over sixty (60) years of age qualify for senior citizen status.

10.20.040 Kennel dogs and cats – Individual license required when. An individual dog license or cat license shall be obtained for each dog or cat in addition to a kennel license when such dog or cat is not kept exclusively on the premises. No individual license shall be required for any dog or cat in transit, or when attending a dog show or cat show in the care of a kennel representative.

10.20.045 Dog or cat breeding – License required – Fees. Any person, except for a person possessing a valid kennel license who for pay or other compensation causes the breeding of a female dog or cat, shall obtain an animal breeding permit in the amount set forth in Section 10.90.010. Each permit shall authorize the whelping of no more than one (1) litter per female cat or dog in any twelve (12) month period and no more than one (1) litter per domestic household in any twelve (12) month period.

10.20.050 Exceptions from licensing requirement. The provision of this Division 1 do not require either a tag or a license for:

1. Any dog or cat found within the City of Carson when the owner thereof resides in the unincorporated portion of the County of Los Angeles or in any municipality within the county, and such dog or cat is wearing or has attached to it a license tag for the current year issued by such municipality or county;

2. Any dog or cat owned by or in the charge of any person who is a nonresident of the City of Carson or of the County of Los Angeles and is traveling through the City of Carson or the County of Los Angeles or temporarily sojourning therein for a period of not exceeding thirty (30) days;

3. Any dog or cat brought into the City of Carson and kept therein for not to exceed thirty (30) days for the exclusive purpose of entering the same in any bench show, or dog or cat exhibition, or field trials or competition;

4. Any dog or cat brought or sent in to the City of Carson from any point outside thereof for the exclusive purpose or receiving care in any dog or cat hospital, in the event that such dog or cat is kept at all times strictly confined within such hospital;

5. Any dog or cat wearing or having attached to it a license tag for the current year issued by a municipality within the County of Los Angeles when the owner thereof has, within one (1) year last past, moved his principal place of residence from such municipality to the City of Carson; provided, that such municipality similarly exempts from tag and license requirements dogs and cats wearing current license tags and owned by persons who have moved from the City of Carson to such municipality.

10.20.060 Unvaccinated dogs and cats – Licensing permitted when. The director may accept the payment of the fee for a license tag and a license for a dog or cat which has not been vaccinated as required by Division 1 on condition that the owner of such dog or cat, within five (5) days thereafter, have such dog or cat vaccinated and submit the required veterinarian’s certificate to the director. Upon receipt of such certificate, the director shall issue the license tag and license.

10.20.070 Unvaccinated dogs and cats – Time limit for vaccination when dog or cat is disabled. A person who obtains a license without submitting a certificate of vaccination because of the infirmity or disability of the dog or cat shall, within ten (10) days after the termination of such infirmity or disability, cause such dog or cat to be vaccinated as required by Part 2 of this chapter.

10.20.080 License and license tag – Period of validity – Dogs discharged from military service. Each license and each dog license tag provided for in this chapter for a dog which has been honorably discharged from the armed forces of the United States shall be of indefinite duration, so long as the same individual owns or harbors the same dog. No fee shall be charged for such license over and above the $1.00 required for the dog license tag.

10.20.090 License and license tag – Period of validity – Guide dogs, signal dogs and service dogs defined – Requirements.

A. Every person owning or having custody or control of a dog or either sex over the age of four (4) months which comes within the definition of guide dog, signal dog, or service dog who submits proof to the director that such dog has been successfully trained as a guide dog, or as a signal dog, or as a service dog shall procure a dog license tag and a license, which dog license tag and license shall be good while such dog is owned or harbored by the same person. No fee shall be charged for such license over and above the $1.00 required for the dog license tag.

B. As used in this section, “guide dog” means any guide dog or seeing-eye dog which was trained by a person licensed under Chapter 9.5 (commencing with Section 7200) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code.

C. As used in this section, “signal dog” means any dog trained to alert a deaf person, or a person whose hearing is impaired, to intruders or sounds.

D. As used in this section, “service dog” means any dog individually trained to do work or perform tasks to meet the requirements of a physically disabled person, including, but not limited to, minimal protection work, rescue work, pulling a wheelchair, or fetching dropped items.

10.20.110 License tag – Fee for spayed or neutered animals. Pursuant to Sections 30804.5 and 31751.5 of the Food and Agricultural Code, any dog or cat license tag issued pursuant to Section 10.20.030 of this Part 1 shall be issued for one-half or less of the fee required if a certificate is presented from a licensed veterinarian that the dog or cat has been spayed or neutered.

10.20.120 Fees payable annually – Delinquency charge.

A. The license fees provided for in this chapter shall be paid annually to the director in the amount set forth in Section 10.90.010

B. A delinquency charge as provided in Section 10.90.010 shall be assessed when the license fees provided for in this chapter are not paid on or before the expiration date of the date the license is required to be obtained by the provisions of this title.

10.20.130 Recordkeeping and procurement of tags and receipts. The director shall procure the number of license receipts and dog and cat license tags needed each year, and shall keep a register wherein shall be entered the name and address of each person to whom any dog or cat license is issued, the number of such tag, the date of issuance thereof and a description of the dog or cat for which issued.

10.20.140 License – Vaccination requirements and conditions. The director shall not issue a dog or cat license unless the applicant exhibits a certificate signed by a veterinarian, licensed either by the state of California or by any other state to practice veterinary medicine, that:

A. The period elapsing from the date of vaccination with approved rabies vaccine to the date of expiration of the license being issued does not exceed the time as established by the state; or

B. Such dog or cat should not be vaccinated with rabies vaccine because such vaccination would jeopardize the health of such dog or cat due to infirmity or other disability, which infirmity or other disability, and the estimated date of termination thereof, is shown on the face of the certificate to the satisfaction of the director.

10.20.150 License – Information to be shown on receipt. When the director issues a dog or cat license, he shall show on the receipt the age of the dog or cat, the date of last vaccination and, if the license was issued without proof of vaccination, the reason therefor.

10.20.160 License and license tag – Transfer permitted when – Fee. If, during a license period, a dog or cat is sold or title to the dog or cat is otherwise transferred to a new owner, such new owner may apply to the director for a transfer of such dog’s or cat’s tag and license and pay a transfer fee of $5.00. Upon receipt of such application and fee, the director shall issue a certificate of transfer of such tag, and the names and addresses of the former and new owners.

10.20.170 Replacement of lost tags. In case any license tag for an individual dog or cat is lost or destroyed, a duplicate thereof may be procured from the director upon the submission to the director of such proof as he may require and upon the payment therefor of the sum of $5.00.

10.20.180 Tag to be worn by dog or cat. A license tag for an individual dog or cat shall be securely affixed to a collar, harness or other device which shall at all times be worn by such dog or cat, except while such dog or cat remains indoors or in any enclosed yard or pen.

10.20.190 Keeping unlicensed dogs prohibited – Exception. A person, other than an approved research institution, shall not have, harbor or keep, or cause or permit to be harbored or kept, any unlicensed dog or cat in the City of Carson.

10.20.200 Counterfeit or imitation tags prohibited. A person shall not attach to or keep upon any dog or cat, or cause or permit to be attached to or kept upon any dog or cat, any tag provided for in Section 10.20.010 of this chapter except a tag issued for such dog or cat under the provisions of this chapter, or attach or keep upon or cause or permit to be attached to or kept upon any dog or cat, or make or cause or permit to be made or have in possession, any counterfeit or imitation of any tag provided for in this chapter.

10.20.210 Removing tag from collar prohibited – Exception. An unauthorized person shall not remove from any dog or cat any collar or harness or other device to which is attached a license tag for the current year, or remove such tag therefrom.

Part 2

VACCINATION

10.20.220 Requirements generally.

A. Every person keeping, harboring, or having any dog or cat over four (4) months of age in the City of Carson shall cause such dog or cat to be vaccinated with rabies vaccine, by a person licensed by the state of California, or other state, to practice veterinary medicine, on or before the latest of the following dates:

1. Fifteen (15) days after first acquiring such dog or cat;

2. Fifteen (15) days after bringing such dog into the City of Carson.

B. No person shall cause a dog or cat under the age of four (4) months to be vaccinated with an approved rabies vaccine unless a veterinarian licensed by the state of California, or other state, determined that such vaccination is required to preserve the health or prevent the disability of such dog or cat.

10.20.230. Revaccination time – Rabies vaccine. Every person keeping, harboring, or having a dog or cat in the City of Carson which has been vaccinated with an approved rabies vaccine shall cause such dog or cat to be revaccinated within a period of not more than:

A. Twelve (12) months after the dog’s or cat’s initial vaccination if the dog or cat was between four (4) months and one (1) year in age at the time of such vaccination;

B. Thirty-six (36) months after each prior vaccination.

10.20.250 Certificate of vaccination – Information to be shown. Every person practicing veterinary medicine in the City of Carson who vaccinates a dog or cat with rabies vaccine shall immediately issue to the person to whom he delivers the dog or cat the original, and monthly to the director a duplicate, of a certificate signed by the veterinarian which states:

A. The name and address of the owner or harborer of the vaccinated dogs or cats;

B. The kind of vaccine used, the name of the manufacturer and the manufacturer’s serial or lot number, and the date of the vaccinations;

C. The breed, age, color and sex of the vaccinated dogs or cats.

10.20.260 Research institutions exempt from Part 2 requirements. This Part 2 of Chapter 10.20 does not apply to any approved research institution.

10.20.262 County assistance to low-cost vaccination clinics. The director may direct department personnel to assist at low-cost vaccination clinics operated by veterinary associations. The director shall charge for the services of department personnel at low-cost vaccination clinics operated by veterinary associations. This charge shall not include the time actually spent in the issuance of licenses. Rates shall be those established by the county auditor-controller.

(Ord. 92-984, 1)

3309 Spaying or Neutering.
Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 3300, the Animal Control Ordinance is amended by changing the title of Chapter 10.24 of Division 1, Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code to read “Spaying and Neutering,” and by repealing Section 10.24.020 of said Chapter 10.24. (Ord. 92-984, § 1)

3310 Fee Schedule.
Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 3300, Chapter 10.90 of Division 3, Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code is amended by amending Section 10.90.010, Part VI, to read:

VI. Individual Animal Licenses.

Every person owning a dog or cat over the age of four (4) months shall obtain an annual license and tag for such dog or cat; except, there shall be a one-time-only fee for registration of discharged military dogs, for guide dogs or Seeing-eye dogs, for signal dogs trained to assist the hearing impaired, for service dogs trained to perform tasks to assist the physically handicapped, and for spayed or neutered dogs belonging to senior citizens upon payment of the following fees:

License processing fee

$2.53

A. Dog license and tag fees:

1.

Unaltered (Unspayed/unneutered)

$60.00

2.

Altered (Spayed/neutered)

20.00

3.

Senior citizen — Spayed/neutered dog

7.50

4.

Delinquency charge for annual license renewal, equivalent to the cost of the license, will be added to the license fee if the renewal application is submitted more than 10 calendar days past the expiration date of a license, or if a license application was not otherwise timely submitted.

 

5.

Replacement of tag or official license receipt

5.00

6.

Transfer of ownership

5.00

7.

Discharged military dogs (one-time registration fee)

5.00

8.

Guide dogs or Seeing Eye dogs, signal dogs, and service dogs (one-time registration fee)

5.00

9.

Field enforcement fee: The owner or custodian of a dog found unlicensed by a department employee in the field will be charged a field enforcement fee.

40.00

B. Cat license and tag fees:

1.

Unspayed/unneutered

$10.00

2.

Spayed/neutered

5.00

3.

Replacement cat tag

5.00

4.

Transfer of ownership

5.00

5.

Delinquency charge for annual license renewal, equivalent to the cost of the license, will be added to the license fee if the renewal is submitted more than 10 calendar days past the expiration date of a license, or if a license application was not otherwise timely submitted.

 

6.

Field enforcement fee: The owner or custodian of a cat found unlicensed by a department employee in the field will be charged a field enforcement fee.

40.00

(Ord. 92-984, § 1; Ord. 10-1457, § 1)

3311 Dog Control.
a) No owner or other person having charge, custody or control of any dog(s) shall permit, either willfully or through failure to exercise due care, any such dog(s) to defecate and to allow any such feces to remain on any public parkway, park or other public property, or on any property owned or occupied by a person other than the owner of the dog(s) or the person having charge, custody or control of the dog(s).

b) Any person having charge, custody or control of any dog(s), in a location other than on the property of such person or on the property of the owner of the animal(s), shall have in possession a suitable disposable bag or container for the purpose of complying with the requirements of this Section.

c) For purposes of this Section, a “suitable disposable bag or container” shall not be considered to be an article of clothing.

d) The provisions of this Section shall not apply to blind persons being accompanied by a trained guide dog.

e) Any person violating any of the provisions of subsection (a) or (b) of this Section shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $100.00. (Ord. 14-1545, § 1)

CHAPTER 4
GENERAL HAZARDS
Sections:

§ 3400    General Hazards Ordinance Adopted.

§ 3401    Amendment to General Hazards Ordinance.

3400 General Hazards Ordinance Adopted.
The General Hazards Ordinance, being Ordinance No. 9415 of the County of Los Angeles, as amended and in effect on August 1, 1968, is hereby adopted as the General Hazards Ordinance of the City of Carson.

Three (3) copies of said Ordinance No. 9415 of the County of Los Angeles, California, as amended, have been deposited with the office of the City Clerk of the City of Carson and shall be at all times maintained by said clerk for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 43, § 3400).

3401 Amendment to General Hazards Ordinance.
Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 3400, Section 403 of General Hazards Ordinance is hereby amended to read:

Exceptions. This article does not apply to:

(a) Wells, cesspools, cisterns, septic tanks, or seepage pits under construction when constantly and immediately attended by workmen or other adult persons.

(b) Wells, pits, or shafts less than three (3) feet in depth or with an opening not exceeding six (6) inches in diameter.

(c) Abandoned excavations covered by Sections 24400, 24401 or 24402 of the Health and Safety Code.

(d) Openings, ditches, trenches, or other excavation in any public street, way or place in the City of Carson which shall be governed by CMC 7102.

(Ord. 43, § 3401)

CHAPTER 5
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Sections:

§ 3500    Gasoline Service Stations.

§ 3501    Tobacco Distribution.

3500 Gasoline Service Stations.
(a) Every person offering for sale or selling any gasoline or other motor vehicle fuel, butane, or propane, to the public from any place of business in the City shall post or display a sign which indicates the actual price per gallon, including all taxes, at which each grade of gasoline or other fuel is currently being sold.

(b) No person subject to the provisions of subsection (a) of this Section shall advertise any grade of gasoline or other fuel which is not immediately available for sale to the public on the business premises. The posting of a sign which advertises the unavailability of a particular fuel and which is as visible to the public as the gasoline price signs required under subsection (a) hereof and posted in conformity with Bus. and Prof. C Section 20880 et seq. shall comply with the requirements of this subsection. (Ord. 74-297, § 1; Ord. 74-305, § 1)

3501 Tobacco Distribution.
(a) No person shall sell, permit to be sold or offer for sale any tobacco product by means other than vendor-assisted sales. This prohibition shall preclude the selling and offering for sale of tobacco products by vending machines and self-service displays; provided, however, that this prohibition shall not apply to tobacco shops, cigar lounges and similar establishments. For purposes of this Section, the term “self-service display” shall mean the display of tobacco products in such a manner that the products are accessible by the public without the intervention of the vendor.

(b) No person shall sell, permit to be sold, or offer for sale any tobacco product to a buyer who reasonably appears to be less than twenty-seven (27) years of age unless such buyer has first presented photographic identification establishing that the buyer is not less than eighteen (18) years of age. (Ord. 99-1180, § 2)

CHAPTER 6
WATERCOURSES
Sections:

§ 3600    Interference with Natural Watercourses.

3600 Interference with Natural Watercourses.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, municipality or district to place or cause to be placed in the channel or bed or bank of any river, stream, wash or arroyo in the City of Carson, any wires, fence, building or other structure, or any refuse, rubbish, tin cans or other matter that may impede, retard or change the normal direction of the flow of the flood, storm or other waters in such river, stream, wash or arroyo, or that may catch or collect debris carried by such waters to the damage and detriment of either private or public property within or adjacent to said river, stream, wash or arroyo, nor shall any material, either solid or liquid, be placed in said river, stream, wash or arroyo that will deteriorate the quality of water flowing or stored therein or that which is stored within the water bearing zones underground. (Ord. 74-310, § 1)

CHAPTER 7
EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION
Sections:

§ 3700    Purposes.

§ 3701    Definition.

§ 3702    Disaster Council Membership.

§ 3703    Disaster Council Powers and Duties.

§ 3704    Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Preparedness.

§ 3705    Powers and Duties of the Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Preparedness.

§ 3706    Emergency Organization.

§ 3707    Emergency Plan.

§ 3708    Expenditures.

§ 3709    Punishment of Violations.

3700 Purposes.
The declared purposes of this Chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within this City in the event of an emergency; the direction of the emergency organization; and the coordination of the emergency functions of this City with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons. (Ord. 75-360, § 1)

3701 Definition.
As used in this Chapter, “emergency” shall mean the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this City caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of this City, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. (Ord. 75-360, § 1)

3702 Disaster Council Membership.
The Carson Disaster Council is hereby created and shall consist of the following:

(a) The Mayor, who shall be chairman.

(b) The Director of Emergency Preparedness, who shall be vice chairman.

(c) The Assistant Director of Emergency Preparedness.

(d) Such chiefs of emergency preparedness as are provided for in a current emergency plan of this City, adopted pursuant to this Chapter.

(e) Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans, professional, or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be appointed by the director with the advice and consent of the City Council. (Ord. 75-360, § 1)

3703 Disaster Council Powers and Duties.
It shall be the duty of the Carson Disaster Council, and it is hereby empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the City Council, emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The Disaster Council shall meet upon call of the chairman, or, in his absence from the City or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the Vice-Chairman. (Ord. 75-360, § 1)

3704 Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Preparedness.
(a) There is hereby created the Office of Director of Emergency Preparedness. The City Administrator shall be the Director of Emergency Preparedness.

(b) There is hereby created the Office of Assistant Director of Emergency Preparedness who shall be appointed by the Director. (Ord. 75-360, § 1)

3705 Powers and Duties of the Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Preparedness.
(a) The Director is hereby empowered to:

(1) Request the City Council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a “local emergency” if the City Council is in session, to request the Mayor to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a “local emergency” if the City Council is not in session, or to issue such proclamation if the Mayor is not available. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the Mayor or Director, the City Council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven (7) days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect.

(2) Request the Governor to proclaim a “state of emergency” when, in the opinion of the City Council and the Director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency.

(3) Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this City for the accomplishment of the purposes of this Chapter.

(4) Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of this City; and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them.

(5) Represent this City in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined herein.

(6) In the event of the proclamation of a “local emergency” as herein provided, the proclamation of a “state of emergency” by the Governor or the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a “state of war emergency,” the Director, or in the Director’s absence, the Assistant Director or other person so designated in the City of Carson Emergency Plan, is hereby empowered:

(i) To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the City Council;

(ii) To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the City for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to command the same for public use;

(iii) To require emergency services of any City officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a “state of emergency” in the county in which this City is located or the existence of a “state of war emergency,” to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he or she deems necessary in the execution of his or her duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits, and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service workers;

(iv) To requisition necessary personnel or material of any City department or agency;

(v) To authorize payment of additional compensation to employees who are not otherwise entitled to overtime pay pursuant to the provisions of the City of Carson’s personnel rules or a memorandum of understanding. The additional compensation shall be in recognition of services performed and authorized hours worked by such employees due to the emergency. The additional compensation shall not exceed the employee’s daily rate of pay for each day worked during the emergency; and

(vi) To execute all of his or her ordinary powers as City Administrator, all of the special powers conferred upon him or her by this Chapter or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the City Council, all powers conferred upon him or her by any statute, by any agreement approved by the City Council, and by any other lawful authority.

(b) The order of succession to the Office of Director of Emergency Preparedness, in the event that the Director is unavailable to attend meetings or otherwise perform his duties during an emergency, shall be as set forth in the City of Carson Emergency Plan.

(c) The Assistant Director, shall, under the supervision of the Director and with the assistance of emergency preparedness chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of this City; and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the Director.

(d) In the event of the proclamation of a “local emergency” as herein provided, the proclamation of a “state of emergency” by the Governor or the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a “state of war emergency,” the City Council may authorize additional compensation to be awarded to the Director of Emergency Preparedness for services performed and hours worked due to the emergency, based on the Director’s daily rate of pay for each day worked during the emergency. (Ord. 75-360, § 1; Ord. 92-997, § 2)

3706 Emergency Organization.
All officers and employees of this City, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations, and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of CMC 3705(a)(6)(iii), be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this City during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the City of Carson. (Ord. 75-360, § 1)

3707 Emergency Plan.
The Carson Disaster Council shall be responsible for the development of the City of Carson Emergency Plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this City, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency; and shall provide for the organization powers and duties, services, and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 75-360, § 1)

3708 Expenditures.
Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the City of Carson. (Ord. 75-360, § 1)

3709 Punishment of Violations.
It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not to exceed $1,000, or by imprisonment for not to exceed six (6) months, or both, for any person, during an emergency, to:

(a) Willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this Chapter 7, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this Chapter 7.

(b) Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this Chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this City, or to prevent, hinder, or delay the defense or protection thereof.

(c) Wear, carry, or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the State, the County, County district or any city in the County of Los Angeles.

The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to a violation of a curfew order issued pursuant to this Chapter 7, if the person was traveling to or from work or school, was homeless, or was seeking medical treatment. (Ord. 75-360, § 1; Ord. 93-1008, § 1)

CHAPTER 8
NEWS RACKS
Sections:

§ 3800    Definitions.

§ 3801    Prohibitions.

§ 3802    Standards.

§ 3803    Maintenance.

§ 3804    Identification.

§ 3805    Notice – Removal – Storage.

§ 3806    Abandonment.

§ 3807    Cumulative Remedies.

3800 Definitions.
(a) News Racks. As used in this Chapter, “news rack” shall mean any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used, or maintained for the display and sale of newspapers or news periodicals.

(b) Street. Shall mean all that area dedicated to public use for public street purposes and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, parkways, and alleys.

(c) Roadway. Shall mean that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.

(d) Parkway. Shall mean that area between the sidewalk and the curb of any street, and where there is no sidewalk that area between the edge of the roadway and the property line adjacent thereto. Parkway shall also include any area within a roadway which is not open to vehicular travel.

(e) Sidewalk. Shall mean any surface provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians. (Ord. 74-304, § 1; Ord. 77-412, § 1)

3801 Prohibitions.
(a) Public Streets. No person shall install, use or maintain any news rack or other structure which projects onto, into or over the part of the roadway of any public street, or which rests, wholly or in part, upon, along or over any portion of the roadway of any public street.

(b) Public Sidewalks. No person shall install, use or maintain any news rack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public sidewalk or parkway, when such installation, use or maintenance endangers the safety of persons or property, or when such site or location is used for public use, or when such news rack unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicle, the ingress into or egress from any residence or place of business, or the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes, or other objects permitted at or near said location, or when such news rack interferes with the cleaning of any sidewalk by the use of mechanical sidewalk cleaning machinery. Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection (b), no news rack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:

(1) Within three (3) feet of any marked crosswalk.

(2) Within fifteen (15) feet of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk.

(3) Within three (3) feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or other emergency facility.

(4) Within three (3) feet of any driveway.

(5) Within three (3) feet ahead of, or fifteen (15) feet to the rear of, any sign marking a designated bus stop.

(6) Within three (3) feet of any bus bench.

(7) At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than six (6) feet.

(8) Within three (3) feet of any area improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs, or trees.

(9) Within three (3) feet of any display window of any building abutting the sidewalk or parkway or in such manner as to impede or interfere with the reasonable use of such window for display purposes.

(10) In any manner so as to obstruct or impede access to the sidewalk, of a person going legally to or from a legally stopped or parked vehicle.

(c) Offensive Material. No person shall place, keep or maintain in any news rack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any portion of a public sidewalk or parkway any publication in a manner which exposes to the public view from the street any of the following:

(1) Any statement or words describing explicit sexual acts, sexual organs, or excrement, where such statements or words have as their purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification, or affront.

(2) Any picture or illustration of genitals, pubic hair, perineum, anus, or anal region of any person where such picture or illustration has as its purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification, or affront.

(3) Any picture or illustration depicting explicit sexual acts where such picture or illustration has as its purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification, or affront.

(4) “Explicit sexual acts,” as used in this Section 3801, means depictions of sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, sadism, masochism, or excretory functions in conjunction with sexual activity, masturbation, or lewd exhibition of the genitals, whether any of the above conduct is depicted or described as being performed alone or between members of the same or opposite sex or between humans and animals, or other act of sexual arousal involving any physical contact with a person’s genitals, pubic region, pubic hair, perineum, anus or anal region.

(d) Advertising. No news rack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes other than that dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the newspaper or news periodical sold therein.

(e) Harmful Matter.

(i) No person shall sell, offer for sale, or keep or maintain for sale any harmful matter, as such term is defined in Section 313, Chapter 7.6, Title 9, Part 1 of the Penal Code of California, in any newsrack on any public sidewalk unless such sale or offer of sale is made or such matter is kept or maintained for sale in the presence of an adult person authorized to prevent the purchase of such matter by a minor.

(ii) No person shall, within five hundred (500) meters of any elementary school, high school, or public playground, or any part thereof, knowingly sell or offer to sell, in any coin or slug-operated vending machine which is located on a public sidewalk, any harmful matter (as such term is defined in subsection (e)(i) of this Section) displaying to the public view photographs or pictorial representations of the commission of any of the following acts: sodomy, oral copulation, sexual intercourse, masturbation, bestiality, or a photograph of an exposed penis in an erect and turgid state. (Ord. 74-304, § 1; Ord. 74-412, § 1)

3802 Standards.
Any news rack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public sidewalk or parkway, shall comply with the following standards:

(a) Size. No news rack shall exceed five (5) feet in height, thirty (30) inches in width, or two (2) feet in thickness,

(b) Location. In addition to the requirements of CMC 3801, news racks shall be located as follows: News racks shall only be placed near a curb or adjacent to the wall of a building. News racks placed near the curb shall be placed no less than eighteen (18) inches nor more than twenty-four (24) inches from the edge of the curb. News racks placed adjacent to the wall of a building shall be placed parallel to such wall and not more than six (6) inches from the wall. No news racks shall be placed or maintained on the sidewalk or parkway opposite a newsstand or another news rack.

(c) Attachments. No news rack shall be chained, bolted, or otherwise attached to any property not owned by the owner of the news rack or to any permanently fixed object without the express permission of the owner of such property or object. News racks may be chained or otherwise attached to one another; however, no more than three (3) news racks may be joined together in this manner, and a space of no less than eighteen (18) inches shall separate a group of three (3) news racks so attached from any other news racks. No news rack or group of attached news racks allowed under this subsection shall weigh, in the aggregate, in excess of one hundred twenty-five (125) pounds when empty. (Ord. 74-304, § 1; Ord. 77-412, § 1)

3803 Maintenance.
Each news rack shall be maintained in a clean and neat condition and in good repair at all times. (Ord. 74-304, § 1; Ord. 77-412, § 1)

3804 Identification.
Every person or other entity which places or maintains a news rack on a street in the City shall have his or its name, address and telephone number affixed thereto in a place where such information may be easily seen. (Ord. 74-304, § 1; Ord. 77-412, § 1)

3805 Notice – Removal – Storage.
(a) Notice. If any public officer designated by the City Administrator determines that a news rack is installed, used or maintained in violation of the provisions of this Chapter or that a news rack displays offensive or harmful matter in violation of the provisions of this Chapter, he shall take reasonable steps to notify the owner thereof in writing as follows:

(1) The news rack is in violation of the provisions of this Chapter for reasons set forth in said notice, and

(2) The owner must within three (3) days of receipt of notice remove the news rack or the offensive or harmful matter, or

(3) The owner must within three (3) days of receipt of notice request in writing that the City Administrator set a hearing within five (5) days thereafter to determine upon sworn testimony whether the news rack or the offensive or harmful matter displayed within it violates the provisions of this Chapter, or

(4) The public officer will remove the news rack or the offensive or harmful matter and store it as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this Section unless the owner removes the news rack or the offensive or harmful matter pursuant to subsection (a)(2) of this Section or requests a hearing pursuant to subsection (a)(3) of this Section.

(b) Removal. After complying with the notice requirements provided for in subsection (a) of this Section, the public officer shall remove the news rack or the offensive or harmful matter displayed within it unless the owner removes the news rack or the offensive or harmful matter displayed within it or requests the hearing as provided in subsection (a) of this Section. If the City Administrator determines at said hearing that the news rack or the offensive or harmful matter displayed within it violates the provisions of this Chapter, the owner of the news rack shall within twenty-four (24) hours after the decision remove the news rack or the offensive or harmful matter displayed within it. News racks or materials not so removed shall be forthwith removed by a public officer.

(c) Storage. If the public officer removes the news rack or the offensive or harmful matter displayed within it, he shall store the news rack or such matter in any convenient place designated by the City Administrator. The owner of the news rack may reclaim the news rack or such matter from the officer within thirty (30) days of its removal by identifying himself, showing evidence of ownership and paying the expenses of removal and storage. Upon failure of the owner, following notice, to claim such news rack or the matter displayed within it and pay the expenses of removal and storage within thirty (30) days after such removal, such news rack or matter shall be deemed to be unclaimed property in possession of the City and may be disposed of pursuant to law. The fee for such removal and storage shall be fixed by the City Council by resolution.

(d) Special Procedure. In the case of a violation of this Chapter relative to (1) restrictions upon attachments of news racks to property other than that owned by the owner of the news rack, or (2) to fixed objects or each other, or (3) relative to location of news racks, any public officer designated by the City Administrator may as an alternate to the procedure specified in subsections (a), (b), and (c) of this Section 3805, remove such attachment and/or move such rack or racks in order to restore them to a legal condition, after taking reasonable steps to notify the owner. (Ord. 74-304, § 1; Ord. 77-412, § 1)

3806 Abandonment.
In the event any news rack installed pursuant to this Chapter is not serviced with the publication it is designed to disseminate for a period of over seven (7) consecutive days, City may remove same pursuant to the procedure set out in CMC 3805. For purposes of this Section abandonment shall include, but is not limited to, circumstances where no publication is in the rack for a period of over seven (7) consecutive days. (Ord. 77-304, § 1; Ord. 77-412, § 1)

3807 Cumulative Remedies.
The remedies set forth in CMC 3805 and 3806 for violation of the provisions of this Chapter are cumulative and in addition to the penalties provided for in Article I, Chapter 2 of this Code. (Ord. 74-304, § 1; Ord. 77-412, § 1)

CHAPTER 9
CITY TREE PRESERVATION AND PROTECTION
Sections:

§ 3900    Purpose.

§ 3901    Definitions.

§ 3902    Authority.

§ 3903    Criteria for Allowed Trees.

§ 3904    Maintenance.

§ 3905    Planting.

§ 3906    Nursery Stock.

§ 3907    Planting and Staking.

§ 3908    Planting Specifications.

§ 3909    Guidelines for Containerized Stock.

§ 3910    Young Tree Maintenance Schedule.

§ 3911    Pruning.

§ 3912    Training Young Trees.

§ 3913    Pruning Mature Trees.

§ 3914    Pruning Cycles.

§ 3915    Street and Sidewalk Clearance.

§ 3916    Utility Clearance.

§ 3917    Clearance Guidelines.

§ 3918    Exceptions to Proper Pruning Techniques.

§ 3919    Root Pruning.

§ 3920    Root Removal – Avoidance.

§ 3921    Root Removal – Methods.

§ 3922    Certified Arborist.

§ 3923    Contractor Qualifications.

§ 3924    Removal.

§ 3925    Removal When – Appeal.

§ 3926    Inspection.

§ 3927    Development/Construction.

§ 3928    Protective Measures for Trees During Construction.

§ 3929    Hardscape.

§ 3930    Hardscape Damage.

§ 3931    Repairing or Replacing Hardscape.

§ 3932    New Hardscape Installation.

§ 3933    Interference with Work.

§ 3934    Penalties.

§ 3935    Violation – Nuisance – Abatement.

3900 Purpose.
The purpose of this Chapter is to preserve and protect the parkway trees of this City that are of aesthetic importance and to provide for the replacement of trees in order to maintain the community’s natural environment. Trees are an important natural resource, and it is essential to the public peace, health, and welfare that such trees be protected from random removal, trimming, or damage. (Ord. 07-1397, § 1; Ord. 12-1487, § 1)

3901 Definitions.
For the purpose of this Chapter, certain terms and words are hereby defined as follows:

(a) “Manager” means the Development Services General Manager of the Development Services Work Group overseeing the Public Works Division.

(b) “Parkway” means either the area between the curb and sidewalk within a fully improved street right-of-way, or that area extending from the curb towards the nearest parallel easement line in an area with no sidewalk, or any area within a street right-of-way in which a parkway tree is located.

(c) “City tree” means a tree planted or caused to be planted by the City within the City right-of-way or City-owned or -maintained property.

(d) “Removal” means the uprooting, cutting, or severing of the main trunk of the tree, or any act which causes the tree to die within six (6) months.

(e) “Shrub” means woody vegetation of a woody plant having multiple stems and bearing foliage from the ground level up.

(f) “Tree” means any woody plant, including a palm, which has the potential of attaining a minimum height of fifteen (15) feet and has its canopy of foliage borne normally on a single trunk.

(g) “Tree well” means a planting area found in an otherwise paved or concrete street right-of-way. (Ord. 07-1397, § 2; Ord. 12-1487, § 2)

3902 Authority.
The Manager or his or her designee is responsible for inspection, maintenance, planting, pruning, trimming, removal, replacement and care of all parkway trees subject to the review and supervision of the City Manager. Subject to said review, the Manager shall have the power to designate the kind or variety of trees and plants to be planted within any parkway of the City. The owners of property fronting on any street, alley or public place may petition the Manager to provide that such trees or plants shall be of a certain kind or variety, but the petition shall be advisory to the action of the Manager. (Ord. 07-1397, § 3; Ord. 12-1487, § 3)

3903 Criteria for Allowed Trees.
Carson’s tree population management plan shall be based primarily upon the City’s adopted plan of parkway trees and Parkway Tree Master Plan. The Parkway Tree Master Plan will designate certain species of trees that may be planted within the City of Carson (Exhibit “A” at the end of this Chapter). These particular types of trees are species that meet the following criteria:

(a) Species Hardiness. Based upon the tree’s adaptability to the region in terms of its resistance to frost, freezing temperatures and heat.

(b) Drought Tolerance. Species with the ability to withstand long periods of drought are preferred.

(c) Durability and Wind Resistance. Species that are not brittle in nature and will tolerate the winds.

(d) Grow Space. The amount of parkway size available relative to the expected tree trunk circumference and root flare at maturity.

(e) Overhead Clearance. The potential for conflicts between the tree’s canopy and overhead obstructions, such as utility lines, at the tree’s mature height.

(f) Pest and Disease Resistance. Species that are resistant to insect and disease infestation are preferred.

(g) Subsurface Growth Habits. Species that do not tend to surface root or have a high potential to damage infrastructure.

(h) Tolerance to a Variety of Irrigation Practices. Species that will tolerate long periods of drought or abundant moisture are preferred.

(i) Soil Qualities. Species that will tolerate the area’s soil conditions are preferred.

(j) Cleanliness. Species that do not have an overabundance of fruit or flower litter are preferred.

(k) Species Selection. Species are chosen with regard to the appropriateness of their character. For example, a deciduous tree will be utilized in areas with very strong winter winds, providing a more stable specimen for severe conditions. Species that already exist in a particular area, have traditionally existed in that area, or are native to the region are preferred.

(l) Aesthetics and Shading. Trees that are aesthetically pleasing with showy flowers or attractive fall color, or that provide a good amount of shade are preferred.

(m) Availability. Trees that are readily available are preferred. (Ord. 07-1397, § 4; Ord. 12-1487, § 4)

3904 Maintenance.
The Public Works Division will develop and maintain a current inventory of all City-owned trees, including detailed site characteristics and work histories for each tree. Tree records shall be updated on a routine basis. The Public Works Division shall be responsible for overseeing the planting of all City trees. The following guidelines and procedures have been developed to promote the health and safety of City trees from the time they are planted through maturity. These guidelines and procedures shall be required for any City-maintained tree that is to be planted. (Ord. 07-1397, § 5; Ord. 12-1487, § 5)

3905 Planting.
The Public Works Division shall be responsible for administering planting of all trees in the public right-of-way. Businesses and residents are required to obtain a permit prior to planting of any trees within the City’s right-of-way. Trees planted without permit may be removed by the City at the discretion of the Manager or his/her designee, without any consent from businesses or residents that have planted the said tree(s). It shall be the objective of the City to plant all viable vacant sites located in the City public right-of-way, to honor all resident requests for new street trees in City-owned locations, and to replace any City tree which has been removed with the provision that the remaining vacant site is viable for planting. Viable planting sites shall be based upon the following criteria:

(a) Spacing. There is adequate spacing present overhead, underground and radially to allow for the healthy, unimpeded growth of the tree to its mature size. Specific examples of spacing conditions may make a site unsuitable for planting, which include: inappropriate canopy room between existing trees; proximity of a planting site to existing utilities, creating potential conflicts and damage; or inadequate width of the location’s parkway for accommodating the tree’s girth.

(b) Traffic Clearance. There is adequate line-of-sight visibility between normal vehicular or pedestrian traffic and necessary signage, street lights or views.

(c) Maintenance Resources. There is an adequate and consistent water source available.

(d) Funding. Funding will be requested every fiscal year budget for tree planting based on the need. (Ord. 07-1397, § 6; Ord. 12-1487, § 6)

3906 Nursery Stock.
The City shall make every effort to ensure that it plants only vigorous, healthy trees which can easily be trained into an attractive natural form, with strong roots and good crown development. The City shall reserve the right to refuse any nursery stock that does not meet these standards, and may require any person who has planted such substandard trees, on City property or within the City right-of-way, to have these trees removed and replaced at the person’s own expense. The specifications for acceptable nursery stock shall be as follows:

(a) All trees shall be selected from the City’s Master Tree List and be no less than a fifteen (15) gallon mature tree.

(b) All trees shall be true to type or botanical name as ordered or showing on planting plans.

(c) All trees shall have a fairly straight trunk with a good taper and good branch distribution vertically, laterally and radially.

(d) All trees shall be healthy, have a form typical for the species or cultivar, be well rooted, and shall be properly trained.

(e) The root ball of all trees shall be moist throughout and the crown shall show no sign of moisture stress.

(f) All trees shall comply with Federal and State laws requiring inspection for plant diseases and pest infestations.

(g) No tree shall be accepted that has been severely topped, headed back, pollarded or lion-tailed.

(h) No tree shall be accepted that has co-dominant stems or excessive weak branch attachments that cannot be trained out without jeopardizing the natural form of the species.

(i) No tree shall be accepted that is root bound, shows evidence of girdling or kinking roots, or has “knees” (roots) protruding above the soil. (Ord. 07-1397, § 7; Ord. 12-1487, § 7)

3907 Planting and Staking.
Unless otherwise approved by the Public Works Division, all City trees shall be planted using materials that meet the following criteria:

(a) Tree Stakes. Tree stakes shall be two (2) sturdy eight (8) to ten (10) foot long lodge pole pine stakes. Stakes will be placed on the outer edge of the root ball on either side of the tree, perpendicular to prevailing winds. If larger trees are planted and require guying, International Society of Arboriculture standards shall be adhered to.

(b) Staking Ties. Staking ties shall be sixteen (16) inch to eighteen (18) inch rubber cinch ties to be fastened to each stake with galvanized roofing nails. Ties will be pulled around the tree’s trunk in a manner which supports the top-heaviness of the canopy, but is loose enough to allow for free movement of the tree in the wind.

(c) Trunk Guards. An approved trunk guard shall be placed around the base of the trunk just above the soil grade. A trunk guard is to deter mechanical damage, as a result of wounds inflicted on a tree’s trunk by such devices as weed whips and lawnmowers.

(d) Root Barrier. Root barrier shall be fabricated from a high-density and high-compact plastic such as polyvinyl chloride, ABS or polyethylene and have a minimum thickness of six one-hundredths (0.06) inch. The plastic shall have one-half (1/2) inch to three-fourths (3/4) inch high raised vertical ribs on the inner surface spaced not more than six (6) to eight (8) inches apart.

(e) Wood Chip Mulch. A four (4) inch uniform layer of City-approved wood chip mulch shall be placed within the planting basin of the tree. A space of three (3) inches shall be left between the tree’s stem and the mulch layer to allow airflow and to restrict moisture from remaining static around the base of the trunk. (Ord. 07-1397, § 8; Ord. 12-1487, § 8)

3908 Planting Specifications.
All trees must conform to the Authorized List of Carson Trees (Exhibit “A” at the end of this Chapter). All trees shall be in a minimum fifteen (15) gallon size container and be standard (not multitrunk). All trees shall be symmetrical, typical for a variety and species, healthy, vigorous, and free from plant disease and insect pests and shall have a healthy and normal root system free from being root bound. All trees shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the General Manager or his/her designee. All trees shall be planted in accordance with these specifications. (Ord. 07-1397, § 9; Ord. 12-1487, § 9)

3909 Guidelines for Containerized Stock.
Most nursery tree stock in California is sold in a containerized form. The following guidelines are specifics for containerized stock. If utilizing bare root or balled and burlapped trees, refer to the appropriate International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) guidelines for planting instructions.

(a) All trees shall be planted immediately after the planting container has been removed. Containers shall not be cut or otherwise damaged prior to delivery of trees to the planting area.

(b) The planting hole is one of the most important factors in establishing a healthy tree. Measure the width and depth of the root ball prior to digging. The diameter of the planting hole shall be dug at least two (2) times wider than that of the root ball. The depth of the planting hole shall be dug slightly shallower than the depth of the root ball to allow for the top one (1) inch of the root crown to remain above the finished grade.

(c) Before placing the tree into the planting hole, tamp down the base of the hole to allow the tree to stand straight and to avoid the potential of the tree settling below the finished grade. Scarify or scrape the sides of the planting hole to break down any glazing or compaction that may have occurred as a result of digging.

(d) Position the tree in the hole so that the tree stands upright and the top of the root crown is slightly exposed above the grade. Backfill the planting hole with clean, native soil no higher than halfway up the root ball. Slightly tamp the soil to remove air pockets, but be sure not to compact the soil too much. Complete the backfilling to the finished grade. Once again, tamp the soil slightly to remove air pockets.

(e) Form a watering basin out of backfill material, approximately six (6) inches high, around the drip line of the tree. Remove all nursery stakes, ties, and ribbons from the tree and install the planting and staking materials as specified. Give the tree an initial deep watering. Fill watering basin as many times as necessary to completely saturate root ball.

(f) Tree stakes and ties should be removed from the tree within two (2) years after planting, or when the circumference of the tree’s trunk is equal to or exceeds the circumference of the stakes. (Ord. 07-1397, § 10; Ord. 12-1487, § 10)

3910 Young Tree Maintenance Schedule.
All newly planted trees shall be placed on a schedule to receive young tree maintenance immediately after a completion of a planting program. See CMC 3912. (Ord. 07-1397, § 11; Ord. 12-1487, § 11)

3911 Pruning.
The Public Works Division shall be responsible for administering and scheduling pruning of all City trees, otherwise all other trimming is prohibited, unless a permit is obtained. All City trees shall be pruned on a regular basis using professionally accepted standards, as established by the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) Best Management Practice and ANSI Pruning Standards, whichever is more protective of tree preservation. All City trees shall be pruned in a manner that will encourage good development while preserving their health, structure and natural appearance. Shearing, topping, heading back, stubbing, lion tailing or pollarding of public trees is prohibited, except in accordance with ISA standards.

(a) “Thinning,” sometimes called “drop-crotching” in mature trees, shall be the standard pruning technique for City trees. A thinning cut is the removal of a branch at its point of origin, or the shortening of a branch to a lateral that is large enough to assume the terminal role.

(b) When removing a live branch, pruning cuts should be made just outside the branch bark ridge and collar. This location of cut is in contrast to a “flush cut” which is made inside the branch bark ridge and collar. Flush cuts should be avoided because they result in a larger wound and expose trunk tissues to the possibility of decay. If no collar is visible, the angle of the cut should approximate the angle formed by the branch bark ridge and trunk.

(c) When removing a dead branch, the final cut should be made just outside the branch bark ridge and collar of live callus or wound wood tissue. If the collar has grown out along the branch stub, only the dead stub should be removed; the live collar should remain intact.

(d) If it is necessary to reduce the length of a branch, the final cut should be made just beyond (without violating) the branch bark ridge of the branch being cut to. The remaining branch should be no less than one-third (1/3) the diameter of the branch being removed, and with enough foliage to assume the terminal role.

(e) Pruning cuts should be clean and smooth, leaving the bark at the edge of the cut firmly attached to the wood. A three (3) cut process, sometimes referred to as “jump-cutting,” should be used to remove larger limbs in order to avoid stripping or tearing of the bark, and to minimize wounding. (Ord. 07-1397, § 12; Ord. 12-1487, § 12)

3912 Training Young Trees.
Properly trained trees will develop into structurally strong trees well suited for their surrounding environment. These trees should require little corrective pruning as they mature. Young trees that reach a large mature size should have a sturdy, tapered trunk with well-spaced branches that are smaller in diameter than the trunk. Each City tree shall be scheduled for training at least once within the first three (3) years after being planted, as part of a Young Tree Maintenance Program. The Young Tree Maintenance Program shall entail evaluating the overall condition of the tree, cleaning out of any dead wood and pruning the tree in such a manner as to develop good structure, checking to ensure stakes and ties are providing adequate support for the tree, and examining the watering basin to verify that the tree is receiving adequate water. (Ord. 07-1397, § 13; Ord. 12-1487, § 13)

3913 Pruning Mature Trees.
As trees mature, their need for structural pruning should decrease. Pruning should then focus on maintaining tree structure, form, health and appearance. This shall be accomplished through one (1) of the three (3) methods described below:

(a) Crown cleaning, or cleaning out, is the removal of dead, dying, broken, diseased, crossing, weakly attached, and low-vigor branches from a tree’s crown, as well as the elimination of water sprouts, sucker growth and foreign materials from the entire tree.

(b) Crown restoration is intended to improve the structure and appearance of trees that have sprouted vigorously after being broken, topped or severely pruned using heading cuts. One (1) to three (3) sprouts, on main branch stubs, should be selected to form a natural-appearing crown. The more vigorous sprouts may need to be thinned or cut to a lateral to control length growth or ensure adequate attachment for the size of the sprout. Crown restoration may require several prunings over a number of years. Crown restoration shall be completed as is necessary, based upon the specific conditions and circumstances surrounding the tree.

(c) Crown thinning is the selective removal of branches to increase light penetration and air movement through the crown. Thinning opens the foliage of the tree, reduces weight on heavy limbs, distributes ensuing invigoration throughout the tree and helps retain the tree’s natural form. When thinning the crown of mature trees, no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the tree’s live growth should be removed. In slower growing or particularly sensitive species (such as native oaks), no more than ten (10) percent of live growth should be removed. Trees shall always be thinned to their natural form, and should retain well-spaced inner lateral branches with foliage. Trees and branches so pruned will have mechanical stress more evenly distributed along the branch and throughout the tree. (Ord. 07-1397, § 14; Ord. 12-1487, § 14)

3914 Pruning Cycles.
Frequency of pruning is also important to a tree’s health. The City of Carson is divided into twenty-one (21) trimming zones, for purposes of scheduling tree trimming in the City’s public right-of-way (Exhibit “F” at the end of this Chapter). The City’s objective is to service seven (7) zones annually within a three (3) year trim cycle. Scheduling is at the discretion of the Public Works Division. Every tree in each zone shall be pruned when that particular zone is being serviced. If a resident requests tree pruning before or after their zone is serviced, it shall be at the discretion of the Public Works Division to schedule. Hazardous conditions shall be evaluated and attended to as soon as possible. (Ord. 07-1397, § 15; Ord. 12-1487, § 15)

3915 Street and Sidewalk Clearance.
Street and sidewalk clearance standards shall be achieved through crown raising. Crown raising is the removal of lower branches in order to provide clearance for vehicles, pedestrians and bicyclists. Only those branches that must be removed to achieve the established height clearance standards shall be pruned. All such pruning cuts shall be thinned back to the nearest lateral found above the set minimum height standard. Where possible, young or developing trees should be maintained in such a manner that at least one-half (1/2) of the foliage should be on branches that originate in the lower two-thirds (2/3) of the tree. Similarly, branches should have even distribution of foliage along their lengths. This will ensure a well-formed, tapered structure and will uniformly distribute stress within the tree. All City trees shall be maintained to the height clearance specifications established below:

(a) Over sidewalks or park paths, limbs shall be raised to a minimum of seven (7) feet and a maximum of eight (8) feet from grade to first lateral branch. In locations where no sidewalks exist, limbs may be retained below this minimum elevation as long as they conform to the natural shape of the species. In locations where City street trees are set back from, or do not interfere with, sidewalk traffic, limbs may also be retained below this minimum height specification.

(b) Over residential or collector streets, limbs shall be raised gradually from eight (8) feet at curb to thirteen (13) feet over traffic lanes from the grade to wood, giving the appearance of an arch rather than an angle.

(c) Over arterial streets, limbs shall be raised to fourteen (14) feet from grade to first lateral branch. A major arterial street may require a higher maximum over central traffic lanes for existing mature canopy-forming limbs.

(d) Visibility clearance for streetlights or signage shall be achieved through “windowing” through the foliage of a tree, rather than severely raising or reducing its crown. Only those branches that need to be removed to attain the visibility clearance desired shall be pruned. All such pruning cuts shall be thinned back to the nearest lateral found away from the structure that is to be cleared. (Ord. 07-1397, § 16; Ord. 12-1487, § 16)

3916 Utility Clearance.
Line-clearance tree workers must be trained safely around high-voltage conductors. The United States Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA) and the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) have established minimum distances to be maintained by tree workers from electrical conductors. All line-clearance work involving City trees shall adhere to these standards, as well as the utility pruning standards established by the ISA and the Utility Arborists Association (UAA). (Ord. 07-1397, § 17; Ord. 12-1487, § 17)

3917 Clearance Guidelines.
The following guidelines are designed to maintain the required clearance of City trees from high-voltage power lines with a minimum of resprouting and fewer pruning cycles and the cost of the maintenance:

(a) A tree’s growth under utility lines is most economically managed by lateral or directional pruning (thinning cuts). Directional pruning is the removal of a branch to the trunk or a significant lateral branch growing away from the conductor. Heading cuts (topping), on the other hand, encourage vigorous sprouting and increase the frequency of pruning cycles and the cost of maintenance.

(b) All trees in the public right-of-way should be examined for hazards before commencing with line-clearance work. Hangers and dead wood should be removed. Where possible, the tree should be allowed to attain normal height, with crown development maturing away from high-voltage conductors. To achieve clearance, pruning should be restricted to removal of branches at crotches within the tree’s crown.

(c) As few pruning cuts as are reasonable should be used to achieve the required clearance.

(d) When the pruning of a branch will result in the loss of more than one-half (1/2) of the foliage on the branch, it should be removed to the parent stem.

(e) Precautions shall be taken to pre-cut large limbs to avoid stripping or tearing the bark, and minimize unnecessary wounding. Heavy limbs should be lowered on ropes to avoid damaging bark on limbs and trunks below.

(f) The placement of pruning cuts shall be determined by anatomy, structure and branching habit. Limbs should not be arbitrarily cut off based on a pre-established clearing limit.

(g) Final drop-crotch cuts should be made outside the branch bark ridge on the main stem or lateral branch. The remaining branch shall be no smaller than one-third (1/3) the diameter of the portion being removed. The removed portion should be pruned out to direct the remaining growth away from conductors. (Ord. 07-1397, § 18; Ord. 12-1487, § 18)

3918 Exceptions to Proper Pruning Techniques.
The Edison Co. is currently administering line clearance in the City of Carson. Every effort has been made to work in cooperation with the Edison Co. The City has shown concern and requested that proper pruning techniques are adhered to by the Edison Co. whenever possible. An example of a situation where proper pruning techniques would not be followed would be with a tree that has grown above the utility lines and must be topped to achieve clearance. With a situation such as this every effort must first be made to drop-crotch or directionally prune the tree. As few branches as possible will be topped. When this situation occurs, removal and replacement of the tree is at the discretion of the Public Works Division. Palm trees in particular shall be evaluated on an individual basis. Because palms are killed when topped, every effort shall be made to remove and replace the tree and when possible obtain compensation for sale of the tree. (Ord. 07-1397, § 19; Ord. 12-1487, § 19)

3919 Root Pruning.
The root system of a tree is one of its most important physiological components. Roots are the main source of water and mineral absorption for the tree, they provide a foundation and stability, and they act as one of the principal storage areas for food. The proper pruning of a tree’s roots when necessary is as important as the proper pruning of a tree’s crown. (Ord. 07-1397, § 20; Ord. 12-1487, § 20)

3920 Root Removal – Avoidance.
Whenever possible, the City, utility companies or contractors shall avoid removing any of a tree’s root system. In instances where there exists a need to install subsurface structures or utilities, such as irrigation lines or block wall footings, every effort shall be made to avoid encroachment within the drip line of a tree. If it becomes necessary to excavate within a tree’s drip line, every effort, if cost-efficient, shall be made to tunnel under or throughout the tree’s root system with a minimal amount of pruning, rather than to trench across the tree’s roots. (Ord. 07-1397, § 21; Ord. 12-1487, § 21)

3921 Root Removal – Methods.
When root removal becomes necessary for the installation and/or repair of hardscape, such as sidewalks, driveway approaches or curb and gutters, and other utilities, two (2) methods shall be employed by the City to eradicate invasive or encroaching roots. These two (2) methods are specified below:

(a) Selective root pruning is the removal of specific offending roots which are directly interfering with a work area. When pruning out selective roots, great care shall be given to retain as much root surface as possible, including sufficient buttress root dispersal around the radius of the tree. Roots shall be cut back at least four (4) inches away from new hardscape to the nearest node. Pruning cuts shall be made clean and smooth with minimal crushing or tearing of the remaining root.

(b) Root shaving is the removal of a small portion of a nonessential buttress root or general root with a diameter of four (4) inches or greater. Roots will be shaved to allow for at least two (2) inches of clearance between the root and the new hardscape. Shaving cuts shall be made clean and smooth with no crushing or tearing of the remaining root; root shaving shall be undertaken at the discretion of the Public Works Division.

(c) Where root pruning is needed within eight (8) feet of the trunk of the tree, removal of the tree shall be considered as an option if structural integrity of the tree will be compromised. (Ord. 07-1397, § 22; Ord. 12-1487, § 22)

3922 Certified Arborist.
Any City-contracted tree company shall be required to have in their employment a full-time, permanent certified arborist, as accredited by the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA). This person shall be responsible for ensuring that the contractor’s crews are performing work according to the City specifications. (Ord. 07-1397, § 23; Ord. 12-1487, § 23)

3923 Contractor Qualifications.
Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of trimming or removing any parkway tree shall carry commercial general liability and property damage, auto and workers’ compensation insurance at a minimum limit of $1,000,000 each. The insurance certificates must be on file with the Risk Management Department and the City Clerk. (Ord. 07-1397, § 24; Ord. 12-1487, § 24)

3924 Removal.
The Public Works Division will trim or remove any publicly owned tree or plant, including any part thereof, regardless of the location, if it is determined by the Manager or his/her designee that removal or trimming is necessary to eliminate any hazard or risk to public safety or property. The following are conditions permitting removal:

(a) Where the tree, foliage or any limb, or the shrub or plant, is interfering with a primary structure, and there is no feasible alternative to mitigate the interference;

(b) Where a written determination has been made, after a visual inspection and evaluation, that the tree is so diseased or damaged that it is no longer viable or it is a threat to property or to other trees;

(c) Where the tree is so poorly formed due to stunted growth that its preservation would not result in any substantial benefit to the community;

(d) Where the tree interferes with utility services, or any street or highway, and no reasonable alternative exists other than removal or trimming of the tree;

(e) Where the tree is a potential safety hazard due to the risk of it falling and its structural instability cannot be remedied; or where any other risk to persons or property is presented;

(f) Where the tree is causing damage to improvements including, but not limited to, any building foundation, retaining wall, roadway/driveway, sidewalk/curb, patio, and/or deck, or is interfering with the use and enjoyment of property;

(g) Where the tree is host to an organism which is parasitic to another species of tree thereby endangered by the parasite; or

(h) Where the tree belongs to a species which is known to be pyrophytic or highly flammable and/or has been identified as a public safety hazard. (Ord. 07-1397, § 25; Ord. 12-1487, § 25)

3925 Removal When – Appeal.
A City tree shall be removed only if it meets one (1) of the above-stated conditions. If a resident does not agree with staff’s decision on a removal request, they may appeal to the Manager. The Public Works Division will provide interested residents with information on the City appeal process. The City Manager and City Council will serve as the appeal body for the Development Services General Manager’s decisions. (Ord. 07-1397, § 26; Ord. 12-1487, § 26)

3926 Inspection.
The Manager or his or her designee may inspect any parkway tree or plant or any tree or plant standing on any private property which overhangs or projects over or into any street, park, alley or public place of the City, to determine whether it or any part of it is in such condition as to constitute a safety hazard or impediment to the progress or vision of anyone traveling in the street, park, alley or public place. However, nothing herein shall authorize the Manager to enter private property without the consent of the owner or lawful possessor of the property, unless otherwise permitted by law. (Ord. 07-1397, § 27; Ord. 12-1487, § 27)

3927 Development/Construction.
All parkway trees planted in a new subdivision shall be in accordance with the Parkway Tree Guidelines and shall be paid for by the subdivider, unless otherwise provided by the City Council. The City Council may require any subdivider to pay all costs of proper parkway tree planting along the streets of any new subdivision before approving any subdivision map. (Ord. 07-1397, § 28; Ord. 12-1487, § 28)

3928 Protective Measures for Trees During Construction.
The Manager or his/her designee shall determine during the project review process whether and to what extent conditions or measures will be required to protect parkway trees during construction. This decision shall be based upon the proximity of the construction activity to parkway trees. The conditions and protective measures include, but are not limited to, the following:

(a) The parkway trees shall be enclosed by chain link fencing with a minimum height of five (5) feet or by another protective barrier approved by the Manager prior to the issuance of grading or building permit and prior to commencement of work.

(b) Barriers shall be placed at least five (5) feet outside the drip line of parkway trees. The Manager, if appropriate to the species and the adjacent construction activity, may approve a lesser distance.

(c) There shall be no grade changes within the protective barriers without prior approval. Any roots greater than two (2) inches in diameter, which are damaged or exposed, shall be cleanly saw cut and covered with soil in conformance with ISA standards.

(d) Excavation or landscape preparation within the protective barriers shall be limited to the use of hand tools and small hand-held power tools and shall not be used at a depth that could cause root damage to the parkway tree.

(e) No attachments or wires other than those of a protective or nondamaging nature shall be attached to a parkway tree.

(f) No equipment or debris of any kind shall be placed within the protective barriers. No fuel, paint, solvent, oil, thinner, asphalt, cement, grout or any other construction chemical shall be stored or allowed in any manner to enter within the protective barrier.

(g) If access within the protective barrier around a parkway tree is required during the construction process, the route shall be covered with a six (6) inch mulch bed in the drip line area, and the area shall be aerated and fertilized at the conclusion of the construction.

(h) When the existing grade around a parkway tree is to be raised, drain tiles shall be laid over the soil to drain liquids away from the trunk, as determined by the Manager or his or her designee. The number of drains shall depend upon the soil material. Lighter sandy soil and porous gravelly material require fewer drains than heavy nonporous soils like clay. Dry wells shall be large enough to allow for maximum growth of the tree trunk. Dry well walls shall be constructed of materials that permit passage of air and water.

(i) When the existing grade around a parkway tree is to be lowered, either by terracing or by a retaining wall, a combination may be used to lower grades, as determined by the Manager or his or her designee. With either method, the area within the drip line shall be left at the original grade. The retaining wall shall be porous to allow for aeration.

(j) Parkway trees that have been destroyed or have received major damage during construction shall be replaced prior to final inspection and subject to the Manager’s direction and approval as to size, variety and species. (Ord. 07-1397, § 29; Ord. 12-1487, § 29)

3929 Hardscape.
In keeping with the City’s policies for protecting and preserving the health and well-being of our urban forest while providing for the safety of our citizens, the following guidelines have been established for correcting potentially hazardous situations that result from tree roots disturbing nearby hardscape. (Ord. 07-1397, § 30; Ord. 12-1487, § 30)

3930 Hardscape Damage.
There are several factors that must be considered in determining the course of action necessary for addressing hardscape damage concerns that involve City trees. These actions are driven by the extent of the damages, and whether the damages are located on private property. The Public Works Division shall inspect all hardscape damage. If the hardscape concerns include potential damage to private property, the matter shall be referred to the Manager for evaluation. Upon initial inspection of the area, staff must determine what course of action is necessary to respond to the problem. The following are the most commonly occurring hardscape problems, and the courses of action that shall be employed to rectify them:

(a) Hardscape damage is within the public right-of-way and will require a temporary asphalt ramp, followed by permanent repair of the area at a later date. Generally, an asphalt ramp should be installed if there exists a deviation in the concrete that is greater than three-fourths (3/4) of an inch.

(b) Hardscape damage is within the public right-of-way but is of such a minor nature that the damaged area can be “ground down” by a concrete grinding machine. Any deviation in the concrete of less than one-half (1/2) of an inch should be able to be rectified by grinding the raised lip down to grade. If necessary, permanent repair of the area should be scheduled for a later date.

(c) Hardscape damage is within the public right-of-way, but the nature of the damages cannot be rectified by temporary measures. Thus, permanent repair of the area will need to be scheduled based upon the potential damages for creating a public safety hazard.

(d) Hardscape damages are on private property and thereby cannot be addressed by the City. However, there are clear-cut indications that at least some of the damages that have occurred are a direct result of a tree in the public right-of-way. Thus, the resident may have reason to file a claim for damages with the City. If the resident does elect to file a claim, the Manager or his or her designee shall be responsible for evaluating the damaged area and submitting a tree assessment report to the City Clerk for inclusion with the claim file.

(e) Hardscape damages are on private property and thereby cannot be addressed by the City, and there exists no clear-cut indication that a City tree is the source of damages. Thus, the resident will be responsible for excavation of the damaged area, for the purpose of exposing any invasive roots, should they wish to file a claim for damages with the City.

(f) Hardscape damage is on private property, and is clearly caused by a City-owned street tree in the public right-of-way.

(g) Upon excavation of the area, it is the resident’s responsibility to contact the Public Works Division and schedule an evaluation and assessment of the damage. The Manager’s designee shall be responsible for submitting this assessment report to the City Clerk for inclusion with the resident’s claim.

(h) Once a course of action has been determined, staff shall be responsible for providing written notification to the involved parties informing them of staff’s findings and of what measures they or the City will need to take to rectify the problem. (Ord. 07-1397, § 31; Ord. 12-1487, § 31)

3931 Repairing or Replacing Hardscape.
The general policy that shall be observed when repairing or replacing hardscape adjacent to a public right-of-way tree is that the health and integrity of the tree shall be taken into consideration before work commences. Every effort shall be made to protect the tree from root or trunk damage. (Ord. 07-1397, § 32; Ord. 12-1487, § 32)

3932 New Hardscape Installation.
Several alternatives are available for accommodating the installation of new hardscape without severely infringing upon a tree’s root system. The Public Works Division shall first evaluate any hardscape installation that may involve the removal of an extensive portion of a tree’s root system. If it is determined by the Public Works Division that the removal of the offending roots might jeopardize public safety or the health or integrity of the tree, then one (1) of the following alternatives should be considered:

(a) Offset. An offset is the tapering or reduction of a sidewalk’s size down to a width no less than forty-eight (48) inches.

(b) Ramping. A sidewalk may be constructed to ramp over offending roots, as long as the slope of the grade does not exceed one (1) foot of elevation change within a span of twelve (12) linear feet.

(c) Reconfiguration. Sidewalks do not need to be constructed in a straight line. If the public easement can accommodate it, a sidewalk may be reconfigured to curve around a tree in a suitable manner.

(d) Removal. If no other hardscape installation alternative is feasible, a tree may be removed, as long as it complies with the tree removal criteria established in this Chapter. (Ord. 07-1397, § 33; Ord. 12-1487, § 33)

3933 Interference with Work.
No person shall interfere, or cause any person to interfere, with the Manager or persons acting under his or her authority while engaged in planting, mulching, pruning, spraying, treating, trimming or removing any parkway tree, shrub or plant or in the removal of any stone, cement or other substance or plant material from or adjacent to the trunk of any parkway tree. No person shall injure or destroy any parkway tree by any means, including, but not limited to, the following:

(a) Constructing concrete, asphalt, brick or gravel sidewalk, raised planter or otherwise filling up the ground area around any tree so as to substantially shut off air, light, or water from its roots, or detrimentally restrict root growth;

(b) Piling building equipment, materials or any other substance around any tree so as to cause injury;

(c) Pouring, spraying or depositing any deleterious substance around any tree or on the surrounding ground, lawn or sidewalk;

(d) Posting of any sign, poster, notice or other object on any tree, tree stake or guard;

(e) Causing any wire charged with electricity to come in contact with any tree; or

(f) Causing any fire or burning near or around any tree. (Ord. 07-1397, § 34; Ord. 12-1487, § 34)

3934 Penalties.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or corporation to violate any provision of or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this Chapter. Any person, firm, partnership or corporation violating any provision of this Chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine of $1,000 or the diminishment of the tree’s value as set forth in the current edition of the Guide Per Plant Appraisal (Council of Tree and Landscape Appraiser, 10th Edition), whichever is greater, by imprisonment not exceeding six (6) months, or both. Each and every person, firm, partnership, or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or any portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm, partnership or corporation, and shall be subject to penalties and imprisonment provided in this Section.

(a) In the event more than one (1) tree subject to the provisions of this Chapter is located adjacent to a parcel of property, each tree that is removed or trimmed shall be considered a separate violation.

(b) Removal or trimming of any parkway tree or plant is a misdemeanor and shall require replacement within sixty (60) days of notice by the City. Such replacement shall be in accordance with the parkway tree guidelines.

(c) Violation of this Chapter during construction activity may result in an immediate stop work order issued by the City. (Ord. 07-1397, § 35; Ord. 12-1487, § 35)

3935 Violation – Nuisance – Abatement.
The violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the City through a civil process by means of a restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or in any other manner provided for by law for the abatement of nuisances. (Ord. 07-1397, § 36; Ord. 12-1487, § 36)









EXHIBIT “F”

CHAPTER 10
SIDEWALK VENDING
Sections:

§ 31000    Purpose.

§ 31001    Definitions.

§ 31002    Sidewalk Vending Operational Requirements.

§ 31003    Violation – Penalties.

31000 Purpose.
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for a regulatory program applicable to sidewalk vendors within the City that is consistent with State law and that protects and promotes the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 18-1828, § 5)

31001 Definitions.
As used in this Chapter:

(a) “Operate,” when used in reference to a sidewalk vendor, means to vend.

(b) “Sidewalk vendor” means a person who vends from a pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other nonmotorized conveyance, or from one’s person (including from a pack or basket carried by the person), upon a public sidewalk, pedestrian path or walkway, or any other public area in the City.

(c) “Stand” means any pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other nonmotorized conveyance used by a sidewalk vendor for purposes of vending.

(d) “Roaming sidewalk vendor” means a sidewalk vendor who moves from place to place and stops only to complete a transaction.

(e) “Stationary sidewalk vendor” means a sidewalk vendor who vends from a fixed location.

(f) “Temporary special permit” means any permit issued by the City for the temporary use of, or encroachment on, the sidewalk or other public area, including, but not limited to, an encroachment permit, special event permit, or temporary event permit, for purposes including, but not limited to, filming, parades, or outdoor concerts.

(g) “Vend” means to sell, offer for sale, display, barter, exchange, or offer for barter or exchange food, beverages or merchandise. (Ord. 18-1828, § 5)

31002 Sidewalk Vending Operational Requirements.
(a) No sidewalk vendor shall operate without first obtaining and maintaining a valid City business license and a sidewalk vendor’s permit issued pursuant to Chapter 3 of Article VI. Application for the business license shall be made by submitting the information required pursuant to CMC 6336. Application for the sidewalk vendor’s permit shall be made by submitting the information required pursuant to CMC 63143(b).

(b) Each sidewalk vendor shall display the required sidewalk vendor’s permit in a conspicuous location on the sidewalk vendor’s person or stand at all times while the sidewalk vendor is operating.

(c) Operating Restrictions. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Chapter for any sidewalk vendor to:

(1) Operate outside the hours authorized in the required sidewalk vendor’s permit, which hours shall not exceed: (a) in residential zones, 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.; and (b) in nonresidential zones, the hours established pursuant to any City-imposed operating hours limitation applicable to all other businesses or uses on the street on which the sidewalk vendor is operating;

(2) Operate as a stationary sidewalk vendor at any time in any residential zone;

(3) Leave unattended any stand at any time while operating, or store, park or leave unattended any stand at any time outside of operating hours on any public sidewalk, pedestrian walkway, or other public place;

(4) Sell food without first obtaining and thereafter maintaining the required permit issued by the Los Angeles County Department of Public Health or any other permit or license required pursuant to Part 7 (commencing with Section 113700) of Division 104 of the Health and Safety Code;

(5) Sell food for immediate consumption unless there is a litter receptacle available for patrons’ use;

(6) Leave any location without first disposing of all trash or refuse generated by operating in such location;

(7) Allow any items used in connection with the operation to be placed or stored anywhere other than in, on, or under the stand, or on the person of the sidewalk vendor;

(8)  Operate from a stand other than the stand authorized pursuant to the sidewalk vendor’s permit;

(9)  Set up, maintain, or permit the use of any additional table, crate, carton, rack, or any other device to increase the selling or displaying capacity of a stand without having obtained express authorization to do so pursuant to the required sidewalk vendor’s permit;

(10) Solicit or conduct business with any person in a motorized vehicle;

(11) Sell anything other than the specific food, beverages or merchandise authorized to be sold as part of the operation pursuant to the required sidewalk vendor’s permit;

(12) Create any unnecessary noise in violation of CMC 4101, including but not limited to CMC 4101(g), except that such conduct, when engaged in by a sidewalk vendor while operating, shall be punishable only by the administrative fines established pursuant to this chapter;

(13) Operate within: (a) fifty (50) feet of any fire hydrant; (b) twenty-five (25) feet of any transit stop; (c) twenty-five (25) feet of any building entrance; (d) fifteen (15) feet of the outer edge of any driveway or vehicular entrance to public or private property; or (e) within five (5) feet of any other sidewalk vendor on any public sidewalk, pedestrian path or walkway or other area intended for ingress or egress;

(14) Operate on any public sidewalk or pedestrian path or walkway in a manner that does not maintain four (4) feet in width of clear space on the sidewalk, path or walkway;

(15) Operate in any public street (i.e., in the street itself and not on the sidewalk), or on any median;

(16) Operate as a stationary sidewalk vendor in any park owned or operated by the City, where the City or other park operator has an agreement in place with a concessionaire that exclusively permits the sale of food or merchandise by the concessionaire, during the hours the concessionaire is open in the park;

(17) Operate as a stationary sidewalk vendor within any area of a City park that is within fifty (50) feet of an abutting residential dwelling;

(18) Operate within a parking lot, except as expressly authorized pursuant to the required sidewalk vendor’s permit based on a finding that such operation will not obstruct vehicular ingress, egress, or parking, or adversely affect public health or safety;

(19) Operate within five hundred (500) feet of a certified farmers’ market or a permitted swap meet during the operating hours of that certified farmers’ market or swap meet;

(20) Operate within five hundred (500) feet of an area designated for a temporary special permit issued by the City during the duration of the permit; provided, that any notice, business interruption mitigation, or other rights provided to affected businesses or property owners under the temporary special permit are also provided to the sidewalk vendor, if such vendor is specifically permitted to operate in the area pursuant to a sidewalk vendor’s permit;

(21) Operate in any area or manner that would obstruct or interfere with disability access standards or accessibility to any facility or area that is provided pursuant to requirements of or in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990;

(22) Operate without general liability insurance meeting the minimum policy limits and other criteria established by the City Manager or designee;

(23) Operate in violation of any applicable law or regulation. (Ord. 18-1828, § 5)

31003 Violation – Penalties.
(a) Any violation of this Chapter or any term of a sidewalk vendor’s permit, except a violation for operating without a required sidewalk vendor’s permit, is punishable only as follows:

(1) An administrative fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation.

(2) An administrative fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation within one (1) year of the first violation.

(3) An administrative fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional violation within one (1) year of the first violation.

(4) Rescission of the sidewalk vendor’s permit for the remaining term of that permit upon the fourth violation or subsequent violations within one (1) year of the first violation.

(b) A violation for operating without a required sidewalk vendor’s permit is punishable only as follows:

(1) An administrative fine not exceeding $250.00 for a first violation.

(2) An administrative fine not exceeding $500.00 for a second violation within one (1) year of the first violation.

(3) An administrative fine not exceeding $1,000 for each additional violation within one (1) year of the first violation.

(c) Upon proof that a sidewalk vendor possesses the required sidewalk vendor’s permit, any administrative fine imposed pursuant to subsection (b) of this Section for operating without a required sidewalk vendor’s permit shall be reduced to the applicable fine amount set forth in subsection (a) of this Section.

(d) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, all fines imposed pursuant to this Section shall be subject to an ability-to-pay determination as described in Government Code Section 51039(f) and as amended. Concurrent with issuance of any citation for administrative fines pursuant to this Section, the citing officer shall provide the sidewalk vendor with notice of his or her right to request an ability-to-pay determination, and shall make available to the sidewalk vendor instructions or other materials for requesting the ability-to-pay determination.

(e) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, no violation of this Chapter shall be punished as a criminal offense. (Ord. 18-1828, § 5)

ARTICLE IV
PUBLIC PEACE
Chapters:

1    Prohibited Conduct – Offenses

2    Alcoholic Beverages

3    Firearms and Dangerous Weapons

4    Solicitation and Distribution of Literature

5    Removal of Abandoned Vehicles

6    Yard Sale Control

7    Mobilehome Space Rent Control

8    Sale and Display of Narcotic and Other Paraphernalia

9    Burglar Alarms

10    Public Lodging Regulations

11    Secondhand Smoke Control

12    Accumulation of Vehicles for Sale

13    Loitering by Criminal Street Gangs

14    Spectators Prohibited at Illegal Speed Contests or Exhibitions of Speed

15    Residency and Loitering Restrictions for Sex Offenders

16    Unmanned Aircraft Systems

CHAPTER 1
PROHIBITED CONDUCT – OFFENSES
Sections:

§ 4100    Disorderly Conduct.

§ 4101    Unnecessary Noises.

§ 4102    Loitering.

§ 4103    Gates.

§ 4104    Aircraft.

§ 4105    Illegal Dumping.

§ 4106    Damaging Property.

§ 4107    False Reports.

§ 4108    False Impersonation of Sheriff or District Attorney or City Prosecutor.

§ 4109    Gate-Crashing.

§ 4110    Radios Receiving Police Calls.

§ 4111    Trespassing.

§ 4112    Picking Flowers.

§ 4113    Closing Hours – Amusement and Entertainment Places.

§ 4114    Curfew for Minors.

§ 4115    Billiard and Pool Halls.

§ 4116    Interference with Special Events.

§ 4117    Throwing Missiles.

§ 4118    Street Vendors Near Schools.

§ 4118.1    Peddling from Vehicles in Parks.

§ 4118.2    Selling Ice Cream and Certain Food Products from Vehicles in Public Streets.

§ 4118.3    Vending of Merchandise on Public Property, Stadiums, Athletic Fields, Community Centers or Abandoned Property.

§ 4118.4    Vending of Merchandise on Public Property, Stadiums, Athletic Fields, Community Centers or Abandoned Property – Exclusions.

§ 4118.5    Vending of Merchandise on Public Property, Stadiums, Athletic Fields, Community Centers or Abandoned Property – Violation – Penalty.

§ 4118.6    Vending of Merchandise on Public Property, Stadiums, Athletic Fields, Community Centers or Abandoned Property – Impoundment.

§ 4119    Vehicles – Commercial Advertising.

§ 4120    Handbills.

§ 4121    Disorderly House.

§ 4122    Repealed.

§ 4123    Soliciting in City or County Buildings.

§ 4124    Unsightliness.

§ 4125    Vendors on Streets.

§ 4126    Repealed.

§ 4127    Gambling and Related Activities Prohibited.

§ 4127.1    Gaming – Betting.

§ 4127.2    Permitting on premises.

§ 4127.3    Attendance.

§ 4127.4    Severability.

§ 4127.5    Limitation.

§ 4127.6    Destruction of devices.

§ 4127.7    Money from destroyed devices.

§ 4127.8    Release from court custody.

§ 4127.9    Applicability.

§ 4128    Gambling Information.

§ 4129    Unauthorized Use of Shopping Carts Prohibited.

§ 4129.5    Abandoned Shopping Carts – Declaration of Nuisance.

§ 4129.5.1    Abandoned Shopping Carts – Definitions.

§ 4129.5.2    Abandoned Shopping Carts – Identification of Shopping Carts.

§ 4129.5.3    Abandoned Shopping Carts – Impoundment of Shopping Carts with Identification Signs.

§ 4129.5.4    Abandoned Shopping Carts – Impoundment of Shopping Carts without Identification Signs.

§ 4129.5.5    Abandoned Shopping Carts – Mandatory Abandoned Shopping Cart Prevention Plan.

§ 4129.5.6    Abandoned Shopping Carts – Submittal of Mandatory Abandoned Shopping Cart Prevention Plan for Approval or Denial.

§ 4129.5.7    Abandoned Shopping Carts – Modification of an Abandoned Shopping Cart Prevention Plan.

§ 4129.5.8    Abandoned Shopping Carts – Exemption from Mandatory Abandoned Shopping Cart Prevention Plan Obligation.

§ 4129.5.9    Abandoned Shopping Carts – Renewal of Mandatory Abandoned Shopping Cart Prevention Plan Exemption.

§ 4129.5.10    Abandoned Shopping Carts – Denial of Renewal or Revocation of a Mandatory Abandoned Shopping Cart Prevention Plan Exemption.

§ 4129.5.11    Abandoned Shopping Carts – Hearing and Appeal Procedure for Renewal of Exemption.

§ 4129.5.12    Abandoned Shopping Carts – Noncompliance – Enforcement.

§ 4129.5.13    Abandoned Shopping Carts – Hearing to Contest a Fine.

§ 4129.5.14    Abandoned Shopping Carts – Location of Impounded Shopping Carts.

§ 4129.5.15    Abandoned Shopping Carts – Disposition of Impounded Shopping Carts.

§ 4129.5.16    Abandoned Shopping Carts – Sale of Abandoned Shopping Carts.

§ 4129.5.17    Shopping Cart Collection Services May Be Performed by City-Appointed Contractor.

§ 4129.5.18    Administration and Enforcement.

§ 4130    Repealed.

§ 4131    Use of City Seal – Restrictions.

§ 4132    Use of City Seal – Exceptions.

§ 4133    City Seal – Commercial Use of.

§ 4134    Imitation of City Seal Prohibited.

§ 4135    Disposal Procedures for Syringes, Hypodermic Needles, Drugs or Medical Supplies.

§ 4136    Item Pricing in Retail Grocery Stores – Definitions.

§ 4136.1    Same – Item Prices.

§ 4136.2    Same – Penalties.

§ 4136.3    Same – Unintentional Error.

§ 4137    Park Hours and Parking.

§ 4138    Use of Park Picnic Shelters.

§ 4139    Use of Parks by Large Groups.

§ 4139.1    Amplified Music in Public Parks.

§ 4139.2    Skate Park Regulations.

§ 4140    Nudity and Partial Nudity in Public Places Prohibited.

§ 4140.1    Legislative Authorization.

§ 4140.2    Theater – Definition.

§ 4140.3    Prohibition.

§ 4140.4    Prohibition.

§ 4140.5    Accessories.

§ 4140.6    Exceptions.

§ 4141    Display of Matter Harmful to Minors.

§ 4142    Reserved.

§ 4143    Reserved.

§ 4144    Threats with Replica Firearms.

§ 4144.1    Replica Firearms and Firearms Definitions.

§ 4144.2    Same – Threats Prohibited.

§ 4145    Disturbing the Peace.

§ 4146    Camping on Public Property.

§ 4147    Sleeping on Public Property.

§ 4148    Controlled Substances.

4100 Disorderly Conduct.
No person shall engage in any disorderly or boisterous conduct, or disturb the peace by assaulting, striking or fighting, or be found in an intoxicated or drunken condition upon any premises within the City, or expose his person or any part thereof in any place in the City where there are other persons to be offended or annoyed thereby, or make in any place or suffer to be made on his premises or upon premises under his control, any disorder or tumult, to the disturbance of the public peace, or utter in the presence of two (2) or more persons, any bawdy, lewd or obscene words or epithets or address another by any words, language or expressions having a tendency to create a breach of the peace, or utter or use within the hearing of one or more persons, any seditious language. (Ord. 2, § 4100)

4101 Unnecessary Noises.
No person shall make, or cause or suffer, or permit to be made upon any premises owned, occupied or controlled by him, any unnecessary noises or sounds which are physically annoying to persons of ordinary sensitiveness or which are so harsh or so prolonged or unnatural or unusual in their use, time, or place as to occasion unnecessary discomfort to any persons within the neighborhood from which said noises emanate or so as to interfere with the peace and comfort of the residents or their guests, or the operators or customers in places of business in the vicinity, or which may detrimentally or adversely affect such residences or places of business. The following acts, among others, are declared to be prima facie evidence of violations of this Section:

(a) Unnecessary Noises. The unnecessary making of, or knowingly and unnecessarily permitting to be made, any loud, boisterous or unusual noise, disturbance or commotion in any hotel, motel, apartment house, court, rooming house, auto court, trailer camp, dwelling, place of business or other structure, or upon any public street, park or other place or building, except the ordinary and usual sounds, noises or commotion incident to the operation with the usual and normal standard of practice applicable thereto and in a manner which will not disturb the peace and comfort of adjacent residences or which will not detrimentally affect the operators or customers of adjacent places of business.

(b) Radios, Phonographs, Etc. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any loudspeaker, radio, musical instrument, phonograph, compact disc player, tape player, television set, or instrument or device similar to those heretofore specifically mentioned for the production or reproduction of sound in volume sufficiently loud as to disturb the peace, quiet or repose of persons of ordinary and normal sensitiveness who are in the immediate vicinity of such machine or device. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 2 of Article I of this Code.

(c) Band or Orchestral Rehearsals. The conducting of or carrying on of band or orchestral concerts or rehearsals or practice between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in any area, building or structure wherein the adjoining occupied building used for human habitation is nearer than two hundred (200) feet. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 2 of Article I of this Code.

(d) Loudspeakers and Amplifiers for Advertising. The playing or operating, or permitting the playing or operating of any musical instrument, radio, television set, or phonograph, or the operation and use of any loudspeaker or amplifying device on any public street, or in any public place, or outside of any doorway of any building, facing upon a business street in the City of Carson for the purpose of advertising or in conjunction with any commercial venture, without a permit being granted therefor by the City Administrator upon application filed with him and hearing held, after at least forty-eight (48) hours’ notice to applicant of such hearing, unless notice is waived; provided, that if said application is denied, applicant may within fifteen (15) days of the date of said order of denial, appeal from said decision of the City Administrator to the City Council, which body shall hold a hearing thereon upon the notice to applicant in the same manner as the hearing before said City Administrator.

(e) Engines, Motors and Mechanical Devices Near Residential District. The operation between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any electric motor or engine or the use or operation of any automobile, truck, motorcycle, machine or mechanical device or other contrivance or facility unless such motor, engine, automobile, truck, motorcycle, machine or mechanical device is enclosed within a sound insulated structure so as to prevent noise and sound from being plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet from such structure, or within ten (10) feet of any residence. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 2 of Article I of this Code.

(f) Noises by Animals. It shall be unlawful for any person having charge, care, custody, or control of any animal to permit such animal to emit any excessive noise which is disturbing or offensive. The City shall enforce this subsection (f) as follows:

(1) Complaints must be submitted in writing and shall include the name, address, and telephone number of the complainant, as well as the address of the animal owner and description of the noise.

(2) Upon receiving a complaint involving whining, barking, howling, screeching or similar animal noise, the City shall cause the following to be performed:

(i) Issue notice of noise complaint to the animal owner or custodian of the animal advising such person of the alleged noise and requesting immediate steps to abate the same.

(ii) Notice shall adequately describe the noise complaint to assist the animal owner in recognizing and correcting the problem.

(iii) If a second complaint is received, the City shall issue a notice apprising the animal owner or custodian of the complaint and directing the same to abate said noise. Such notice shall contain a provision that within five (5) days of receipt thereof the animal owner or custodian may request a hearing with a City representative to discuss the Notice of Noncompliance.

(iv) Should the problem remain unresolved by the end of the time limit noted in the Notice of Noncompliance, a second notice with a five (5) day limit shall be issued.

(v) If the problem is not resolved at the end of this five (5) day period a citation shall be issued to the owner or custodian of the animal.

(g) Amplifying Devices for Hawkers and Peddlers. The operation of any vehicle or instrumentality equipped with, or to which is attached and used, any loudspeaker or sound-amplifying device, or the operation of any device or instrumentality, either mobile or stationary, through which device the spoken word, or other sounds are produced or reproduced in such increased volume as to be clearly audible to a person of normal hearing under normal and ordinary conditions, for a distance of more than two hundred (200) feet, from the source of such sound, or between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. without first obtaining a permit for such operation from the City Administrator, upon application filed with him, and hearing held, after at least forty-eight (48) hours’ notice to the applicant of such hearing, unless notice is waived, and provided that if said application is denied, applicant may, within fifteen (15) days from the date of said order of denial, appeal from said decision of the City Administrator to the City Council, which shall hold a hearing thereon upon notice to applicant in the same manner as the hearing before said City Administrator.

(h) Motor Vehicles. The racing of the engine of any motor vehicle or needless bringing to a sudden start or stop any motor vehicle.

(i) Pile Drivers, Hammers, Etc. The operation between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, hoist or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise.

(j) Construction or Repair of Buildings. The erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration, construction or repair of any building other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the City Engineer, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three (3) days while the emergency condition continues, and which permit may be renewed for periods of three (3) days or less while the emergency continues; if the City Engineer should determine that the public health, safety, comfort and convenience will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of streets, highways, or other sites within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or any part thereof, or on Sunday, and that substantial loss or inconvenience would result from any party in interest denied permission to do so, he may grant permission for such work, on any day, or at such times within such hours as he shall fix in accordance with such determination.

(k) Yelling, Shouting, Etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets or in a public place, whether amplified or unamplified, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 2 of Article I of this Code.

(l) Vulgar or Obscene Language Through Loudspeakers. The uttering through any loudspeaker, sound-making or sound-amplifying device of any obscene, vulgar, profane or indecent language, or uttering language intending to, or which would reasonably be expected to, incite riot, destruction or damage to property or injury to any person, or intended to or which would reasonably be expected to incite others to do unlawful acts or which utterances would reasonably be expected to create a condition which would result in a clear and present danger of the commission of such unlawful acts.

(m) Loud Parties or Gatherings. Generating any noise from a party or gathering of two (2) or more people that can be heard from fifty (50) feet away. The City shall enforce this subsection (m) as follows:

(1) When a party or gathering of two (2) or more people occurs on private property and is determined by a law enforcement officer at the scene to constitute a violation of the California Penal Code or the Carson Municipal Code, or is otherwise a threat to the public peace, health, safety, or welfare due to the magnitude of the crowd, noise, disturbance or unruly behavior generated by the party or gathering, or excessive traffic, or destruction of property, then the law enforcement officer shall take such actions and give such direction as is necessary to abate the violation or condition and shall advise the responsible person orally and in writing that, if additional law enforcement personnel or emergency service providers appropriately respond on behalf of the City to abate the condition, the responsible person and the owner or occupant of the property shall be held liable for the cost to the City of providing such services. Such direction and advice shall be given to the person responsible for the party or gathering or to the owner or occupant of the property involved. If the condition is not voluntarily abated and if additional law enforcement personnel or emergency service providers appropriately respond on behalf of the City in order to disperse the party or gathering, quell any disturbance, direct traffic, cite illegally parked vehicles or otherwise respond, then the cost to the City of such additional services shall be reimbursed to the City as provided in subsection (m)(2) of this Section.

(2) The person or persons responsible for a party or gathering described in subsection (m)(1) of this Section, or the owner or occupant of the property on which the party or gathering is held, or, if any such person is a minor, the parents or legal guardian of the minor shall be jointly and severally liable for the following costs incurred by the City:

(i) The actual cost to the City of law enforcement services and emergency services, excluding the initial response provided by a law enforcement officer, in order to abate any of the conditions described in subsection (m)(1) of this Section;

(ii) Damage to public property resulting from such law enforcement or emergency response; and

(iii) Injuries to any law enforcement or emergency service personnel involved in such law enforcement or emergency response.

(3) The Director of Public Safety shall calculate all such costs and shall advise the City Administrator. The person or persons specified above in subsection (m)(2) of this Section shall be billed by the City Administrator for the total cost, and payment shall be due and payable within fifteen (15) days of the billing date. If the amount due is not paid, the City may collect the debt, as well as any fees and costs incurred in its collection, pursuant to all applicable provisions of law.

Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Section shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 2 of Article I of this Code. (Ord. 2, § 4101; Ord. 49, § 1; Ord. 78-450, § 1; Ord. 79-479, § 2; Ord. 93-1006, § 2; Ord. 95-1069, §§ 1 – 4)

4102 Loitering.
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter or to stand or sit in or upon any public highway, alley, sidewalk or crosswalk so as to in any manner hinder or obstruct the free passage therein or thereon of persons or vehicles passing along the same, or so as in any manner to annoy or molest persons passing along the same.

It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter or to stand or sit in or at the entrance of any church, hall, theater or place of public assemblage so as in any manner to obstruct such entrance. (Ord. 2, § 4102)

4103 Gates.
It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any gate in any fence in such manner that such gate may be opened outward over any portion of any public highway open for either pedestrians or vehicular traffic.

It shall be unlawful to cause or permit any gate in any fence to be or remain opened outward over any portion of any public highway open for either pedestrian or vehicular traffic. (Ord. 2, § 4103)

4104 Aircraft.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to drive, or cause to be driven, or to conduct, or cause to be conducted any aircraft in the air at a distance of less than four hundred (400) feet from the ground, except when said aircraft is ascending from or descending to the ground. (Ord. 2, § 4104)

4105 Illegal Dumping.
No person shall place, deposit, throw or dump, or cause to be placed, deposited, thrown or dumped any garbage, swill, cans, bottles, paper, ashes, dirt, sand, rock, cement, glass, metal, carcass of any dead animal, offal, refuse, plants, cuttings or trash, or rubbish of any nature whatsoever, or any nauseous, offensive matter in or upon any public or private road, highway, street, alley, public way, or any public or private property of any kind whatsoever.

Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Section shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 2 of Article I of this Code. (Ord. 2, § 4105; Ord. 71-479, § 3)

4106 Damaging Property.
No person shall willfully or maliciously break or destroy any window, windowsash, door, blind or pane of glass of any occupied or unoccupied house or outhouse in the City or enter any unoccupied house or outhouse and commit any nuisance therein or break, destroy or injure anything therein or any part of said house or outhouse, of any fence, or improvement whatever, or aid, abet or assist anyone to commit such nuisance or injure said property. (Ord. 2, § 4106)

4107 False Reports.
No person shall inform or report to a peace officer that a crime has been committed whether a felony or a misdemeanor, unless he, in good faith, believes that such crime has been committed. (Ord. 2, § 4107)

4108 False Impersonation of Sheriff or District Attorney or City Prosecutor.
No person shall falsely impersonate or cause or permit to be falsely impersonated the Sheriff, District Attorney or City Prosecutor, or member of the State Highway Patrol, or a deputy of, representative of, or connected with either. No person shall wear the uniform of the Sheriff, State Highway Patrol, or deputies thereof, or any part of such uniform or any uniform part of which is similar to the uniform of the Sheriff or State Highway Patrol or deputies thereof, unless such a person is a member of such organization. (Ord. 2, § 4108)

4109 Gate-Crashing.
No person, with intent gratuitously to avail himself of the entertainment or recreation furnished or the privileges conferred therein, shall enter any theater, stadium, athletic club, ball park, golf course, golf club, tennis club, or other place of amusement, entertainment or recreation, for admission to which an admission fee or membership fee is charged, without first paying such admission fee or membership fee. Any person who is a bona fide guest of a member of any club may enter such club in accordance with the rules thereof. Any person may enter any place which is within the purview of this Section with the consent of the owner or manager thereof. This Section shall not be deemed to apply to the entry into any such place by a law enforcement officer acting within the scope and course of his official duties. (Ord. 2, § 4109)

4110 Radios Receiving Police Calls.
No person shall equip a vehicle with a radio capable of receiving Police, Sheriff, State Highway Patrol, Forester and Fire Wardens’ Calls. (Ord. 2, § 4110)

4111 Trespassing.
No person shall trespass in, upon, on or across the property of another, without the permission and consent of the person in charge or control thereof; provided, that such person shall have posted at each of the corners of the property a notice in writing, upon either a metallic or wooden sign, or other substantial material, which said sign shall be at least one (1) square foot in area, and shall be placed three (3) feet above the normal level of the ground, and upon which said posted notice there appears in legible letters, at least two (2) inches in height, the words, “PRIVATE PROPERTY – NO TRESPASSING,” and such other words as may be desired indicating that trespassers are subject to prosecution. The sign shall have either a white or black base, and in the event the white base is used, the letters shall be in black, and if a black base is used, the letters shall be in white; provided, further, that in the event said property exceeds a total area of one (1) acre, in addition to the posting of such notices at the corners thereof, there shall be posted at intervals of three hundred (300) feet, or less, on or near the boundary lines of said property, notices of similar character.

These provisions shall have no application to a trespass committed by any officially authorized peace officer or law enforcement agent when such trespass is committed in the execution of such officer or agent’s official duty, nor to any person visiting or calling at the residence or place of business of another person for the purpose of transacting any legitimate business. (Ord. 2, § 4111)

4112 Picking Flowers.
No person shall pick any flower or flowers growing in any public park, or place, of the City, except by the express authorization of the Superintendent thereof. (Ord. 2, § 4112)

4113 Closing Hours – Amusement and Entertainment Places.
No person shall carry on or assist in carrying on any amusement or entertainment to which the public is invited, or in which the public may participate, at any time between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.

1. Same. Special Permission. Any person who shall desire to carry on or conduct such amusement or entertainment for one (1) night only, during the hours prohibited by the foregoing Section, may apply in writing to the Sheriff for permission so to do and the Sheriff may grant such permission to such applicant when in his discretion the conduct of such amusement or entertainment at such time shall not be detrimental to the public health, safety, morals and welfare. The Sheriff shall either grant or deny such application within three (3) days after such application has been presented to him and if he does not grant the same within such period such application shall be deemed to have been denied.

2. Same. Application to City Council. Any person who shall desire to carry on or conduct any such amusement or entertainment, during the hours prohibited by the foregoing sections and for a longer period than one (1) night, shall file a written application therefor with the City Clerk for presentation to the City Council. Such application shall contain a detailed statement of the type of amusement or entertainment which the applicant desires to carry on or conduct and a statement of the reasons which in his opinion warrant the granting of the same. Such application shall be filed with the City Clerk at least five (5) days prior to the date upon which the applicant desires the granting of such permission and five (5) days prior to the meeting of the City Council next succeeding the filing of such application. Thereupon the City Clerk shall refer said application to the Sheriff for investigation and his recommendation thereon. The City Council may grant such permission to such applicant when in its discretion the nightly conduct of such amusement or entertainment will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, morals, or welfare. (Ord. 2, § 4113)

4114 Curfew for Minors.
(a) Every minor who is present in or upon any public or private street, road, drive, alley, or trail; any public or community park or recreation area; any public ground, place, or building; or any vacant lot or abandoned or vacant building between the hour of 10:00 p.m. and the time of sunrise of the following day is guilty of an infraction unless the minor meets one (1) of the exceptions set forth in subsection (c) of this Section.

(b) Parental Responsibility. Every custodial person who allows or permits a minor in his or her custody to violate any provision of this Section is guilty of an infraction.

(c) This Section shall not apply if the minor is:

(1) Accompanied by a custodial person or by the minor’s spouse over eighteen (18) years of age;

(2) On an errand directed by, and in possession of a written excuse from, a custodial person or spouse over eighteen (18) years of age;

(3) Engaged in or going directly to or returning directly from a school-approved activity or one that is supervised by school personnel; a medical appointment; a religious activity; or a lawful educational or recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a school, a public agency, a civic organization, or a similar entity that takes responsibility for the child;

(4) Engaged in a lawful employment activity or in a place in connection with or as required by a business, trade, profession, or occupation in which the minor is lawfully engaged, or going directly to or returning directly from such activity;

(5) Engaged in or going directly to or returning directly from any other lawful activity with written permission from a custodial person or spouse over the age of eighteen (18) years of age;

(6) Involved in an emergency or seeking medical assistance;

(7) Exercising rights protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution or Article 1 of the California Constitution, including but not limited to: free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and freedom of assembly;

(8) In the right-of-way abutting the minor’s residence;

(9) In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;

(10) Emancipated pursuant to State law and California Family Code Section 7000, et seq., including but not limited to the following reasons: married or in the military service; or

(11) Homeless.

(d) Community Service or Parenting Classes for First Offense. On a first offense, the Court may order community service or parenting classes instead of a fine, as may be appropriate.

(e) Penalties. A violation of this Section constitutes an infraction subject to the penalties provided in CMC 1200(b). After three (3) violations, every additional violation constitutes a misdemeanor offense subject to the penalties provided in CMC 1200(a).

(f) Definitions.

(1) The word “emergency” as used in this Section means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes but is not limited to fire, natural disaster, automobile accident, a maternity related incident or occurrence requiring travel to the hospital, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.

(2) The word “minor” as used in this Section means a person under the age of eighteen (18) years.

(3) The word “custodial person” as used in this Section means any parent or legal guardian of the minor, or any person eighteen (18) years of age or older who is authorized by such parent or legal guardian with the care and custody of the child.

(g) Enforcement Procedures. A police officer shall ask the age of an apparent offender and the reason for being on the premises or property. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that none of the exceptions set forth in subsection (c) apply.

(h) Power of Law Enforcement Officers. Nothing in this Section shall be construed as limiting in any way the power or right of law enforcement officers to make investigations, detentions or arrests as would have been permitted had this Section not been enacted. (Ord. 2, § 4114; Ord. 87-815U, § 1; Ord. 93-1008, § 2; Ord. 97-1120, § 2)

4115 Billiard and Pool Halls.
All places where billiard tables or pool tables are maintained for public use shall be and remain closed every day between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day.

No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be permitted to play at any game or lounge about or in any public billiard hall, pool hall or other gaming place within the City, unless accompanied by his parent or guardian or upon the written consent of his parent or guardian.

No owner, proprietor or operator of any such establishment shall permit a violation of the foregoing Section within his establishment. (Ord. 2, § 4115)

4116 Interference with Special Events.
A. Prohibition. No person shall interfere with, disrupt or impede a special event staged in or upon a public place.

B. Definitions. For the purpose of this Section, the following definitions shall apply:

1. “Special event” means a lawfully conducted fair, parade, exposition, procession or similar activity for which either: (i) City services are required because of interference with normal vehicular traffic or pedestrian traffic; or (ii) an extraordinary need for sanitation or other City services is reasonably expected to be generated.

2. “Interfere with, disrupt or impede a special event” means to do any of the following:

a. Block or obstruct the passage of participants, vehicles or animals in a special event along the special event route.

b. Walk, run, rollerskate, rollerblade, skateboard or ride a wheeled vehicle through, between, with or among the participants, vehicles or animals in a special event.

c. Drop, roll, throw, toss, squirt or propel a gaseous, liquid, semisolid or solid matter toward or among the participants, vehicles or animals in a special event.

d. Grab, hold, strike, hit, pull or push any participant, vehicle or animal in a special event.

e. Mount any vehicle or animal in a special event.

f. Generate, amplify or broadcast any noises or sounds using any loudspeaker, amplifier, instrument or similar device other than sounds generated solely by the human voice or body unaided by any such loudspeaker, amplifier, instrument or similar device, along a special event route while the special event is in progress at that location.

3. “Public place” means publicly owned buildings, streets, sidewalks and rights-of-way.

C. Exemptions. This Section shall not apply to persons acting in cases of bona fide emergency or with the permission of the special event organizer. (Ord. 98-1137U, § 1; Ord. 98-1137, § 1)

4117 Throwing Missiles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw upon, along, or across any public highway, road, street, alley, sidewalk, any missile capable of causing personal injury or damage to personal property at or towards any person, or any vehicle. (Ord. 2, § 4117)

4118 Street Vendors Near Schools.
No person shall sell any product other than written materials or other products protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution on any public street, sidewalk, parkway, way, alley, or highway within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of the boundaries of any public or private elementary or secondary school between the hours of 6:30 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. on any day when such school is in session. (Ord. 2, § 4118, deleted by Ord. 71-162, § 3; Ord. 71-199, § 1; Ord. 73-263, § 1; Ord. 79-479, § 3; Ord. 81-553U, § 1; Ord. 12-1491, § 1)

4118.1 Peddling from Vehicles in Parks.
No person shall peddle, hawk, sell or vend any food product or service from a vehicle within any City park at any time, unless it is in conjunction with a City event or City-associated event and that person and/or business has been specifically licensed and permitted by the City to do so. (Ord. 80-548, § 1; Ord. 88-825U; Ord. 88-825, § 4; Ord. 12-1491, § 2)

4118.2 Selling Ice Cream and Certain Food Products from Vehicles in Public Streets.
No person shall peddle, hawk, sell, vend or offer for sale ice cream; ice cream bars, cones or rolls; sherbet; sherbet bars, cones or rolls; iced fruit juice (natural or artificial) bars, cones or rolls; the food product commonly known as “cotton candy” or other spun sugar type confections; candy; carbonated drinks; or other similar food substances, products or beverages packaged or otherwise prepared or designed for an individual person’s consumption from a vehicle stopped or parked on any public street, way or alley within a residential zone or a park within the City of Carson, unless it is in conjunction with a City event or City-associated event and that person and/or business has been specifically licensed and permitted by the City to do so. This Section does not prohibit street vending of other products from vehicles in residential districts. (Ord. 88-825, § 2; Ord. 12-1491, § 3)

4118.3 Vending of Merchandise on Public Property, Stadiums, Athletic Fields, Community Centers or Abandoned Property.
(A) It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any food, beverage, good, ware, or merchandise of any kind (hereinafter, “merchandise”) from any pushcart, wagon, bicycle, or other wheeled conveyance moved by human power (hereinafter, a “nonmotorized device”) which is parked, stopped, or standing upon any public street, alley, parkway, sidewalk or other public property (hereinafter, “public property”) in the City.

(B) It is unlawful for any person to park, stop, or stand any nonmotorized device upon any public property in the City for the purpose of causing the sale of or offering for sale any merchandise.

(C) It is unlawful for any person to utilize any public property in the City for any display of merchandise for sale, whether such merchandise is placed directly upon the public property or upon a stand, table, box, bucket, blanket or other display device located on the public property, unless the City’s Building and Safety Division has first determined that such display is consistent with the requirements of all existing laws and regulations, including but not limited to the Carson Municipal Code (hereinafter, the “existing laws”) and has provided such person with a written consent which shall be kept at the location of such display and provided upon request to any person seeking to view the same.

(D) It is unlawful for any person to utilize any public property in the City for the storage of merchandise, whether such merchandise is placed directly upon the public property or upon a stand, table, box, bucket, blanket or other display device located on the public property, unless the City’s Building and Safety Division has first determined that such storage is consistent with the requirements of all existing laws and regulations, including but not limited to the Carson Municipal Code (hereinafter, the “existing laws”) and has provided such person with a written consent which shall be kept at the location of such storage and provided upon request to any person seeking to view the same.

(E) It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any goods at any stadium, athletic field or community center within the City unless the prior written consent of the owner of such property has first been filed with the City’s Building and Safety Division, the proposed activity has been reviewed and approved by the Building and Safety Division for consistency with all existing laws, and the Building and Safety Division has provided such person with a written consent which shall be kept at the location of such sale or offer of sale and provided upon request to any person seeking to see it.

(F) It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any goods on any property containing any vacant building within the City unless the prior written consent of the owner of such property has first been filed with the City’s Building and Safety Division, the proposed activity has been reviewed and approved by the Building and Safety Division for consistency with all existing laws, and the Building and Safety Division has provided such person with a written consent which shall be at the location of such sale or offer of sale and provided upon request to any person seeking to view the same.

(G) It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any goods on any property containing any occupied building within the City unless such sale is specifically permitted pursuant to the provisions of the Carson Municipal Code. (Ord. 09-1427U, § 1; Ord. 09-1427, § 1)

4118.4 Vending of Merchandise on Public Property, Stadiums, Athletic Fields, Community Centers or Abandoned Property – Exclusions.
The provisions of CMC 4118.3 shall not apply to:

(1) Any person delivering any goods where such goods have been ordered in advance for such delivery from any business located at a permanent location and which goods are being delivered from such location to the customer regardless of the point of sale thereof; or

(2) Any charitable or religious solicitation which meets all requirements of CMC 6339; or

(3) Any person selling or offering to sell any merchandise upon public property if such sale is pursuant to agreement with the City or the prior written consent of the City has otherwise first been obtained;

(4) Any person selling or offering to sell any agricultural items upon public property if such sale is within a designated Certified Farmers’ Market pursuant to an agreement with the City or the prior written consent of the City has otherwise first been obtained. (Ord. 09-1427U, § 2; Ord. 09-1427, § 2; Ord. 10-1458, § 1)

4118.5 Vending of Merchandise on Public Property, Stadiums, Athletic Fields, Community Centers or Abandoned Property – Violation – Penalty.
Unless otherwise provided, any person who violates any provision of CMC 4118.3 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be cited or arrested. A violation of any provision of CMC 4118.3 through 4118.6 may be charged as an infraction when the prosecutor files a complaint charging the offense to be an infraction. (Ord. 09-1427U, § 3; Ord. 09-1427, § 3)

4118.6 Vending of Merchandise on Public Property, Stadiums, Athletic Fields, Community Centers or Abandoned Property – Impoundment.
(A) Upon the citation or arrest of any person for violation of CMC 4118.3, the City may seize and impound all perishable and nonperishable goods in the possession of such person.

(B) Following citation or arrest pursuant to CMC 4118.5, any unlicensed person or vendor shall sign a declaration, which shall declare, under penalty of perjury, the name and contact information of the rightful owner of the seized goods.

(C) The City shall make a reasonable attempt to contact the rightful owner of any seized perishable goods, if other than the unlicensed person or vendor arrested or cited, in order to provide such rightful owner with an opportunity to retrieve the goods within twenty-four (24) hours. Such rightful owner, as set forth in the declaration described in subsection (B) of this Section, must present valid identification to the City’s Public Safety Division, before the City will release any seized goods. If the unlicensed person or vendor claims to be the rightful owner of the seized perishable goods, said person or vendor shall, as a condition precedent to retrieval of any perishable goods, present valid identification to the City’s Public Safety Division, and shall sign the declaration described in subsection (B) of this Section declaring himself or herself to be the rightful owner of the same. In such case, the City shall provide said person or vendor the opportunity to either:

(i) Contact, with one (1) phone call (which one (1) phone call shall be in addition to any other phone calls permitted by law to an arrestee), another individual to pick up the seized perishable goods; provided, that the goods must be picked up within twenty-four (24) hours; or

(ii) Sign a release allowing the City to immediately discard or donate such seized perishable goods.

(D) Prior to releasing, disposing or donating any perishable goods seized pursuant to this Section, the City shall inspect and take photographs and any necessary samples of such goods to maintain as evidence.

(E) Any perishable goods not retrieved by the rightful owner, as provided for in this Chapter, within twenty-four (24) hours of seizure of the same shall be immediately discarded by the City, with no liability to the City for such action.

(F) Nothing contained in this Section shall limit the ability of the City to cite the rightful owner of such seized perishable goods for violation of this Chapter.

(G) The City Manager, or his or her designee, may adopt reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this Chapter, in order to implement this Chapter. (Ord. 09-1427U, § 4; Ord. 09-1427, § 4)

4119 Vehicles – Commercial Advertising.
No person at any time shall operate, drive or park or cause to be operated, driven or parked upon any street, alley, parkway, sidewalk or public property within the City, without first obtaining written permission therefor from the City Clerk, any advertising vehicle, sound truck or commercial vehicle with its sound-amplifying equipment in operation or with any sound or signalling device in operation for the purpose of advertising goods, wares, or merchandise sold at or from such vehicle or for the purpose of attracting or calling attention to such vehicle. Application for the permission required hereunder shall be made to the City Clerk in accordance with such rules and regulations as he may prescribe therefor and such permission shall be given only if the vehicle will not be inimical to the public welfare, health or safety or cause such sounds or noises to be emitted or created as will disturb the peace of the citizens of the City.

1. Same. The City Clerk must refer the application to the County Sheriff and may in his discretion rely on the decision on the County Sheriff as to whether the same will be inimical to public welfare, health or safety or will disturb the peace. (Ord. 2, § 4119)

4120 Handbills.
No person shall distribute, scatter, hand out or circulate any commercial or noncommercial handbill, circular, tract, or leaflet in any place or under any circumstances which does not have printed on the cover, front or back thereof the name and address of:

1. The person who caused the same to be printed, written, compiled or manufactured;

2. The person who caused the same to be distributed;

3. In the event the person who caused the same to be printed, written, compiled or manufactured, or distributed is a fictitious person or club, there shall appear on said handbill, circular, tract or leaflet, in addition to such fictitious name, the true name of the owner, manager or agent of the person sponsoring said handbill.

No person shall post, hand out or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill, circular, tract or leaflet which reasonably shall tend to incite riot or other public disorder or which advocates disloyalty to, or the overthrow of the Government of the United States by force and arms or other unlawful means, or which urges any unlawful conduct or encourages or reasonably tends to encourage a breach of the public peace of the community.

Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Section shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 2 of Article I of this Code. (Ord. 2, § 4120, Ord. 79-479, § 3)

4121 Disorderly House.
No person shall keep a riotous or disorderly house, or permit any riotous or disorderly conduct in his house, yard, or premises connected with his house, or be guilty of any riotous or disorderly conduct in any house, yard or premises, whereby the peace, quiet or decency of the neighborhood of such house or any person may be distributed. (Ord. 2, § 4121)

4122 Repealed.
Repealed by Ord. 71-162. (Ord. 2, § 4122; Ord. 79-479, § 3)

4123 Soliciting in City or County Buildings.
No person shall solicit in any manner for any purpose in any City or County Buildings. (Ord. 2, § 4123)

4124 Unsightliness.
Any person, firm or corporation who owns or has the care or management of any real property and wilfully permits any part of the property to become so unsightly as to detract from the appearance of the immediate neighborhood, and who fails to remedy the condition within thirty (30) days after being ordered to do so by the City Council is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2, § 4124)

4125 Vendors on Streets.
No person shall sell any product from a motorized vehicle parked on any public street, alley or highway when:

A. The posted speed limit on the public street, alley, or highway where the vehicle is parked exceeds thirty-five (35) miles per hour; or

B. The vehicle from which the products are sold is not lawfully parked; or

C. Any part of the vehicle from which the products are sold is open to prospective customers other than the side of the vehicle facing away from the street; or

D. The products are sold to persons within a vehicle or standing in the portion of the roadway open to motor vehicles; or

E. The vehicle is not parked on the right side of the street; or

F. There is not a clear view of the vehicle from the street at a distance of two hundred (200) feet in front of and two hundred (200) feet behind the vehicle; or

G. Repealed by Ord. 88-825. (Ord. 2, § 4125; Ord. 79-479, § 3; Ord. 81-553U, § 2; Ord. 81-574U, § 1; Ord. 88-825, § 3; Ord. 18-1828, § 3)

4126 Repealed.
Repealed by Ord. 18-1828. (Ord. 88-835, § 1; Ord. 89-881U).

4127 Gambling and Related Activities Prohibited.
4127.1 Gaming – Betting.
A person shall not deal, play, carry on, open, cause to be opened, or conduct any game played with cards, dice, or other device for money, checks, credits, or other thing of value. A person shall not bet at any such game. (Ord. 2, § 4127; Ord. 30, § 1)

4127.2 Permitting on premises.
A person shall not knowingly permit any game prohibited by this Section to be played, conducted, or dealt, in any house or other premises, owned by, rented by, or in the lawful possession of such person. (Ord. 30, § 1)

4127.3 Attendance.
A person shall not resort to, attend, visit, or be in any house, or other place in the City of Carson where there is any gambling being conducted, played, or carried on. (Ord. 30, § 1)

4127.4 Severability.
If any provision of this Section 4127 or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this Section 4127 and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 30, § 1)

4127.5 Limitation.
This Section 4127 does not prohibit any act either positively or prohibited by State Law. (Ord. 30, § 1)

4127.6 Destruction of devices.
The Chief of Police shall destroy any thing which is used, kept, placed or maintained in violation of any statute or of this or any other section of the Carson Municipal Code after any person owning, possessing or having control of such cards, game or thing has pleaded guilty to or has been convicted of such violation and such plea of guilty or conviction has become final. (Ord. 30, § 1)

4127.7 Money from destroyed devices.
The Chief of Police shall deliver to the City Treasurer for deposit in the City Treasury to the credit of the general fund, all money contained in anything he destroys pursuant to the provisions of this Section. He shall destroy all other contents of such game or thing. (Ord. 30, § 1)

4127.8 Release from court custody.
The Chief of Police shall apply to the judge of any court which has custody of any thing subject to destruction under the terms of this Section for an order releasing such cards, game or thing to him for the purpose of complying with this Section. (Ord. 30, § 1)

4127.9 Applicability.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Section, this Chapter shall not apply to any bingo game which is conducted pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 7 of Article VI of this Code. (Ord. 77-405, § 1)

4128 Gambling Information.
No person, either as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, shall let or lease any telegraph or telephone line or wire knowing that it is to be used for the purpose of conducting or carrying on a pool room, or for the purpose of conducting the business of making books, or selling pools on races or other contests, or of betting or laying of wagers upon the result of any race or contest. No person shall transmit any message over any telephone or telegraph line or wire owned, controlled or leased by any person engaged in conducting or carrying on a pool room or in conducting the business of making books or selling pools on races or other contests, or of betting or laying of wagers upon the result of any race or contest, knowing that such message is to be used in conducting or carrying on such pool room or business.

1. Same. For the purposes of this Section a “pool room” is defined to be a room or place where betting or laying of wagers upon the result of races or contests is carried on as a business. (Ord. 2, § 4128)

4129 Unauthorized Use of Shopping Carts Prohibited.
A. Removal. No person shall remove any shopping cart, shopping basket or other similar device from the premises or parking area of any business establishment if such shopping cart, basket or device has permanently affixed to it a sign identifying it as belonging to the owner or operator of such business establishment and a notification to the effect that such cart, basket or device is not to be removed from the premises.

B. Abandonment. No person shall abandon or leave any such shopping cart, shopping basket or other similar device which has been removed from the owner’s premises upon any public street, alley, sidewalk, parkway or other public place, nor upon any private property except that of the owner of such cart, basket or device.

C. Possession. No person shall have in his possession any shopping cart, shopping basket or other similar device which has been removed from the premises of any business establishment operated by the owner of said cart, basket or device and which has permanently affixed to it a sign identifying it as belonging to the operator of a business establishment and a notification to the effect that such cart, basket or device is not to be removed from the premises of said establishment. (Ord. 2, § 4129)

4129.5 Abandoned Shopping Carts – Declaration of Nuisance.
The City Council makes the following findings and declarations: the presence of wrecked, dismantled, or abandoned shopping carts, or parts thereof, creates a condition tending to reduce property values, impede emergency services, promote blight and deterioration, constitute an attractive nuisance by creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, and create an aesthetic that is detrimental to the community and injurious to the health, safety and general welfare of the City’s residents. Therefore, the presence of wrecked, dismantled or abandoned shopping carts, or parts thereof, is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of CMC 4129.5, et seq. (Ord. 07-1371, § 1)

4129.5.1 Abandoned Shopping Carts – Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in CMC 4129.5, et seq., shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

“Abandoned shopping cart” means any unattended shopping cart left on any public or private property outside the premises or parking area of the retail establishment owning the shopping cart without the written consent of the owner.

“Abandoned shopping cart prevention plan” means a document submitted by the responsible business owner as required by CMC 4129.5.5.

“Abatement of shopping cart” shall mean the removal of an abandoned shopping cart by the City or its appointed contractor.

“Agent” means the person or persons designated in an abandoned shopping cart prevention plan to provide abandoned shopping cart retrieval services on behalf of the owner of the business. The agent may be the owner if so designated in the approved abandoned shopping cart prevention plan.

“Manager” means the Public Safety Services Manager or such other official designated by the City Manager to administer CMC 4129.5, et seq.

“Owner” means the person or entity responsible for shopping carts whose name is required to appear on the shopping cart identification sign required by CMC 4129.5.2.

“Parkway” means the area between the edge of the roadway and the property line adjacent thereto. “Parkway” also includes any area within a roadway which is not open to vehicular travel.

“Premises” means the entire area owned, occupied, and/or utilized by a business owner who provides shopping carts for use by customers or other persons, and shall include any parking lot or other property provided by or on behalf of the owner for customer parking or use. The parking area of a retail establishment located in a multistore complex or shopping center shall include the entire parking area used by the complex or center.

“Shopping cart” means a nonmotorized basket which is mounted on wheels or a similar device generally used in commercial establishments by a customer for the purpose of transporting goods of any kind. (Ord. 07-1371, § 2)

4129.5.2 Abandoned Shopping Carts – Identification of Shopping Carts.
Any establishment providing shopping carts to its customers shall permanently affix to each shopping cart an identification sign of the type described in Section 22435.1 of the California Business and Professions Code which (1) identifies the owner of the shopping cart or the retailer, or both; (2) notifies the public of the procedure to be utilized for authorized removal of the shopping cart from the premises; (3) notifies the public that the unauthorized removal of the shopping cart from the premises or parking area of the retail establishment or the unauthorized possession of the shopping cart is a violation of State and local law; and (4) lists a valid telephone number or address for returning the shopping cart removed from the premises or parking area to the owner or retailer. (Ord. 07-1371, § 3)

4129.5.3 Abandoned Shopping Carts – Impoundment of Shopping Carts with Identification Signs.
The impoundment procedures contained in this Section shall apply only to shopping carts that have the identification sign required by CMC 4129.5.2. A fine imposed pursuant to this Section may be appealed pursuant to CMC 4129.5.13.

(a) Any abandoned shopping cart may be impounded by the City at the owner’s cost if, prior to said impoundment, the City provides to the owner or the owner’s agent a minimum of three (3) business days’ actual notice of the shopping cart’s discovery and location. Notice may be given by any appropriate means, including by telephone. After said impoundment, the City shall notify either the owner of the shopping cart or its agent, either by telephone or in writing, that the City has impounded the shopping cart and the address at which the shopping cart is then located. Any owner or agent wishing to reclaim a shopping cart impounded pursuant to this subsection may appear during normal business hours at the applicable location and reclaim the shopping cart upon paying the $50.00 fine authorized by Business and Professions Code Section 22435.7(f), if applicable, and the City’s actual costs incurred for impoundment and storage of the shopping cart. The fine shall only be required to be paid if the owner or the agent fails to retrieve one (1) or more shopping carts within the applicable three (3) day period on three (3) separate occurrences within any six (6) month period.

(b) Alternatively, any abandoned shopping cart may be immediately impounded by the City if, within twenty-four (24) hours of the shopping cart’s impoundment, the City notifies the owner or the agent that the shopping cart has been impounded and the location at which the shopping cart was impounded. Any owner or agent wishing to reclaim a shopping cart impounded pursuant to this subsection may appear during normal business hours within three (3) business days of the date of notice at the location and times indicated in the notice to reclaim the shopping cart free of charge. Any shopping cart reclaimed within the three (3) business day period shall not be deemed an “occurrence” for the purposes of assessing the fine referred to in subsection (a) of this Section. Any shopping cart not reclaimed within three (3) business days shall be subject to the applicable fine imposed pursuant to subsection (a) of this Section commencing on the fourth business day following the date of the notice.

(c) Any shopping cart which is abandoned in a location which will impede emergency services may be immediately impounded. (Ord. 07-1371, § 4)

4129.5.4 Abandoned Shopping Carts – Impoundment of Shopping Carts without Identification Signs.
The impoundment contained in this Section shall apply only to shopping carts that do not have the identification sign required by CMC 4129.5.2.

Any abandoned shopping cart without an identification sign may be immediately impounded by the City at the owner’s cost. Within forty-eight (48) hours of said impoundment, the City shall attempt to notify the owner (if the identity of the owner is known or has been ascertained by the City), either by telephone or in writing, that the City has impounded the shopping cart and the location at which the shopping cart was impounded. Any owner wishing to recover a shopping cart impounded pursuant to this Section may appear during normal business hours within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice (or, if no notice is given because the identity of the owner is not known, within thirty (30) days after impoundment) at the applicable location, and reclaim the shopping cart upon paying the City’s actual costs incurred for impoundment and storage of the shopping cart.

A shopping cart that has not been retrieved within thirty (30) days may be disposed of pursuant to CMC 4129.5.15. (Ord. 07-1371, § 5)

4129.5.5 Abandoned Shopping Carts – Mandatory Abandoned Shopping Cart Prevention Plan.
Every business owner who provides shopping carts, or allows or intends to allow the use of shopping carts, shall develop, implement and comply with the terms and conditions of an abandoned shopping cart prevention plan to prevent the unauthorized removal by any person of any shopping carts from the owner’s premises and, should shopping carts be removed, to retrieve such shopping carts within twenty-four (24) hours of the removal or notice of removal. Each owner’s abandoned shopping cart prevention plan shall include the following elements and be approved by the Public Safety Services Manager or such other official designated by the City Manager to administer CMC 4129.5, et seq.:

(a) Name of Business/Owner. The name of the owner and the business name; the physical address where the business is conducted; the name, address and phone numbers of the on-site and off-site owner, if different, and the name of the agent, if any.

(b) Inventory of Shopping Carts. A complete list of all shopping carts maintained on or in the premises.

(c) Community Outreach. A description of the community outreach process under which the owner shall cause notice to be provided to customers that the removal of shopping carts from the premises is prohibited and a violation of State and City law. This notice shall include, but is not limited to, flyers distributed on the premises, warnings on shopping bags, signs posted in prominent places near door and parking lot exits, direct mail, an announcement using intercom systems on the premises or a website, or any other means demonstrated to be effective as determined by the Manager.

(d) Notice of Posting. There shall be posted by the owner of any retail establishment furnishing shopping carts for its customers, prominently and conspicuously, a notice in substantially the following form: “REMOVAL OF SHOPPING CARTS FROM THESE PREMISES IS PROHIBITED BY LAW.”

(e) Shopping Cart Identification. Shopping carts must be clearly and easily identifiable as to the business owner that has provided the shopping carts, including the business name and the physical address where the business is conducted.

(f) Loss Prevention Measures. A description of the specific measures that the owner shall implement to prevent shopping cart removal from the premises. These measures may include, but are not limited to, electronic or other disabling devices on the shopping carts so they cannot be removed from the premises, effective management practices, use of courtesy clerks to accompany customers and return shopping carts to the store, use of security personnel to prevent removal, a security deposit for the use of a shopping cart, or any other measures determined, at the discretion of the Manager, to be likely to prevent the removal of shopping carts from the premises.

(g) Employee Training. A description of an ongoing employee training program that shall be implemented by the owner to educate new and existing employees on the abandoned shopping cart prevention plan and conditions contained therein, at least annually.

(h) Mandatory Shopping Cart Retrieval. A plan for retrieval of abandoned shopping carts by the owner within a twenty-four (24) hour time period of removal, or evidence of a contract with a City-licensed retrieval service to serve as the owner’s agent in such process. (Ord. 07-1371, § 6)

4129.5.6 Abandoned Shopping Carts – Submittal of Mandatory Abandoned Shopping Cart Prevention Plan for Approval or Denial.
(a) Each business owner who offers shopping carts to its patrons shall submit an abandoned shopping cart prevention plan in compliance with CMC 4129.5, et seq., within thirty (30) days and beginning on April 2, 2007. For all new businesses that will offer shopping carts and which open after this deadline, each owner shall be required to comply with the provisions of CMC 4129.5, et seq., regardless of receipt of written notice from the Manager prior to commencement of operations. In implementing CMC 4129.5, et seq., for the period commencing upon adoption of the ordinance from which this Section is derived, the Manager shall endeavor to provide no less than sixty (60) days’ written notice to each owner of the date that the owner’s initial abandoned shopping cart prevention plan is due.

Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a plan, the Manager may approve or deny any proposed plan and shall notify the owner of his or her decision. If approved, the abandoned shopping cart prevention plan shall be implemented by the owner no later than thirty (30) days from the date of approval. Each owner must comply with the provisions of CMC 4129.5, et seq., regardless of receipt of written notice from the Manager.

(b) The Manager may deny a proposed abandoned shopping cart prevention plan pursuant to his or her determination that:

(1) Implementation of the plan would violate provisions of the building, zoning, health, safety, fire, police or other City codes, or any county, State, or Federal law which substantially affects public health, welfare or safety.

(2) The plan fails to include all the information required by CMC 4129.5, et seq.

(3) The plan is insufficient or inadequate to prevent removal of shopping carts from the owner’s premises.

(4) The plan fails to address any special or unique conditions arising due to the physical location of the premises as they relate to shopping cart retention and prevention efforts.

(5) Implementation of the plan would violate a term or condition of another policy or requirement of a City code.

(6) The owner has knowingly made a false statement of fact, or omitted a fact required to be revealed in an application for an abandoned shopping cart prevention plan or in any addendum or report or other information required to be provided regarding the plan.

(c) If the plan is rejected as incomplete or inadequate, the Manager shall indicate the areas of incompleteness or inadequacy, and the owner shall have an additional thirty (30) days in which to resubmit a corrected plan.

(d) An owner who fails to (1) submit a complete plan, (2) implement approved plan measures, or (3) comply with the approved plan measures shall submit a new plan upon the City’s request and/or shall be subject to enforcement of these requirements in accordance with Chapter 2 of Article I, Penalty Provisions, of the Carson Municipal Code.

(e) The Manager’s denial of a plan may be appealed pursuant to CMC 4129.5.11(c). (Ord. 07-1371, § 7)

4129.5.7 Abandoned Shopping Carts – Modification of an Abandoned Shopping Cart Prevention Plan.
The Public Safety Manager or such other official designated by the City Manager to administer CMC 4129.5, et seq., may request a modification to a previously approved plan to address a change in circumstances, an unanticipated physical or economic impact of the plan or a need to modify an ineffective plan.

An owner may request a modification to a previously approved plan to address a change in circumstances, an unanticipated physical or economic impact of the plan or a need to modify an ineffective plan. (Ord. 07-1371, § 8)

4129.5.8 Abandoned Shopping Carts – Exemption from Mandatory Abandoned Shopping Cart Prevention Plan Obligation.
(a) Any owner may request an exemption, on an annual basis, from the requirements of CMC 4129.5, et seq., if the owner provides written documentation and demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Manager that the owner has:

(1) A contract with a City-licensed cart retrieval service; or

(2) A physical device or mechanism currently in place which prevents the unauthorized removal of shopping carts from the owner’s premises.

(b) A written application for the exemption shall include all of the following:

(1) The name of the owner and the name of the business; the physical address where the business is conducted; and the name, address and phone number of the on-site and off-site owner.

(2) The method, management practice, or physical device that will ensure that the shopping carts will not leave the premises.

(3) Certification by the person submitting the application, signed under penalty of perjury, asserting that all information contained in the application is true and correct.

(c) Any exemption granted to an owner shall be void upon the sale or transfer of ownership of the business.

(d) An exemption shall be valid for the calendar year for which the exemption is granted. Accordingly, every exemption expires on December 31st.

(e) If, during the course of the year in which an exemption has been granted, the owner ceases to employ its designated retrieval service or any other change occurs which would make any of the information contained on owner’s application for the exemption inaccurate, owner must immediately notify the Manager in writing of such change. (Ord. 07-1371, § 9)

4129.5.9 Abandoned Shopping Carts – Renewal of Mandatory Abandoned Shopping Cart Prevention Plan Exemption.
Every owner who receives an exemption from the abandoned shopping cart prevention plan must re-apply, each year, to the Manager for a one (1) year renewal of the exemption. A renewal application must be submitted at least forty-five (45) days before its expiration, to allow staff adequate time to review the application, and shall include the information required to be submitted in an initial application for the exemption. An owner who fails to (a) apply for a renewal of the exemption, (b) submit a complete plan, (c) implement approved plan measures, (d) comply with the approved plan measures, or (e) advise the City of a change in circumstance with respect to the administration of its plan shall submit a new plan upon the City’s request and/or shall be subject to enforcement of these requirements in accordance with Chapter 2 of Article I, Penalty Provisions, of the Carson Municipal Code. (Ord. 07-1371, § 10)

4129.5.10 Abandoned Shopping Carts – Denial of Renewal or Revocation of a Mandatory Abandoned Shopping Cart Prevention Plan Exemption.
(a) Grounds for Denial or Revocation. An application for renewal of a mandatory abandoned shopping cart prevention plan exemption may be denied or an existing exemption revoked by the Manager upon the finding of any of the following:

(1) Any of the owner’s shopping carts currently are or have been abandoned for longer than three (3) business days after notification by the Manager on three (3) occasions in any six (6) month period.

(2) The owner has failed to comply with any of the provisions of CMC 4129.5, et seq.

(3) The owner has knowingly made a false statement of fact or omitted a fact required to be revealed in an application for the exemption, or in any amendment or report or other information required to be made.

(b) Notice of Intended Decision. Upon determining the existence of any of the grounds for denial or revocation of a renewal of an exemption, the Manager shall issue the owner a written notice of intended decision. Such notice shall state all grounds upon which the decision is based and shall advise the owner that the denial or revocation shall become final unless the owner files a written request for a hearing before the Manager within ten (10) calendar days of the date of the notice of intended decision. The notice of intended decision shall also specify the effective date of the denial or revocation. (Ord. 07-1371, § 11)

4129.5.11 Abandoned Shopping Carts – Hearing and Appeal Procedure for Renewal of Exemption.
(a) Request for Hearing. Any request for a hearing to contest a decision denying the renewal or revoking of an abandoned shopping cart prevention plan exemption that has been timely requested pursuant to this Section shall be scheduled for a hearing by the Manager for a date that is no later than thirty (30) calendar days after receipt of the request for hearing. The Manager shall serve a notice of hearing on the owner at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the scheduled date of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner shall be given the opportunity to present witnesses and relevant documentary evidence. The hearing will be conducted informally and the technical rules of evidence shall not apply. Any and all evidence which the City deems reliable, relevant and not unduly repetitious may be considered.

(b) The Manager’s Decision. Within twenty (20) calendar days after the hearing, the Manager shall serve the owner with a written decision sustaining, reversing or modifying the Manager’s intended decision. The decision by the Manager after the hearing shall become final unless the owner files an appeal before the City Manager pursuant to subsection (c) of this Section.

(c) Appeal to the City Manager. If an owner is dissatisfied with any decision of the Manager, the owner may file an appeal to the City Manager. The appeal must be in writing and must be received by the City Manager’s office within fifteen (15) calendar days of the date of the Manager’s decision. The City Manager, or his or her designee, shall preside at the hearing and consider all facts and testimony presented and deemed appropriate. The hearing will be conducted informally and the technical rules of evidence shall not apply. Any and all evidence which the City deems reliable, relevant and not unduly repetitious may be considered. The City Manager’s decision shall be final. Notice of the City Manager’s decision shall be provided to the owner within ten (10) days of the hearing. (Ord. 07-1371, § 12)

4129.5.12 Abandoned Shopping Carts – Noncompliance – Enforcement.
(a) Any owner who fails to comply with any provision of CMC 4129.5, et seq., or any provision of the owner’s approved abandoned shopping cart prevention plan shall be subject to enforcement procedures for each violation through any lawful means available to the City, including, without limitation, those set forth in Business and Professions Code Section 22435.7, as amended from time to time, as well as the institution of an administrative remedy in accordance with CMC 4129.5, et seq.

(b) Any person who violates any provision of CMC 4129.5, et seq., is guilty of a misdemeanor. The provisions of these sections are not intended to preclude the application of any other laws relating to the prosecution of thefts. (Ord. 07-1371, § 13)

4129.5.13 Abandoned Shopping Carts – Hearing to Contest a Fine.
Any owner of a shopping cart who has been charged a fine to reclaim a shopping cart shall be entitled to a hearing as to whether the fine has been properly charged by providing to the City Clerk a written request for a hearing within fifteen (15) days of receipt of notice that the shopping cart has been impounded. The hearing shall be held not later than thirty (30) days from the date of the hearing request and the owner shall be notified of the time, date, and location of the hearing. The City Manager or his or her designee shall appoint a hearing officer. If the hearing officer determines that the City properly impounded the shopping cart and the owner has been charged the appropriate amount, the owner shall pay all costs associated with the administrative hearing and, if he or she desires to reclaim the shopping cart, pay any applicable fine. If the hearing officer determines that the owner has been improperly charged a fine, the owner shall be entitled to reclaim the shopping cart at an adjusted fine or at no charge, whichever is applicable. (Ord. 07-1371, § 14)

4129.5.14 Abandoned Shopping Carts – Location of Impounded Shopping Carts.
Any shopping cart impounded by the City pursuant to CMC 4129.5, et seq., shall be taken to a location designated by the City which is both: (a) reasonably convenient to the owner of the shopping cart; and (b) open for business at least six (6) hours of each business day. (Ord. 07-1371, § 15)

4129.5.15 Abandoned Shopping Carts – Disposition of Impounded Shopping Carts.
The City shall be permitted to destroy, sell at public auction or otherwise dispose of any shopping cart, or part thereof, impounded by the City pursuant to CMC 4129.5, et seq., which has been deemed to be permanently abandoned, which may occur in the following circumstances, but is not limited to the following circumstances:

(a) The shopping cart does not have the identification sign required by CMC 4129.5.2 or other information that identifies the owner, or the City is unable to locate the owner with reasonable diligence.

(b) If the owner has not requested a hearing and the owner and the agent, if any, failed to reclaim the shopping cart from the City within thirty (30) days of receipt of notice that the shopping cart was impounded by the City.

(c) If, within thirty (30) days after a hearing, the owner or agent has failed to reclaim the shopping cart from the City.

(d) The Manager determines that the shopping cart is inoperable, unsafe, or that the cost to repair exceeds the value of the shopping cart. In such case, the shopping cart or parts thereof may be destroyed without providing the appeal hearing provided in CMC 4129.5.11(c), but the Manager shall give notice of this action to the owner, if the owner can be determined. The owner shall not be liable for any cost for removal and abatement in such case. (Ord. 07-1371, § 16)

4129.5.16 Abandoned Shopping Carts – Sale of Abandoned Shopping Carts.
If the City determines to sell any shopping cart deemed to be permanently abandoned pursuant to CMC 4129.5.15, the City shall advertise the sale at a time convenient to the City. Notice of such sale, including the time and place, shall be posted in three (3) conspicuous places within the City. Ten (10) days after posting such notice, such shopping carts may be sold and delivered to the highest bidder free and clear of any claims of the owner thereof. The proceeds of such sale shall be distributed to the City. (Ord. 07-1371, § 17)

4129.5.17 Shopping Cart Collection Services May Be Performed by City-Appointed Contractor.
The City may contract with a shopping cart retrieval service for the retrieval and impoundment of shopping carts or any other related service described in CMC 4129.5, et seq. (Ord. 07-1371, § 18)

4129.5.18 Administration and Enforcement.
Except as otherwise provided in CMC 4129.5, et seq., the provisions of CMC 4129.5, et seq., shall be administered and enforced by the City Manager. In the enforcement of CMC 4129.5, et seq., the City Manager, or his or her designee, may enter onto public or private property to examine a shopping cart or parts thereof or to obtain information to identify the owner of the shopping cart and to order, pursuant to CMC 4129.5, et seq., the abatement and impoundment of the shopping cart, or parts thereof, declared to be a nuisance. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Manager shall perform the day-to-day administration of CMC 4129.5, et seq. (Ord. 07-1371, § 19)

4130 Repealed.
Repealed by Ord. 86-754.

4131 Use of City Seal – Restrictions.
No person shall place the City seal or any copy, facsimile or reproduction thereof on any written or printed material supporting or opposing any candidate or candidates for any elective public office or supporting or opposing any state or federal legislation or any local or statewide referendum, initiative or other ballot measure, and no person shall circulate or distribute any such written or printed material containing or bearing the City seal or any copy, facsimile or reproduction thereof, except only as provided in CMC 4132. (Ord. 80-524, § 1)

4132 Use of City Seal – Exceptions.
CMC 4131 shall not prohibit:

(a) Use of the City seal or a copy, facsimile or reproduction thereof on written material in support of or in opposition to any state or federal legislation or statewide referendum, initiative or other ballot measure when specifically authorized by the City Council;

(b) Use of the City letterhead bearing the City seal by a member of the City Council for individual correspondence, or the reproduction and distribution of a City Councilmember’s letter by the recipient thereof, at no cost to the City of Carson.

This Section shall not be construed so as to authorize any mass production, mailing or distribution of any such letter or written material on City stationery or otherwise at City expense, or any use of public funds in connection with any political campaign or issue. (Ord. 80-524, § 1)

4133 City Seal – Commercial Use of.
No person shall place the City seal or any copy, facsimile or reproduction thereof on any written or printed material other than that specified in CMC 4132, for any commercial, business or private purpose unless specifically authorized by the City Council. (Ord. 80-524, § 1)

4134 Imitation of City Seal Prohibited.
No person shall place any imitation of the City seal on any written or printed material which is designed, calculated, intended or likely to confuse, deceive or mislead the public or cause the reader of such written or printed material to believe it to be an official City publication, and no person shall circulate or distribute any such written or printed material in the City of Carson. (Ord. 80-524, § 1)

4135 Disposal Procedures for Syringes, Hypodermic Needles, Drugs or Medical Supplies.
It shall be unlawful for any pharmacist, physician, surgeon, dentist, podiatrist, veterinarian, nurse, nurse’s aid or helper, or any other person engaged in a similar profession or occupation, or the agent or employee of any such person, or for any clinic or hospital or any agent or employee of any such clinic or hospital, or for any other person or custodian responsible for the disposal of such material to dispose of any unused, used or partly used hypodermic syringes, hypodermic needles, drugs, drug containers or bottles, medicines, medicine containers or bottles, medical supplies or other similar items, including bandages or dressings, customarily used by any such person, clinic or hospital, by placing any such item in any open garbage or refuse receptacle, unless such item or items are so treated, crushed, or securely packaged or contained as to prevent direct access thereto. (Ord. 70-127, § 1)

4136 Item Pricing in Retail Grocery Stores – Definitions.
a. Automatic Checkout System. An electronic system employing a scanning device combined with a computer and register to read a universal product code or similar code of packaging and display and total the cost of the items purchased.

b. Consumer Commodity.

(1) Food, including all material whether solid, liquid, or mixed, and whether simple or compound, which is used or intended for consumption by human beings or domestic animals normally kept as household pets, and all substances or ingredients added to any such material for any purpose. This definition shall not apply to individual packages of cigarettes or individual cigars.

(2) Paper and plastic products, such as, but not limited to, napkins, facial tissues, toilet tissues, foil wrapping, plastic wrapping, paper toweling, and disposable plates and cups.

(3) Detergents, soaps and other cleaning agents.

(4) Pharmaceuticals, including nonprescription drugs, bandages, hygiene products, and toiletries.

c. Grocery Department. An area within a general retail merchandise store which is engaged primarily in the retail sale of packaged food, rather than food prepared for immediate consumption on or off the premises.

d. Grocery Store. A store engaged primarily in the retail sale of packaged food, rather than food prepared for consumption on the premises.

e. Person. An individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, or other organization, group or combination acting as a unit.

f. Sale Item or Special. Any consumer commodity offered in good faith for some appropriate time period, on sale at a price below the normal price that item is usually sold for in that store. (Ord. 80-516, § 1)

4136.1 Same – Item Prices.
Every retail grocery store or grocery department within a general retail merchandise store which uses an automatic checkout system shall cause to have a clearly readable price indicated on each packaged consumer commodity offered for sale provided, however, that said requirement shall not apply to:

a. Any unpackaged fresh food produce;

b. Any consumer commodity under three (3) cubic inches in size and weighing less than three (3) ounces and priced for less than $0.30;

c. Any grocery business which has as its only regular employees the owner thereof, or the parent, spouse, or child of such owner, or in addition thereto, not more than two (2) persons employed on a regular schedule for a continuing period of time;

d. Identical items within a multi-item package;

e. Items sold through a vending machine;

f. Any-consumer commodity which was not generally item-priced as of January 1, 1977, as determined by the State of California Department of Food and Agriculture;

g. Any consumer commodity offered as a sale item or as a special. (Ord. 80-516, § 1)

4136.2 Same – Penalties.
a. Any person intentionally violating any of the provisions of CMC 4136.1 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25.00 and not more than $500.00.

b. Failure to have a clearly readable price indicated on twelve (12) units of the same item of the same commodity shall give rise to a rebuttable presumption of intent to violate CMC 4136.1.

c. Each additional twelve (12) units of the same item that fail to have a price indicated on them shall constitute a separate violation of CMC 4136.1.

d. Each day that a violation continues after notification thereof by any person to the grocery store or department manager or assistant manager shall constitute a separate violation and shall constitute a presumption of intent to violate CMC 4136.1.

e. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any person may bring an action to enjoin a violation of CMC 4136.1.

f. Any person who violates CMC 4136.1 shall be liable to any person injured for any losses and expenses thereby incurred, and for the sum of $50.00, in addition thereto. The remedies set forth in this Section shall apply only to actions brought on behalf of a single plaintiff and shall not apply to multiple plaintiffs or class actions. (Ord. 80-516, § 1)

4136.3 Same – Unintentional Error.
Improper pricing on the shelf or on the item due to unintentional error shall not constitute a violation of this Chapter. (Ord. 80-516, § 1)

4137 Park Hours and Parking.
Public parks owned or operated by the City of Carson are hereby closed between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., except as otherwise provided in this Section. No person shall enter or remain in any public park owned or operated by the City of Carson or the County of Los Angeles while such park is closed. The City may grant the use of such parks during the hours of closure by permit. The City Administrator, the Deputy City Administrator/Director of Recreation and Community Services, or the Director of Public Safety may declare any park closed when necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. Parking on the grounds of a public park is prohibited at all times except by permit. Parking in a public park parking lot is prohibited while the park is closed and at all other times as may be provided by resolution of the City Council. Vehicles parked in violation of this Section shall be towed and stored at the owner’s expense pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 22651(n). This section shall not apply to officers or employees of the City of Carson, County of Los Angeles, or Los Angeles County Flood Control District when such employees or officers must enter or remain in such park in order to perform duties attendant to such office or employment. (Ord. 81-570U, § 1; Ord. 95-1055, § 1)

4138 Use of Park Picnic Shelters.
In connection with the use of picnic shelters at public parks owned or operated by the City of Carson, the following requirements shall be met:

(a) Permit Required. No group, company, society or organization shall use a picnic shelter at any public park owned or operated by the City of Carson for any purpose without first obtaining a permit from the Recreation and Community Services Department. All persons occupying a picnic shelter area without the obtainment of a permit shall vacate such area when requested to do so by an authorized City representative. This Section shall not apply to officers or employees of the City of Carson, County of Los Angeles, or Los Angeles County Flood Control District when such employees or officers must use such picnic shelters to perform duties attendant to such office or employment.

(b) Fee Required. The fee for a permit shall be as established by a resolution of the Council. Said fee shall be in addition to any other fee which may be established by the Council.

(c) Procedural Standards. The recreation and Community Services Department shall issue permits in the priority by which applications are received. The Department shall make a decision on an application within three (3) days of the date the application is deemed complete, unless an extension of this time limit is agreed to by the applicant. (Ord. 95-1056, § 2)

4139 Use of Parks by Large Groups.
In connection with use of public parks owned or operated by the City of Carson by large groups, the following requirements shall be met:

(a) Permit Requirement. No group, company, society or organization, consisting of twenty-five (25) or more individuals, shall use public parks owned or operated by the City of Carson for any purpose without first obtaining a permit from the Recreation and Community Services Department. This Section shall not apply to officers or employees of the City of Carson, County of Los Angeles, or Los Angeles County Flood Control District, when such employees or officers must use such facilities to perform duties attendant to such office or employment.

(b) Fee Required. The fee for a permit shall be as established by a resolution of the Council. Said fee shall be in addition to any other fee which may be established by the Council.

(c) Procedural Standards. The Recreation and Community Service Department shall issue permits in the priority which applications are received. Such permits shall be issued or denied within two (2) days of submission of a complete application, unless the applicant agrees to an extension of time. (Ord. 95-1057, § 2)

4139.1 Amplified Music in Public Parks.
In connection with the broadcast of amplified music in public parks owned or operated by the City of Carson, the following requirements shall be met:

(a) Permit Required. No person, firm, or corporation shall use or operate, or cause to be used or operated, in any public park owned or operated by the City of Carson, any device, apparatus or instrument for the amplification of music without first obtaining a permit from the Recreation and Community Services Department.

(b) Broadcast Standards. The broadcasting of amplified music in City parks shall comply with the following standards:

(1) The volume of sound shall be controlled so that it will not be audible for a distance in excess of fifty (50) feet from the source, and the volume of sound shall be so controlled that it will not be unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing, or a nuisance to persons within the area of audibility.

(2) The area where the music can be played and the direction of the speakers shall be as agreed upon by the permittee and Recreation and Community Services Department staff.

(3) Amplified music shall only broadcast between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. while daylight savings time is in effect, and between 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. while standard time is in effect.

(c) Procedural Standards. Permits shall be issued according to the following procedural standards:

(1) Residents shall submit an application for a permit between ninety (90) days and ten (10) days in advance of the activity. Nonresidents shall submit an application for a permit between fourteen (14) days and ten (10) days in advance of the activity.

(2) The Recreation and Community Services Department shall issue permits in the priority by which applications are received. Decisions on permit applications shall be made within two (2) days of submission of a complete application, unless the applicant agrees to an extension of time. (Ord. 95-1058, § 2)

4139.2 Skate Park Regulations.
The skate facility at Veteran’s Park is hereby designated for skateboarding and in-line skating (the “skate facility”). The boundaries of the skate facility are on file in the office of the City Engineer and are further defined by the fence and signs surrounding the skate facility. No person shall ride, operate or use a skateboard or in-line skates within a park except in the skate facility. Within the skate facility, it shall be unlawful for any person to:

(a) Ride, operate, or use a skateboard or in-line skates unless that person is wearing a helmet designated for skateboard use with a chin strap, elbow pads designated for skateboard use with plastic elbow caps, and knee pads designated for skateboard use with plastic knee caps, which equipment shall be in good repair at all times during use;

(b) Ride, operate, or utilize a skateboard or in-line skates unless such equipment is in good repair at all times during use;

(c) Place or utilize additional obstacles or other material (including, but not limited to, ramps or jumps) within the skate facility;

(d) Enter the skate facility unless actively skateboarding or in-line skating in accordance with these regulations;

(e) Use, consume, or have within his or her custody or control food, beverages, tobacco products or illegal drugs within the skate facility;

(f) Enter or be upon the skate facility while under the influence of alcoholic beverages or illegal drugs;

(g) Use or possess glass containers, bottles or other breakable glass products within the skate facility;

(h) Use or engage in profanity, reckless or boisterous behavior (including, but not limited to, tandem riding, pushing, profanity, horseplay, and bullying), graffiti or tagging, loud music or any other activity which could endanger the safety of persons using the skate facility or spectators;

(i) Enter or be upon the skate facility at any time except during its posted hours of operation; or

(j) Ride, operate, or utilize any device other than a skateboard or in-line skates (prohibited devices include, but are not limited to, bicycles or motor vehicles) on the skate facility. (Ord. 03-1269U, § 1; Ord. 03-1269, § 1)

4140 Nudity and Partial Nudity in Public Places Prohibited.
4140.1 Legislative Authorization.
CMC 4140 and its subsections are adopted pursuant to Sections 318.5 and 318.6 of the Penal Code. All words used in CMC 4140 and its subsections which also are used in the said Sections 318.5 and 318.6 are used in the same sense and mean the same as the same respective words used in the said Sections 318.5 and 318.6 of the Penal Code. (Ord. 69-107, § 1)

4140.2 Theater – Definition.
As used in this CMC 4140 and its subsections and in Sections 318.5 and 318.6, “theater” means a building, playhouse, room, hall or other place having a permanent stage upon which movable scenery is placed and theatrical or vaudeville or similar performances are given and permanently affixed seats so arranged that a body of spectators can have an unobstructed view of the stage, and for which a City license for a theater is in full force and effect. This definition does not supersede the provisions of CMC 4140.1. (Ord. 69-107, § 1)

4140.3 Prohibition.
Every female is guilty of a misdemeanor who while participating in any live act, demonstration, or exhibition in any public place, open to the public, or place open to public view, or while serving food or drink or both to any customer:

(a) Exposes the areola of either breast or any portion of either breast below the areola thereof, or

(b) Employs any device or covering, which is intended to simulate such portions of the breast, or

(c) Wears any type of clothing so that any portion of such part of the breast may be observed. (Ord. 69-107, § 1)

4140.4 Prohibition.
Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who:

(a) Exposes his or her genitalia, pubic hair or natal cleft or perineum or employs any device or covering which is intended to simulate the genitalia or pubic hair while participating in any live act, demonstration, or exhibition in any public place, place open to the public, or place open to public view, or while serving food or drink or both to any customer. (Ord. 69-107, § 1)

4140.5 Accessories.
Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who permits, counsels, or assists any person to violate any provision of CMC 4140.3 or 4140.4. (Ord. 69-107, § 1)

4140.6 Exceptions.
This Chapter does not apply to:

(a) A theater, concert hall, or similar establishment which is primarily devoted to theatrical performances.

(b) Any act authorized or prohibited by any state statute. (Ord. 69-107, § 1)

4141 Display of Matter Harmful to Minors.
(a) For purposes of this Section, the term “matter” and the phrase “matter harmful to minors” shall have the same definitions as those set forth in Section 313 of the Penal Code of the State of California.

(b) No person shall knowingly display in any place open to the general public, other than a public place from which minors are excluded, any matter which is harmful to minors unless such material is located in blinder racks so that the lower two-thirds (2/3) of the matter is not exposed to public view. (Ord. 91-942, § 1)

4142 Reserved.
4143 Reserved.
4144 Threats with Replica Firearms.
4144.1 Replica Firearms and Firearms Definitions.
(a) As used in this Section, the term “replica firearm” shall include any device or object made of plastic, wood, metal or any other material which is a facsimile or toy version of, or is otherwise recognizable as, a pistol, revolver, shotgun, sawed-off shotgun, rifle, machine gun, rocket launcher, or any other firearm as that term is used under the provisions of Sections 12001, 12001.5, 12020(d)(1), and 12570 of the State Penal Code.

(b) For purposes of this Section, the meaning of the term “firearm” shall be the same as the meaning of that term under the State Dangerous Weapons Control laws and shall include air rifles, pellet guns or BB guns. (Ord. 87-810, § 1)

4144.2 Same – Threats Prohibited.
Every person who, except in self defense, in the presence of any other person, draws, exhibits or brandishes a replica firearm or who simulates a firearm in a rude, angry and threatening manner, or who in any manner, unlawfully uses the same in any fight or quarrel and causes the victim to reasonably believe that the person is actually in possession of an operable firearm is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 87-810, § 1)

4145 Disturbing the Peace.
No person shall operate any motor vehicle (including any motorcycle, trail bike, mini bike, unlicensed vehicle, dune buggy, motor scooter or jeep), or the motor thereof on any vacant lot, parking lot, vacant property or acreage so as to disturb the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or person by noise, dust, smoke or fumes caused by such motor vehicle. Violation of this Section shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in CMC 1200(a). (Ord. 87-804, § 1)

4146 Camping on Public Property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to camp in: (1) any public park; (2) any public street, alley, lane, public right of-way; or (3) any public parking lot or public area, improved, or unimproved.

(a) As used in this Section, “to camp” shall be defined as to set up, or to remain in or at, a campsite.

(b) A “campsite” shall mean and include any place where any bedding, sleeping bag or other sleeping matter, or any stove, or other cooking equipment, or fire, is placed, established or maintained, whether or not such place incorporates the use of any tent, lean-to, or any other structure, or any vehicle or part thereof. Campsites shall not include any area specifically designated by the City Council for such purpose. (Ord. 90-908U, § 2; Ord. 90-908, § 2)

4147 Sleeping on Public Property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sleep in: (1) any public park during the period of time from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.; (2) any public street, alley, lane, or public right-of-way; (3) any public parking lot or public area, improved or unimproved. (Ord. 90-908U, § 2; Ord. 90-908, § 2)

4148 Controlled Substances.
Each violation of Title 21 United States Code, “The Controlled Substances Act,” and each violation of the California Penal Code relating to the manufacture, possession, sale, distribution, or consumption of controlled substances as defined in State law, shall constitute a separate misdemeanor as defined in CMC 1200(a) and subject to the penalty specified therein. (Ord. 10-1446, § 1)

CHAPTER 2
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Sections:

§ 4200    Alcoholic Beverage Defined.

§ 4200.5    Drinking Upon Public Streets.

§ 4201    Same.

§ 4202    Public View.

§ 4203    Set Ups.

§ 4204    Alcoholic Beverage on School Grounds.

§ 4205    Drinking in Vehicle.

§ 4206    Disorderly.

§ 4207    Consuming Liquor.

§ 4208    Same.

§ 4209    Possession or Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages in Public Parks.

§ 4210    Driving While Under the Influence – Collection of Expenses for Emergency Response.

§ 4211    Consumption or Use of Alcohol, Cannabis, Controlled Substances and Tobacco Products by Minors Prohibited – Purpose and Intent.

§ 4211.1    Definitions.

§ 4211.2    Consumption or Use of Alcohol, Cannabis, Controlled Substances and Tobacco Products by Minor Prohibited in Public Place, Place Open to Public, or Place Not Open to Public.

§ 4211.3    Hosting, Permitting, or Allowing a Party, Gathering, or Event Where Minors Consuming or Using Alcoholic Beverages, Cannabis, Controlled Substances or Tobacco Products Prohibited.

§ 4211.4    Protected Activities.

§ 4211.5    Fines.

§ 4211.6    Civil Liability for Enforcement Services.

§ 4211.7    Reimbursement for Cost of Enforcement Services.

§ 4211.8    Reservation of Legal Options.

§ 4211.9    Administrative Citation Procedures.

§ 4212    Limited Alcoholic Beverage Use on Public Property – Special Permit.

4200 Alcoholic Beverage Defined.
As used in this Chapter, “alcoholic beverage” means and includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine or beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine or beer, and which contains one-half (1/2) of one (1) percent or more of alcohol by volume, and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances. (Ord. 2, § 4200; Ord. 91-952, § 1)

4200.5 Drinking Upon Public Streets.
No person shall drink any alcoholic beverage upon any public street, alleyway, sidewalk or parkway, or in any public buildings, public lavatories, auto park, or lobby or entrance way to any building within the City. (Ord. 91-952, § 2)

4201 Same.
It shall be unlawful for any intoxicated person, or any person in an intoxicated condition, willfully to appear, remain or be in or on any public highway, street, alley, way, park, playground or public place in the incorporated territory of the City of Carson, whether such person is or is not in or upon any automobile, street or interurban car, vehicle or conveyance. (Ord. 2, § 4201)

4202 Public View.
It shall be unlawful for any intoxicated person, or any person in an intoxicated condition, willfully to appear, remain or be in any place open to public view or in any store, railway depot, stadium, or other place to which the public is admitted or invited, or in or on any private premises or in any private house to the annoyance of any other person. (Ord. 2, § 4202)

4203 Set Ups.
No person shall serve “Set Ups” between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., if they are to be used with distilled spirits. (Ord. 2, § 4203)

4204 Alcoholic Beverage on School Grounds.
No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage on the grounds of any public school or any stadium or athletic field while being used by a public school. (Ord. 2, § 4204)

4205 Drinking in Vehicle.
No person shall enter or remain in a vehicle while any other occupant is consuming any alcoholic beverage while such vehicle is on a public street, alleyway, or public highway. (Ord. 2, § 4205)

4206 Disorderly.
No person shall lie or sleep on any of the sidewalks, streets, or other public places within the City, or appear therein in such a state of intoxication or drunkenness as to be unable to take proper care of himself, or disturb the peace or quiet of any person, family or neighborhood, by drunkenness or by making loud or unusual noises, or by violent conduct, or by boisterous, tumultuous or offensive conduct, or by the threatening, traducing, quarreling, fighting or offering or challenging to fight, or in any other way or manner whatever shall disturb the peace, quiet and decency of any person, street or neighborhood. (Ord. 2, § 4206)

4207 Consuming Liquor.
It shall be unlawful for any person to go upon or remain upon any part of a public highway, while he is consuming any alcoholic beverage. (Ord. 2, § 4207)

4208 Same.
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or remain in any vehicle while such vehicle is on any part of any public highway when such person or any other occupant of such vehicle is consuming any alcoholic beverage. (Ord. 2, § 4208)

4209 Possession or Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages in Public Parks.
No person shall possess or consume any alcoholic beverage in any public park, parking lot of any public park, or building of any public park. (Ord. 91-952, § 3)

4210 Driving While Under the Influence – Collection of Expenses for Emergency Response.
(a) No person shall operate a motor vehicle while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage and/or any drug. A person is considered to be under the influence of an alcoholic beverage and/or any drug when, as a result of drinking an alcoholic beverage and/or using a drug, his or her physical or mental abilities are impaired to a degree that he or she no longer has the ability to operate a motor vehicle with the caution characteristic of a sober person of ordinary prudence under the same or similar circumstances.

(b) Any person whose operation of a motor vehicle in violation of subsection (a) of this Section 4210 proximately causes any incident to which law enforcement personnel and/or emergency service providers appropriately respond on behalf of the City, is liable for all costs incurred by the City in providing the law enforcement and/or emergency response.

(c) The Director of Public Safety shall calculate all such costs and shall advise the City Administrator. The person specified above in subsection (b) of this Section 4210 shall be billed by the City Administrator for the total cost, and payment shall be due and payable within fifteen (15) days of the billing date. If the amount due is not paid, the City may collect the debt, as well as any fees and costs incurred in its collection, pursuant to all applicable provisions of law. (Ord. 93-1006, § 3)

4211 Consumption or Use of Alcohol, Cannabis, Controlled Substances and Tobacco Products by Minors Prohibited – Purpose and Intent.
The City Council finds and determines that minors often obtain alcoholic beverages, cannabis, controlled substances, and tobacco products at parties held at private premises. The City Council further finds and determines that persons who will be held responsible for abetting or tolerating such conduct will be more likely to properly supervise or stop such parties on property under their control. (Ord. 13-1522, § 1; Ord. 19-1936, § 3)

4211.1 Definitions.
For purposes of CMC 4211 through 4211.9, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

(A) “Adult” shall mean a person who is twenty-one (21) years of age or older.

(B) “Cannabis” shall mean all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. “Cannabis” also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. “Cannabis” does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. For purposes of CMC 4211 through 4211.9 only, “Cannabis” includes “cannabis products.”

(C) “Cannabis products” shall mean cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including but not limited to concentrated cannabis (as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 11006.5, as may be amended), or an edible or topical product containing cannabis or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients.

(D) “Control” shall mean any form of dominion including ownership, tenancy, or other possessory right.

(E) “Controlled substance(s)” shall mean the substances designated as controlled substances under Section 202 of the federal Controlled Substances Act and the schedules published in the regulations promulgated thereunder, 21 C.F.R. Section 1308.01 et seq., all as may be amended from time to time. Notwithstanding the foregoing, for purposes of CMC 4211 through 4211.9 only, “controlled substances” does not include “cannabis.”

(F) “Electronic cigarette” shall mean any electronic and/or battery-operated device, the use of which may resemble smoking, which can be used to deliver an inhaled dose of nicotine or other substances. The term includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an electronic cigarette, an e-cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic hookah, or any other product name or descriptor. The term does not include any inhaler prescribed by a licensed doctor.

(G) “Enforcement services” shall mean the salaries and benefits of police officers or other code enforcement officers for the amount of time actually spent in responding to or in remaining at the residence or premises and the administrative costs attributable to the incident, the actual cost of any medical treatment to injured police officers or other code enforcement officers as a result of injuries suffered in responding to or in remaining at the residence or premises, the cost arising from the use of any City equipment in responding to or remaining at the residence or premises, and the cost of repairing any damaged City equipment or property used in responding to or in remaining at the residence or premises.

(H) “Industrial hemp” shall mean a crop that is limited to types of the plant Cannabis sativa L. having no more than three-tenths (3/10) of one (1) percent tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) contained in the dried flowering tops, whether growing or not; the seeds of the plant; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin produced therefrom.

(I) “Minor” shall mean a person who is less than twenty-one (21) years of age.

(J) “Tobacco product” means any of the following: (1) a product containing, made, or derived from tobacco or nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, little cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, or snuff; (2) an electronic cigarette; (3) any component, part, or accessory of a tobacco product, whether or not sold separately. “Tobacco product” does not include a nicotine replacement product approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration.

(K) “Residence” or “premises” shall mean a house, yard, apartment, condominium, or other dwelling unit, a hotel or motel room, or a hall or meeting room, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or for living space or for a party, meeting, or other social function or gathering, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without compensation. (Ord. 13-1522, § 1; Ord. 19-1936,§ 3)

4211.2 Consumption or Use of Alcohol, Cannabis, Controlled Substances and Tobacco Products by Minors Prohibited in Public Place, Place Open to Public, or Place Not Open to Public.
Except as otherwise permitted by State law, it shall be unlawful for any minor to:

(A) Consume or use at any public place or any place open to the public any alcoholic beverage, cannabis, controlled substance, or tobacco product;

(B) Consume or use at any place not open to the public any alcoholic beverage unless his or her parent or legal guardian in connection with the consumption of the alcoholic beverage is supervising that minor. (Ord. 13-1522, § 1; Ord. 19-1936, § 3)

4211.3 Hosting, Permitting, or Allowing a Party, Gathering, or Event Where Minors Consuming or Using Alcoholic Beverages, Cannabis, Controlled Substances or Tobacco Products Prohibited.
(A) Except as permitted by Article I, Section 4, of the California Constitution, it shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly host, permit, or allow a party, gathering, or event at his or her place of residence or other private property, place, or premises under his or her control where two (2) or more minors are present and alcoholic beverages, cannabis, controlled substances or tobacco products are being consumed or used by any minor.

(B) It is the duty of any person who knowingly hosts, permits or allows a party, gathering, or event at his or her place of residence or other private property, place, or premises under his or her control to take all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption or use of alcoholic beverages, cannabis, controlled substances and tobacco products by any minor at the party, gathering, or event. Reasonable steps are: (1) controlling access to alcoholic beverages, cannabis, and tobacco products at the party, gathering or event; (2) prohibiting controlled substances at the party, gathering or event (except pursuant to valid medical prescription as stated in
CMC 4211.4(D)); and (3) supervising the activities of minors at the party, gathering or event.

(C) For purposes of subsection (B) of this Section, a person “knowingly” hosts, permits, or allows a party, gathering, or event at his or her place of residence or other private property, place, or premises under his or her control where two (2) or more minors are present and alcoholic beverages, cannabis, controlled substances or tobacco products are being used or consumed by any minor, whenever the person either knows that such conduct is occurring or reasonably should have known that such conduct was occurring had the person taken all reasonable steps set forth in subsection (B) of this Section.

(D) This Section shall not apply to conduct involving the use of alcoholic beverages which occurs exclusively between a minor child and his or her parent or legal guardian.

(E) This Section shall not apply to any location or place that is regulated by the California Department of Alcohol and Beverage Control. (Ord. 13-1522, § 1; Ord. 19-1936, § 3)

4211.4 Protected Activities.
The provisions of CMC 4211.2 and 4211.3 shall not apply to any of the following:

(A) Legally protected religious ceremonies;

(B) The consumption or use of cannabis for medicinal purposes by a minor holding a physician’s recommendation in compliance with State law, including the Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5), the Medical Marijuana Program Act (Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.7 et seq.), and the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act (Business and Professions Code Sections 26000 et seq.);

(C) The consumption or use of industrial hemp, including cannabidiol (CBD) oil derived therefrom;

(D) The consumption or use of a controlled substance by a minor as prescribed to the minor by a licensed medical practitioner authorized to issue the prescription. (Ord. 13-1522, § 1; Ord. 19-1936, § 3)

4211.5 Fines.
The Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department or duly authorized code enforcement officer is authorized to issue an administrative citation for a violation of CMC 4211.2 or a violation of CMC 4211.3. Any person who violates said Sections is subject to citation and punishment in accordance with CMC 1203.3. Fines for violations of CMC 4211.2 or 4211.3 are as follows:

(i) A fine not exceeding $250.00 for a first violation;

(ii) A fine not exceeding $500.00 for a second violation of the same ordinance or permit within one (1) year from the date of the first violation;

(iii) A fine not exceeding $1,000 for each additional violation of the same ordinance or permit within one (1) year from the date of the first violation. (Ord. 13-1522, § 1; Ord. 19-1936, § 3)

4211.6 Civil Liability for Enforcement Services.
When a party, gathering, or event prohibited by CMC 4211.3 occurs and Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department or duly authorized code enforcement officers are called to the scene, the person(s) having control of the residence or premises shall be liable for the cost of providing enforcement services. If the person having control is a minor and if a parent or legal guardian is served with a copy of the civil citation issued to the minor, the parent or legal guardian of that minor shall be liable for the costs incurred for said enforcement services up to the limits allowed by State law. (Ord. 13-1522, § 1; Ord. 19-1936, § 3)

4211.7 Reimbursement for Cost of Enforcement Services.
The actual cost of enforcement services described in CMC 4211.6 shall be deemed a debt owed to the City recoverable in a civil action and shall be recoverable in a civil action, including reasonable attorney fees and costs. (Ord. 13-1522, § 1; Ord. 19-1936, § 3)

4211.8 Reservation of Legal Options.
The City of Carson does not waive its right to seek reimbursement for actual costs of enforcement services through other legal remedies or procedures. The procedure provided for in CMC 4211.9 is in addition to any other statute, ordinance, or law, civil or criminal. This subsection in no way limits the authority of peace officers or private citizens to make arrests for any criminal offense arising out of conduct regulated by CMC 4211.2 or 4211.3. (Ord. 13-1522, § 1; Ord. 19-1936, § 3)

4211.9 Administrative Citation Procedures.
(A) All citations issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be subject to the administrative citation procedures set forth in Chapter 2.5 of Article I. (Ord. 13-1522, § 1; Ord. 19-1936, § 3)

4212 Limited Alcoholic Beverage Use on Public Property – Special Permit.
Notwithstanding the other prohibitions of this chapter, the Council may grant special permits for the sale or consumption of wine or beer at special functions or activities in public parks in the City of Carson and only at City of Carson functions or activities. Any such permit with the sale of beer or wine shall be given to City-authorized vendors and such vendors shall be subject to the license requirements of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act of the State. (Ord. 15-1552, § 2)

CHAPTER 3
FIREARMS AND DANGEROUS WEAPONS
Sections:

§ 4300    Permit Required.

§ 4301    Confiscation of Weapons.

§ 4302    Minors – Selling or Giving Weapons To.

§ 4303    Minors – Providing Ammunition To.

§ 4304    Minors – Discharging Weapons.

§ 4305    Exception To.

§ 4306    Discharging Firearms.

§ 4307    Discharging Weapons Prohibited.

§ 4308    Same – Exceptions.

§ 4309    Carrying Loaded Weapons Prohibited.

§ 4310    Assault Weapons – Sale or Possession Prohibited.

§ 4311    Sellers of Firearm Ammunition.

§ 4312    Requirements for Ammunition Sales.

4300 Permit Required.
No person except a duly elected or appointed peace officer shall carry concealed upon or about his person any revolver, pistol, dagger, dirk, or sling shot, billy or other deadly weapon or instrument without first having obtained a written permit from the Sheriff of Los Angeles County. (Ord. 70-133, § 4300)

4301 Confiscation of Weapons.
All concealed weapons found on persons violating the provisions of this Chapter shall, upon conviction of said person, be confiscated upon order of the court in which said conviction has been made. (Ord. 70-133, § 4301)

4302 Minors – Selling or Giving Weapons To.
Except as otherwise provided in CMC 4305, no person shall sell, give, loan, or in any way furnish, or cause or permit to be sold, given, loaned, or in any way furnished to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, any gun, revolver, pistol, firearm, spring gun, air gun, sling, sling shot, or device designed to discharge, or capable of discharging, any dangerous missile. (Ord. 70-133, § 4302)

4303 Minors – Providing Ammunition To.
Except as otherwise provided in CMC 4305, no person shall sell, give, loan, or in any way furnish, or cause or permit to be sold, given, loaned, or in any way furnished, to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, any cartridge, shell, ammunition, or device containing any explosive substance, designed, or intended to be used in, or fired from, any gun, revolver, pistol or firearm. (Ord. 70-133, § 4303)

4304 Minors – Discharging Weapons.
Except as otherwise provided in CMC 4305, no person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall fire, discharge, shoot, or operate, or assist or participate in the firing, discharging, shooting, or operating, or have in his or her possession, care, custody, or control, any gun, revolver, pistol, firearm, spring gun, air gun, sling, sling shot, or device designed, or intended, to discharge, or capable of discharging, any dangerous missile or any cartridge, shell, ammunition, or device containing any explosive substance, designed or intended to be used in or fired from, any gun, revolver, pistol or firearm. (Ord. 70-133, § 4304)

4305 Exception To.
Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed or construed to prohibit the selling, giving, loaning, or furnishing to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, upon written consent of the parent or guardian of such person, any article mentioned in CMC 4302 and 4303 hereof; nor to prohibit any such person under the age of eighteen (18) years from having in his or her possession, care, custody or control any article mentioned in CMC 4304 hereof in the event that such possession, care, custody, or control of such article is had with the consent of the parent or guardian of such person and is under the direct supervision and control of some adult person; nor to prohibit any such person under the age of eighteen (18) years from firing, discharging, shooting, or operating any article mentioned in CMC 4304 hereof when such person is accompanied by and under the direct care and control of some adult person and is engaged in hunting any wild game or predatory bird or animal which may be lawfully hunted or killed, or is lawfully engaged in shooting at any inanimate target, or trapshooting device while accompanied by and under the direct care and control of some such adult person. (Ord. 70-133, § 4305)

4306 Discharging Firearms.
Except as otherwise provided in the Carson Municipal Code, a person shall not shoot, fire or discharge, and a person, firm or corporation shall not cause or permit to be shot, fired or discharged, in the City of Carson, any rifle, shotgun, pistol, air powered rifle or pistol, or other firearm of any kind. (Ord. 70-133, § 4306)

4307 Discharging Weapons Prohibited.
Except as otherwise provided in CMC 4308, no person shall, within the territorial limits of the City, fire, discharge, shoot, operate, or use any gun, revolver, pistol, shotgun, rifle, spring gun, air gun, gas-operated gun, sling, sling shot, bow and any other device, instrument or weapon designed to, or capable of:

(a) Discharging, throwing or projecting any missile or projectile a distance of fifty (50) feet or more; or

(b) Discharging or firing any cartridge, shell, ammunition or device containing any explosive substance designed for or intended to be used in or fired from any gun, revolver, pistol, shotgun, rifle or other firearm which cartridge, shell, ammunition or device containing any such explosive substance is designed to or capable of projecting or propelling any missile or projectile for a distance of fifty (50) feet or more. (Ord. 70-133, § 4307)

4308 Same – Exceptions.
Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be deemed to prohibit the firing, discharging, shooting, operating or using of any weapon, device or instrument mentioned in CMC 4307 as follows:

(a) By any duly appointed or elected law enforcement officer in the performance of his duties as such officer;

(b) By any member of the armed forces, when on duty in such force;

(c) When necessary to protect life or property, or to destroy or kill any predatory or dangerous animal;

(d) In or upon any licensed shooting gallery or any pistol, rifle or target range; provided, that such gallery or range is so installed, constructed, safeguarded, equipped and used as to adequately prevent any missile or projectile from being propelled beyond the confines of such range or gallery. (Ord. 70-133, § 4308)

4309 Carrying Loaded Weapons Prohibited.
No person except a duly elected or appointed peace officer or member of the armed forces when on duty shall carry on his person or in his immediate custody or control, any weapon, device or instrument mentioned in CMC 4307 while said weapon, device or instrument is loaded with any missile, projectile or any cartridge, shell, ammunition or device containing any explosive substance mentioned in CMC 4307 without first having obtained a written permit from the Sheriff of Los Angeles County. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to prohibit the keeping of any such loaded weapon, device or instrument in or upon any building or structure by the owner or tenant of such building or structure or by the agent, servant or employee of such owner or tenant. (Ord. 70-133, § 4309)

4310 Assault Weapons – Sale or Possession Prohibited.
(a) Subject to subsection (c) of this Section the term “assault weapon,” as used in this Section, shall include:

(1) Any semi-automatic action, center fire rifle or carbine which accepts a detachable magazine with a capacity of twenty (20) rounds or more, including, but not limited to the following firearms or their copies: AR 15 semi-automatic assault rifles, Uzi semi-automatic assault rifles or carbines, Ingram Mac-10 semi-automatic assault carbines, Ingram Mac-11 semi-automatic assault carbines, Heckler and Koch 93 semi-automatic assault rifles, Heckler and Koch 91 semi-automatic assault rifles, AK-47 semi-automatic assault rifles, AKM-47 semi-automatic assault rifles, all Automat Kalashnikov weapons, M1-A semi-automatic assault rifles, M-14 semi-automatic assault rifles, Thompson semi-automatic carbines and any other semiautomatic carbines manufactured by Auto Ordnance;

(2) Any shotgun with a barrel of less than eighteen (18) inches and a folding stock or magazine capacity of more than six (6) rounds;

(3) Any weapon which may be readily restored to an operable assault weapon, as defined above in subsections (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this Section; and

(4) Any part, or combination of parts, designed or intended to convert a weapon into an assault weapon, as defined above in subsections (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this Section, or any combination of parts from which an assault weapon may be readily assembled, if those parts are in the possession or under control of the same person.

(b) As used in this Section, the term “semi-automatic” means a weapon which fires a single projectile for each single pull of the trigger and which employs a magazine.

(c) The term “assault weapon” does not include any of the following:

(1) Any of the above generally and specifically described weapons which is a “machine gun” as that term is defined by Section 12200 of the Penal Code of the State of California; any pistol, revolver or other firearm which is capable of being concealed upon one’s person, as defined and regulated by the provisions of Sections 12021 and 12025 of the Penal Code of the State of California;

(2) Any of the following: weapons which do not use fixed ammunition, weapons which were manufactured prior to 1898, manually operated bolt action weapons, lever action weapons, slide action weapons, single-shot weapons, multiple-barrel weapons, revolving cylinder weapons, semi-automatic weapons which use exclusively Mannlicher-style clips, semi-automatic weapons manufactured prior to 1954, rim-fire weapons that employ a tubular magazine;

(3) Any assault weapon which is an antique or relic firearm or other weapon falling within the specifications of paragraphs (5), (7), and (8) of subsection (b) of Section 12020 of the Penal Code of the State of California;

(4) Any short-barrelled rifle or shotgun as defined in subsection (c) of the Penal Code Section 12020; or

(5) Any assault weapon which has been modified either to render it permanently inoperable or to permanently make it a device no longer defined as an assault weapon.

(d) Except as specified in subsections (e), (f) and (g) of this Section, no person, including wholesale and retail gun dealers, shall sell, offer or display for sale, give, lend or transfer ownership of, or possess any assault weapon.

(e) Nothing in this Section shall prohibit the acquisition, possession, or disposition by police departments, sheriffs offices, marshals offices, the California Highway Patrol, other local, State and Federal law enforcement agencies, or the military and naval forces of this State or of the United States for use in the discharge of their official duties; nor shall anything in this Section prohibit the possession of assault weapons or magazines therefor by regular, salaried, full-time officers, employees or agents thereof when on duty and the use of assault weapons is within the scope of their duties.

(f) The provisions of this Section shall not apply to the possession of any assault weapon when such possession is prohibited by the provisions of Section 12031 of the Penal Code of the State of California or Section 2010 of the Fish and Game Code of the State of California.

(g) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (d) of this Section:

(1) Any person who obtains title to an assault weapon by request or intestate succession may retain possession for a period of time not to exceed six (6) months, and shall within that time transfer title of the weapon to a dealer licensed pursuant to Article 4 of the State of California Penal Code, commencing at Section 12250, or to the Los Angeles County Sheriffs Department or other police agency;

(2) An assault weapon may be maintained in the possession of an entity or establishment engaged in the business of motion picture, television or video production, but only for the purpose of being utilized as a prop during the course of motion picture, television or video production by an authorized participant therein or by an authorized agent or employee of the entity or establishment, and only if the entity or establishment properly secures such assault weapon from unauthorized use; and

(3) An assault weapon may be possessed by any Federal, State or local historical society, museum or institution collection which is open to the public provided any such weapon is properly housed, secured from unauthorized handling, and is unloaded. (Ord. 89-867, § 1)

4311 Sellers of Firearm Ammunition.
(a) Definitions.

1. “Chief of Police” means the Captain of the Carson Sheriff’s Station, of the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department, or designee.

2. “Firearm ammunition” means any self-contained unit consisting of the case, primer, propellant charge, and projectile for use in pistols, revolvers, rifles, shotguns, or any other device designed to be used as a weapon from which is expelled a projectile by the force of explosion or other form of combustion. “Firearm ammunition” shall not include blank ammunition used solely in the course of motion picture, television, video, or theatrical productions.

3. “Residential neighborhood” means any district of the City zoned for residential use or, if not so zoned, any street segment bounded by intersecting streets wherein over fifty (50) percent of the buildings on that street segment are used for residential purposes.

4. “Vendor” means any person who is engaged in the retail sale of firearm ammunition.

(b) Permit Required. No person shall engage in, manage, conduct, or carry on the business of the sales of firearm ammunition without a written permit from the Chief of Police.

(c) Fixed Location. Each vendor must have a fixed place of business. Sales of ammunition may be made only at said fixed location.

(d) Overlapping Business. If any person engages in, conducts, manages or carries on at the same time more than one (1) business requiring police permits, such person shall comply with all of the provisions affecting each business.

(e) Condition of Issuance. No permit or renewal permit for the sale of firearm ammunition shall be issued unless:

1. The applicant has obtained all other required permits for the operation of the business as proposed and has complied with all other applicable laws;

2. The applicant provides evidence of a possessory interest such as owner, lessee or renter, in the property at which the business is proposed to be conducted;

3. The proposed location of the business is in other than a residential neighborhood;

4. The applicant has obtained a policy of insurance as provided in subsection (f) of this section;

5. The applicant agrees to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, its officers, agents and employees, from claims arising from the negligence of the applicant or permittee.

(f) Insurance Requirements. The vendor shall maintain in full force and effect a policy of insurance on file with the Risk Manager. Such policy shall be executed by an insurance company admitted to do business in this state, and shall be in a form that the City deems proper. It shall insure the vendor against liability for damage to property and for injury to or the death of any person as a result of the sale, transfer or lease, or the advertising for sale, transfer or lease, or the offering or exposing for sale, transfer or lease, of any firearm ammunition. The policy shall also name the City and its officers, agents and employees as additional insureds. The minimum liability limit shall not be less than $1,000,000 for damage to or destruction of property in any one (1) incident, and $1,000,000 for the death or injury to any one (1) person; provided, however, that additional amounts may be required by the City if deemed necessary.

Such policy of insurance shall contain an endorsement providing that the policy will be continuous until canceled by a thirty (30) day written notice sent by registered mail to the City Risk Manager thirty (30) days in advance of the cancellation date. Prior to cancellation of any such policy, the vendor shall secure equivalent insurance. Failure to so do is grounds for revocation of the permit.

(g) Denial of Permit. Any applicant who is denied a permit shall be informed of the reasons for denial.

(h) Permit Valid for Issuance. When issued, the permit shall state on its face “Valid for Retail Sale of Firearm Ammunition.”

(i) Consent to Inspection. The acceptance of a permit to engage in the business of a firearms ammunition dealer constitutes consent to inspection of the books, records and business premises in the manner permitted by law and during ordinary business hours.

(j) Permit Assignment. The assignment or attempted assignment of any permit issued pursuant to this section, otherwise than in connection with a bona fide change of ownership, is unlawful and any such assignment or attempted assignment shall render the permit null and void.

(k) Permittee Responsible for the Conduct of Business. No firearm ammunition shall be sold or leased or offered for sale or lease or advertised for sale or lease by the vendor, nor shall the vendor otherwise conduct his or her business, in violation of the Penal Code of the State of California, this section or other applicable law.

(l) Conditions of Employment by Permittee. No officer, employee or agent of the vendor, hereinafter referred to collectively as “employee,” who will have access to or control of firearm ammunition shall:

1. Be under twenty-one (21) years of age;

2. Have had a Federal firearms license revoked or denied within the last year;

3. Be prohibited by law from owning, possessing or having custody or control of any firearm as defined in such law;

4. Have been convicted of any firearms or ammunition related offense within the last five (5) years.

(m) Recording of Information. The vendor shall comply with all requirements related to ammunition sales, as set forth in CMC 4312.

(n) Penalty. Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. (Ord. 09-1428, § 1)

4312 Requirements for Ammunition Sales.
(a) “Firearm ammunition” means any self-contained unit consisting of the case, primer, propellant charge, and projectile for use in pistols, revolvers, rifles, shotguns, or any other device designed to be used as a weapon from which is expelled a projectile by the force of explosion or other form of combustion.

“Firearm ammunition” shall not include blank ammunition used solely in the course of motion picture, television, video, or theatrical productions.

(b) The term “vendor,” as used in this section, shall mean any person who is engaged in the retail sale of firearm ammunition and retail firearms dealers.

(c) No vendor shall sell or otherwise transfer ownership of any firearm ammunition to any person other than those listed in subsection (g) of this section without at the time of purchase recording the following information on a form to be prescribed by the Chief of Police:

1. The date of the transaction;

2. The name, address and date of birth of the transferee;

3. The transferee’s driver’s license or other identification number and the state in which it was issued;

4. The brand, type and amount of ammunition transferred;

5. The transferee’s signature; and

6. The name of the sales person who processed the transaction.

The vendor shall also at the time of purchase or transfer obtain the right thumbprint of the purchaser or transferee on the above-referenced form.

(d) No vendor shall sell or otherwise transfer ownership of any firearm ammunition without complying with all requirements of subsection (c) of this section in a face-to-face transaction.

(e) The records required by this section shall be maintained on the premises of the vendor for a period of not less than two (2) consecutive calendar years from the date of the recorded transfer. Said records shall be subject to inspection at any time during normal business hours.

(f) No person shall knowingly make a false entry in, or fail to make a required entry in, or fail to obtain the required thumbprint, or fail to maintain in the required manner records prepared in accordance herewith. No person shall refuse to permit a Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department employee to examine any record prepared in accordance with this section during any inspection conducted pursuant to this section, or refuse to permit the use of any record or information therefrom by the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department.

(g) The requirements of subsection (c) of this section shall not apply when the purchaser is any of the following:

1. Any person described in Section 12302 or 12322 of the California Penal Code;

2. Any off-duty peace officer who displays proper agency identification which identifies him or her as an active peace officer;

3. Any person who has been issued a permit to carry a concealed weapon under the authority of Section 12050 of the California Penal Code;

4. Any security guard licensed under the authority of Section 12033 of the Penal Code of the State of California;

5. Any firearms dealer who has been issued a Federal Firearms License, or a Certificate of Eligibility by the State of California; and

6. Any firearm ammunition vendor who has been issued a seller of ammunition police permit by the City of Carson.

(h) Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. (Ord. 09-1428, § 2)

CHAPTER 4
SOLICITATION AND DISTRIBUTION OF LITERATURE
Sections:

§ 4400    Short Title.

§ 4401    Findings and Purposes of Chapter.

§ 4402    Violations.

Part 1. Solicitation and Distribution of Literature

§ 4410    Distribution of Literature to Unwilling Recipients.

§ 4411    Notice to Solicitors and Distributors.

§ 4412    Littering Forbidden – Lawful Methods of Distribution.

§ 4413    Newspapers Excepted.

§ 4414    Real Estate Solicitation.

§ 4415    Refusal to Leave on Request.

Part 2. Real Estate Advertising Signs

§ 4420    Repealed.

§ 4421    Repealed.

§ 4422    Repealed.

§ 4423    Repealed.

§ 4429    Repealed.

Part 3. Aggressive Solicitation

§ 4430    Definitions.

§ 4431    Prohibition of Aggressive Solicitation.

§ 4432    Prohibition of Solicitation from Specified Locations.

§ 4433    Demand for Services.

§ 4434    Free Speech.

§ 4435    Violation.

4400 Short Title.
Chapter 4 of Article IV of the Carson Municipal Code may be cited as the “Solicitation, Distribution of Literature, and Real Estate Advertising Sign Ordinance” of the City of Carson. (Ord. 72-240, § 1)

4401 Findings and Purposes of Chapter.
The City Council finds and declares as follows:

(a) That the distribution of commercial advertising material upon residential property in the City creates widespread litter which is unsightly, unhealthy, and difficult to remove.

(b) That door-to-door commercial solicitation of unwilling recipients by salesmen of goods and services jeopardizes the right of residents in this City to enjoy the privacy of their homes in tranquility and security, and serious public offenses have been committed by purported solicitors.

(c) That unscrupulous real estate salesmen have used and threaten to use handbills and door-to-door techniques to directly or indirectly induce panic sales of real estate based on supposed changes in the racial, economic and social character of a neighborhood.

(d) That such practices are injurious and inimical to the public health, safety and welfare of residents of this City and that such problems are becoming increasingly direct and substantial.

(e) That such practices are, therefore, declared to be a public nuisance.

(f) That such practices should be regulated to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of this City.

(g) That as a necessary means of preventing such practices, the regulation of real estate advertising signs is required. (Ord. 72-240, § 1)

4402 Violations.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 2 of Article I of this Code. (Ord. 79-479, § 4)

Part 1. Solicitation and Distribution
of Literature

4410 Distribution of Literature to Unwilling Recipients.
It shall be unlawful to pass out, give away, circulate, distribute, or deliver any printed or written handbill, circular, or advertising literature offering to sell or buy any goods, wares, merchandise, or commercial services or offering or soliciting to buy, sell, exchange, lease, rent or list any real property when the intended recipient thereof, or the owner, occupant, or resident of any property where such literature is left or intended to be left, has notified the distributor or disseminator of such material that such intended recipient, owner, occupant or resident does not wish to receive any literature. (Ord. 72-240, § 1)

4411 Notice to Solicitors and Distributors.
The notice referred to in the preceding section may be given to a distributor or disseminator of printed or written material by an owner, occupant, or resident of property by any one (1) or more of the following means:

(a) By posting the property on or near the front door or main entrance thereof with a sign at least twelve (12) square inches in area stating, in effect, “No Handbills,” or words of similar meaning.

(b) By written or oral communication to the distributor or disseminator of such material. (Ord. 72-240, § 1)

4412 Littering Forbidden – Lawful Methods of Distribution.
(a) It shall be unlawful to throw, cast or scatter any printed or written material of any type whatsoever in or onto any public place; into, or upon any automobile, vehicle or conveyance; or in, into or on the yard or grounds or on the doorstep, porch or vestibule of any residence, apartment or dwelling; or upon any vacant lot or other private property within the City.

(b) Any printed or written material which may be passed out, given away, circulated or delivered in the City pursuant to law, shall be:

(1) Placed in the hand of the intended recipient; or

(2) Bound, folded or weighted in such a manner that the material cannot be blown away, scattered or fragmented by the action of the elements and/or normal pedestrian or vehicular traffic; or

(3) Affixed to the premises for which it is intended by being tied to or slipped over a doorknob or other protrusion, or other means calculated to prevent the material from being blown away, scattered or fragmented by action of the elements. (Ord. 72-240, § 1)

4413 Newspapers Excepted.
The foregoing provisions of this Part shall not apply to the distribution of folded newspapers of general circulation, as the same are defined in the Government Code of the State of California. (Ord. 72-420, § 1)

4414 Real Estate Solicitation.
It shall be unlawful for any person offering or soliciting to buy, sell, exchange, lease, rent or list any real property in the course of, or as an incident to or part of such person’s business, occupation, trade or employment to go upon, ring the doorbell of, or knock on the door of or attempt to gain admittance to any occupied residence, dwelling or apartment within the City unless prior to such entry, doorbell ringing, knocking or attempt to gain admittance such person has been requested or invited by the owner or adult occupant of such premises to enter or be upon such premises for such purpose. (Ord. 72-420, § 1)

4415 Refusal to Leave on Request.
It shall be unlawful for a peddler or solicitor or person distributing literature of any kind, to refuse to leave any residence, dwelling or apartment or other private property within the City when requested to leave by the owner, occupant, resident or person in control thereof. (Ord. 72-240, § 1)

Part 2. Real Estate Advertising Signs

4420 Certain Residential Real Estate Advertising Signs Prohibited.
Repealed by Ord. 15-1563. (Ord. 72-240, § 1; Ord. 72-368, § 2)

4421 Regulation of Residential Real Estate Signs.
Repealed by Ord. 15-1563. (Ord. 72-240, § 1; Ord. 76-368, § 2)

4422 Violation Creating Nuisance.
Repealed by Ord. 15-1563. (Ord. 72-240, § 1; Ord. 76-368, § 2)

4423 Removal of Unauthorized Signs.
Repealed by Ord. 15-1563. (Ord. 76-368, § 1)

4429 Signs, Flags, Streamers, etc., on Vehicles.
Repealed by Ord. 15-1563. (Ord. 74-316, § 1)

Part 3. Aggressive Solicitation

4430 Definitions.
“Aggressive manner” means and includes:

A. Intentionally or recklessly making any physical contact with or touching another person in the course of the solicitation without the person’s consent;

B. Following the person being solicited, if that conduct is:

(1) Intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person’s possession, or

(2) Is intended to or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation;

C. Continuing to solicit within five (5) feet of the person being solicited after the person has made a negative response, if continuing the solicitation is:

(1) Intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person’s possession, or

(2) Is intended to or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation;

D. Intentionally or recklessly blocking the safe or free passage of the person being solicited or requiring the person, or the driver of the vehicle, to take evasive action to avoid physical contact with the person making the solicitation. Acts authorized as an exercise of one’s constitutional right to picket or legally protest shall not constitute obstruction of pedestrian or vehicular traffic;

E. Intentionally or recklessly using:

(1) Obscene or abusive language or gestures intended to or likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person’s possession, or

(2) Words intended to or reasonably likely to intimidate the person into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; or

F. Approaching the person being solicited in a manner that:

(1) Is intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person’s possession, or

(2) Is intended to or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation.

“Automated teller machine (ATM)” means a device, linked to a financial institution’s account records, which is able to carry out transactions, including, but not limited to, account transfers, deposits, cash withdrawals, balance inquiries and mortgage and loan payments.

“Automated teller machine facility” means the area comprised of one or more automatic teller machines and any adjacent space which is made available to banking customers after regular banking hours.

“Check-cashing business” means any person duly licensed by the State Banking Department to engage in the business of cashing checks, drafts or money orders for consideration pursuant to the provisions of the banking laws.

“Loitering” means standing around, moving slowly about, or lingering or lagging behind.

“Public area” means an area to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access, and includes, but is not limited to, alleys, bridges, buildings, driveways, public parking garages, parking lots, parks, playgrounds, schools, plazas, sidewalks, and streets open to the general public, and the doorways and entrances to buildings and dwellings, and the grounds enclosing them.

“Solicit” means to request an immediate donation of money or other thing of value from another person, regardless of the solicitor’s purpose or intended use of the money or other thing of value. The solicitation may be, without limitation, by the spoken, written, or printed word, or by other means of communication. (Ord. 13-1527, § 2)

4431 Prohibition of Aggressive Solicitation.
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value or to solicit the sale of goods or services in an aggressive manner in a public area. (Ord. 13-1527, § 3)

4432 Prohibition of Solicitation from Specified Locations.
In order to promote the safe and orderly flow of traffic and to prevent the harassment and intimidation of citizens and visitors in the vicinity of certain locations within the City, no person may solicit or beg for any moneys, goods or services, including offering any services in exchange for moneys, goods or services, while located:

A. In any public transportation vehicle or bus or within twenty-five (25) feet of any bus or public transport station or stop;

B. In any public garage;

C. Within twenty-five (25) feet of any entrance or exit of any bank or check-cashing businesses or within twenty-five (25) feet of any automated teller machine; provided, however, that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility;

D. On private property if the owner, tenant, or lawful occupant has asked the person not to solicit on the property, or has posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property; or

E. From any operator of a motor vehicle or a bicycle that is in traffic on a public street, whether in exchange for cleaning the bicycle or the vehicle windows or for blocking, occupying or reserving a public parking space, or directing the occupant to a public parking space; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the operator or passengers of such vehicle or bicycle. (Ord. 13-1527, § 4)

4433 Demand for Services.
This chapter is not intended to proscribe any demand for payment for services rendered or goods delivered. (Ord. 13-1527, § 5)

4434 Free Speech.
This chapter is not intended to restrict the exercise of protected free speech. (Ord. 13-1527, § 6)

4435 Violation.
Pursuant to CMC 1200, any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction and is subject to punishment as provided in Chapter 2 of Article I of the Carson Municipal Code. (Ord. 13-1527, § 7)

CHAPTER 5
REMOVAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES
Sections:

§ 4500    Short Title.

§ 4501    Declaration of Policy.

Part 1. General Provisions

§ 4510    Definitions.

§ 4511    Limitations of Chapter.

§ 4512    Enforcement of Chapter by City Administrator.

§ 4513    Misdemeanor.

Part 2. Procedure for Removal of Abandoned Vehicles

§ 4520    Notice of Intention to Remove Vehicle.

§ 4521    Request for Public Hearing – Absence of Request.

§ 4522    Public Hearing – Conduct.

§ 4522.5    Public Hearings – Findings and Determinations.

§ 4523    Appeal to the City Council.

§ 4524    Removal of Vehicle.

§ 4525    Notice of Removal to Department of Motor Vehicles.

§ 4526    Costs of Removal – Assessed Against Land.

4500 Short Title.
Chapter 5 of Article IV of the Carson Municipal Code may be cited as “The Abandoned Vehicle Ordinance” of the City of Carson. (Ord. 73-259, § 1)

4501 Declaration of Policy.
In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the State of California under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the City Council hereby makes the following findings and declarations:

The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property not including highways is hereby found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof, on private or public property not including highways, except as expressly hereinafter permitted, is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 73-259, § 1)

Part 1. General Provisions

4510 Definitions.
As used in this Chapter, unless the context otherwise clearly indicates, the following words and phrases are defined as follows:

(a) The term “vehicle” means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway except a device designed to be moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.

(b) The term “highway” means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. Highway includes street.

(c) The term “public property” does not include “highway.”

(d) The term “owner of the land” means the owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts thereof, is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll.

(e) The term “owner of the vehicle” means that last registered owner and legal owner of record.

(f) The term “City Administrator” means the City Administrator or the person designated in writing by the City Administrator to act in the City Administrator’s place. (Ord. 73-259, § 1; Ord. 84-676, § 2)

4511 Limitations of Chapter.
This Chapter shall not apply to:

(a) A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or

(b) A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer, or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise.

(c) A vehicle or parts thereof which is directly behind a solid fence six (6) feet in height or which is not plainly visible from a highway.

Nothing in this Section or Chapter shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 22660) of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code and this Chapter. (Ord. 73-259, § 1)

4512 Enforcement of Chapter by City Administrator.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this Chapter shall be administered and enforced by the City Administrator.

(a) Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private property or public property within the City of Carson, the City Administrator shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure prescribed herein.

(b) In the enforcement of this Chapter such officer and his deputies may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this Chapter.

(c) The City Administrator shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs (excluding the actual cost of removal of any vehicle or parts thereof) under this Chapter. (Ord. 73-259, § 1; Ord. 84-676, § 3)

4513 Misdemeanor.
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to abandon, park, store or leave, or permit the abandonment, parking, storing or leaving of any vehicle, or part thereof, which is subject to removal under the provisions of this Chapter for a period in excess of ten (10) days. (Ord. 73-259, § 1)

Part 2. Procedure for Removal of Abandoned Vehicles

4520 Notice of Intention to Remove Vehicle.
A ten (10) day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered mail to the owner of the land and to the last registered and legal owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. The notices of intention shall be in substantially the form set out in Section 2 of the ordinance codified in this Chapter. (Ord. 73-259, § 1)

4521 Request for Public Hearing – Absence of Request.
Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or the owner of the property on which the vehicle is located received by the City Administrator within ten (10) days after the mailing of the notices of intention to abate and remove, a public hearing shall be held by the City Council or its designate on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or parts thereof as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, and the assessment of the administrative costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof against the property on which it is located.

(a) If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land within such ten (10) day period, said statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing which does not require his presence.

(b) If such a request for hearing is not received within ten (10) days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the City of Carson shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance without holding a public hearing.

(c) Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by registered mail, at least ten (10) days before the hearing to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. (Ord. 73-259, § 1)

4522 Public Hearing – Conduct.
All hearings under this Chapter shall be held before the City Council or its designate which shall hear all facts and testimony it deems pertinent. Said facts and testimony may include testimony of the condition of the vehicle or parts thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on the said private property or public property. The City Council or its designate shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his reasons for such denial. (Ord. 73-259, § 1)

4522.5 Public Hearings – Findings and Determinations.
(a) The City Council or its designate may impose such other action as it deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this Chapter. It may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or parts thereof if, in its opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the City Council or its designate may find that a vehicle or parts thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or is inoperative on private or public property and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as hereinafter provided and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the land. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or parts thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site.

(b) If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the owner of the land and that he has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the City Council or its designate shall not assess the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such owner of the land.

(c) If an interested party makes a written presentation to the City Council or its designate but does not appear, he shall be notified in writing of the decision. (Ord. 73-259, § 1)

4523 Appeal to the City Council.
Any interested party may appeal the decision of the City Council or its designate by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Administrator within five (5) days after its decision. (Ord. 73-259, § 1)

4524 Removal of Vehicle.
Five (5) days after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle or parts thereof to be a public nuisance, five (5) days from the date of mailing of notice of the decision by the City Council or its designate if such notice is required by CMC 4522.5(c), or fifteen (15) days after action by the City Council authorizing removal following an appeal, whichever is later, the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard or automobile dismantler’s yard.

After a vehicle has been removed it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable.

When the City Council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this Chapter. (Ord. 73-259, § 1)

4525 Notice of Removal to Department of Motor Vehicles.
Within five (5) days after the date of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle or parts removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence or registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates. (Ord. 73-259, § 1)

4526 Costs of Removal – Assessed Against Land.
If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to CMC 4522.5 are not paid within thirty (30) days of the date of the order, or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the Government Code and shall be transmitted to the Tax Collector for collection. (Ord. 73-259, § 1)

CHAPTER 6
YARD SALE CONTROL
Sections:

§ 4600    Definitions.

§ 4601    Permit.

§ 4602    Application.

§ 4603    Business License.

§ 4604    Duration.

§ 4605    Locations.

§ 4606    Advertising.

4600 Definitions.
A “yard sale” is defined as a yard, garage, patio, or similar type sale held in any residential zone for the purpose of disposing of personal property. (Ord. 75-336; Ord. 12-1482, § 1)

4601 Permit.
No yard sale shall be conducted without a permit issued by the Administrative Services General Manager or his designated agent. (Ord. 75-336; Ord. 12-1482, § 1)

4602 Application.
An applicant for a permit shall furnish the following:

1. Full name.

2. Residence address (sale location).

3. The dates and hours of the sale.

4. A general description of the type of merchandise to be sold.

5. A declaration that the applicant is the owner of all of the property to be offered for sale and that the applicant will permit inspection by City staff and/or local law enforcement staff of all goods, products and merchandise offered or to be offered for sale.

6. A declaration that the applicant will comply with all the requirements of this Chapter. (Ord. 75-336; Ord. 12-1482, § 1)

4603 Business License.
No permit shall be issued unless the applicant has obtained a business license and paid the fee required under CMC 6310 and 6360. (Ord. 75-336; Ord. 12-1482, § 1)

4604 Duration.
Only three (3) permits per year will be issued to any one (1) address. Each such permit may be issued for a period not to exceed three (3) days or two (2) consecutive two (2) day weekends between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. (Ord. 75-336; Ord. 12-1482, § 1)

4605 Locations.
All display and related activity shall be conducted within the physical boundaries of the parcel address and not intrude on public right-of-way. (Ord. 75-336; Ord. 12-1482, § 1)

4606 Advertising.
No sign or other form of advertisement of a proposed yard sale shall be placed upon any public property within the City or upon any other property within the City, except upon the premises where a sale is conducted. No sign or other form of advertisement shall be exhibited for more than two (2) days prior to the day each sale period is to commence, and shall be removed by 6:00 p.m. on the termination day of each period. One (1) sign only, not exceeding fifteen (15) by twenty (20) inches in size, may be placed in the front or side yard of the premises where the sale is conducted. The sign shall be placed at least five (5) feet from the front property line, which for purposes of this Section shall be considered the inside edge of the sidewalk or, if there is no sidewalk, then the inside edge of curb. No flags, banners or similar items shall be displayed. (Ord. 75-336; Ord. 12-1482, § 1)

CHAPTER 7
MOBILEHOME SPACE RENT CONTROL
Sections:

§ 4700    Short Title.

§ 4701    Definitions.

§ 4702    Mobilehome Park Rental Review Board.

§ 4703    Base Rent.

§ 4704.010    Rent Increase.

§ 4704.020    Permitted Rent Increases Based upon Application Approved by the Board.

§ 4705    Maximum Allowable Rent.

§ 4706    Tenancies Not Governed by the Mobilehome Residency Law.

§ 4707    Refusal of Homeowner to Pay Illegal Rent.

§ 4708    Remedies.

§ 4709    City Council Review of This Chapter.

§ 4710    Lease Regulations.

§ 4711    Utility Fees – Registration and Posting.

4700 Short Title.
Chapter 7 of Article IV of the Carson Municipal Code may be cited as the “Mobilehome Space Rent Control Ordinance” of the City of Carson. (Ord. 79-485U)

4701 Definitions.
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall be defined as follows:

(a) “Board” shall mean the Mobilehome Park Rental Review Board of the City of Carson.

(b) “Camping trailer” shall mean a vehicular portable unit mounted on wheels and constructed with collapsible partial sidewalls which fold for towing by another vehicle and unfold for occupancy, and designed for human habitation for recreational or emergency occupancy.

(c) “Capital improvement” shall mean improvements to a park, major refurbishment of a park and rehabilitation of a park which involve more than ordinary maintenance.

(d) “Department” shall mean the Community Development Department of the City of Carson.

(e) “Homeowner” shall mean an owner of a mobilehome in a mobilehome park in the City.

(f) “Mobilehome” shall mean a vehicle, designed or used for human habitation, including a camping trailer, travel trailer, motor home and slide-in camper, when used as the principal place of habitation for the occupants thereof.

(g) “Mobilehome space” shall mean the site within a mobilehome park intended, designed, or used for the location or accommodation of a mobilehome and any accessory structures or appurtenances attached thereto or used in conjunction therewith.

(h) “Motor home” shall mean a vehicular unit built on or permanently attached to a self-propelled motor vehicle chassis, chassis cab or van, which becomes an integral part of the completed vehicle, designed for human habitation for recreational or emergency occupancy.

(i) “Park Owner” shall mean an owner or operator of a mobilehome park or a person authorized to act on the owner’s behalf in operating the park.

(j) “Rehabilitation” work shall mean any renovation or repair work completed on or in a mobilehome park which was performed in order to comply with the direction or order of a public agency, or to repair damage resulting from fire, earthquake, or other casualty.

(k) “Rent” shall mean the consideration paid for the use or occupancy of a mobilehome space.

(l) “Slide-in camper” shall mean a portable unit, consisting of a roof, floor and sides, designed to be loaded onto and unloaded from the bed of a pickup truck, and designed for human habitation for recreational or emergency occupancy and shall include a truck camper.

(m) “Tenancy” shall mean the right of a Homeowner to use or occupy a mobilehome space in a park in the City.

(n) “Resident Homeowner” shall mean a Homeowner who has a tenancy in the park and resides in the mobilehome in the park.

(o) “Travel trailer” shall mean a portable unit, mounted on wheels, of such size and weight as not to require special highway movement permits when drawn by a motor vehicle, and for human habitation for recreational or emergency occupancy. (Ord. 79-485U; Ord. 83-659; Ord. 86-768, § 1; Ord. 98-1130, § 2)

4702 Mobilehome Park Rental Review Board.
(a) The Mobilehome Park Rental Review Board is hereby established and shall consist of seven (7) members. In order to provide varied and balanced backgrounds, two (2) members shall be Resident Homeowners, two (2) members shall be Park Owners and three (3) members shall be At Large Members, who shall be residents of the City who are not Homeowners, Park Owners, landlords, property managers or tenants in multifamily housing. There shall also be eight (8) Alternate Members; two (2) Alternates shall be Resident Homeowners, two (2) Alternates shall be Park Owners and four (4) Alternates shall be At Large. The terms of the Board Members shall be two (2) years and a Board Member shall continue to serve until a successor has been appointed. The terms of Board Members appointed following adoption of the ordinance codified in this Section shall expire on March 31, 2001.

All Board Members and Alternate Board Members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. The tenure of any Board Member and Alternate shall be terminable at will, and without cause, on the motion of any member of the Council, duly seconded, and with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. If a vacancy occurs in a Board Member or Alternate Board Member position, an appointment shall be made by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor. If a vacancy should occur in the office of Mayor or Mayor is elected, the tenure of the Board Member or Alternate shall expire when the vacancy in the Mayor’s office has been filled or Mayor takes office, at which time the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor, shall make the appointment of the Board Member or Alternate. Each Board Member or Alternate shall continue to serve until a successor has been appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor, and has qualified unless the City Council declares the position to be vacant. All appointments shall be made in an open meeting of the City Council.

An Alternate shall serve on the Board in the absence of a Board Member. The Alternate to be called first, if available, shall have the same qualification as to home ownership or park ownership as the absent Board Member. If the Alternate Member with the same qualifications as the absent Member should be unavailable, an At Large Alternate shall be called on to serve in place of the absent Member. A Resident Homeowner Alternate shall not serve in place of a Park Owner Member and a Park Owner Alternate shall not serve in place of a Resident Homeowner Member.

(b) If a member of the Board is absent from three (3) successive regular meetings without being excused by the Board, or is absent for any reason for more than six (6) regular meetings in any twelve (12) month period, the office of such member shall be vacated and the Chair shall immediately notify the City Manager, who shall notify the City Council that said office is vacant. Upon such notification, a successor for the remainder of the term of such member shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire City Council present, including the Mayor.

(c) The Board shall establish the time of any hearings or meetings held pursuant to this Chapter and such hearings or meetings shall be held in the City Hall as often as the Board determines to be necessary to discharge its duties hereunder.

(d) The Board shall elect one (1) of its members as the Chair and one (1) as Chair Pro Tem and said election shall be held as soon as practicable after each new term commences or new appointments are made to the majority of the Board Member positions. Four (4) Board Members, counting any Alternate serving in the absence of a Board Member, shall constitute a quorum. The decisions of the Board shall be made by a majority vote, provided however, that if there are not an equal number of Resident Homeowner Members and Park Owner Members, then a two-thirds (2/3) vote, and in no case less than four (4) affirmative votes, shall be required to reach a decision on a rent increase or rent adjustment application.

(e) The duties and responsibilities of the Board shall include the following:

(1) The Board shall make any recommendations to the City Council the Board deems appropriate regarding the implementation and enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter.

(2) The Board shall hear and determine rent adjustment applications seeking either an adjustment for capital improvement expenditures incurred and/or for an adjustment to assure a Park Owner a “fair return” as that term is defined by law, and determine whether to approve, modify or disapprove such a rent adjustment pursuant to the procedures set forth in CMC 4704.020.

(3) Each Board Member or Alternate of the Mobilehome Park Rental Review Board shall receive compensation at the rate of $35.00 for each meeting of the Mobilehome Park Rental Review Board attended by such Board Member or Alternate. Such compensation shall be paid on the first register of the month following each meeting of the Board. The Secretary of the Mobilehome Park Rental Review Board shall submit to Finance Officer at the end of each applicable month a statement showing the number of meetings of the Mobilehome Park Rental Review Board attended by each Board Member or Alternate during each month. Board Members or Alternates required to make site visits as part of their preparation for a meeting may submit a request for mileage reimbursement on the City’s mileage reimbursement form using the guidelines for mileage reimbursement delineated in Standard Management Procedure (SMP) No. 3.18, or such future SMPs that may be approved. No other compensation shall be paid for expenses incurred by the Board Members or Alternates in the performance of their duties, except that the City Council may from time to time authorize in advance expenditures for attendance at seminars, institutes, or other meetings which the City Council finds to be beneficial to the Board Members or Alternates in the performance of their duties, and in the best interests of the City. Claims for such expenses shall be filed with the Finance Officer on the appropriate form and shall be subject to audit and approval by the City Council. (Ord. 79-485U; Ord. 80-519, § 1; Ord. 81-582, § 1; Ord. 82-614, § 1; Ord. 88-847, § 1; Ord. 92-983, § 2; Ord. 92-988U, §§  1, 3; Ord. 92-994U, § 1; Ord. 97-1113, § 1; Ord. 97-1127U, § 1; Ord. 98-1130, §§ 3 – 5; Ord. 99-1164U, §§ 1, 2; Ord. 04-1325, § 9; Ord. 04-1330, § 9; Ord. 05-1333, § 1; Ord. 06-1368, § 15; Ord. 13-1523, § 2; Ord. 17-1622, § 2)

4703 Base Rent.
Except as hereinafter provided, a Park Owner shall not demand, accept, or retain rent for a mobilehome space exceeding the rent in effect for said space on May 1, 1979. If a previously rented mobilehome space was not rented on May 1, 1979, the Park Owner shall not demand, accept, or retain rent for said space exceeding the rent in effect during the last month the space was rented prior to May 1, 1979. If a mobilehome space is rented for the first time after May 1, 1979, the Park Owner shall not demand, accept or retain rent for said space exceeding the rent first charged for the space. No Park Owner shall send a notice containing the specific amount of a proposed rental increase prior to receiving approval of a rent increase from the Board or from the Department Director. Except as herein provided, a Park Owner shall not demand, accept or retain rent exceeding the rent in effect on June 1, 1983, for a mobilehome space that was not regulated by this Section prior to the amendment of this Section on June 20, 1983. If such a mobilehome space was not rented on June 1, 1983, the Park Owner shall not demand, accept or retain rent for said space exceeding the rent in effect during the last month the space was rented prior to June 1, 1983. (Ord. 79-485U; Ord. 80-504U; Ord. 83-695U, § 2; Ord. 98-1130, § 6; Ord. 17-1622, § 6)

4704.010 Rent Increase.
(a) Except as provided in CMC 4704.020 and/or 4706, the maximum rent that a park owner may request, demand, or receive for a mobilehome space covered by this Chapter shall not exceed the monthly rent charged for such mobilehome space as of the date of approval of the park’s last rent increase under this Section or under CMC 4704.020, whichever is later. Rent increases made pursuant to this Section shall not occur more than once during any twelve (12) month period and shall be the lesser of an eight (8) percent increase or seventy-five (75) percent of the change in the cost of living since the last rent increase under this Section or under CMC 4704.020, whichever is later, as indicated in the latest available Consumer Price Index (“CPI”).

(b) As used herein, the term “Consumer Price Index” shall mean the All Urban Consumers in the Los Angeles-Riverside-Orange County Metropolitan Area (commonly known as the “CPI-U”) as provided by the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics (based on 1967 = one hundred (100) base).

(c) Computation of any rent increase allowable by this Section shall be according to the following formula:

(1) The allowable percentage rent increase (I), expressed as a decimal figure, shall be calculated as follows: I = (A/B - 1) x 0.75 where A is the latest available CPI as of the date the CPI rent increase application is deemed substantially complete, and B is the CPI as of the date of approval of the park’s last rent increase under this Section or under CMC 4704.020, whichever is later;

(2) Multiply the allowable percentage rent increase by the current rent. The resulting figure is the maximum allowable rent increase.

(d) An application for a CPI rent increase pursuant to this Section shall be filed upon a form prescribed by the Department and shall be accompanied by the payment of a fee to be established by resolution of the City Council. The application shall specify the address of the mobilehome park, the space number or numbers for which the CPI rent adjustment is requested, and the amount of the CPI rent adjustment permitted under this Section.

(e) A determination of completeness shall be made in the manner and within the time specified in CMC 4704.020(c). Homeowners may review the application in the Department and may also obtain copies of the application upon payment of the City’s copying costs.

(f) Unless waived by the park owner in writing, the Department Director shall, within thirty (30) days of the date that the application is determined to be substantially complete, approve the rent increase as properly calculated under this Section. The determination of the Department Director on a CPI rent increase application shall be final. (Ord. 17-1622, § 4)

4704.020 Permitted Rent Increases Based upon Application Approved by the Board.
(a) A park owner who, notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 4704.010, seeks a rent adjustment to assure that the park owner is receiving a “fair return,” as that term is defined in law, may file with the Department a rent increase application for one (1) or more mobilehome spaces for approval by the Board pursuant to this Section. A park owner, a resident homeowner or the Department may file an application for a rent adjustment for one (1) or more spaces pursuant to subsection (h) of this Section.

(b) An application for a rent adjustment pursuant to this Section shall be filed upon a form prescribed by the Department and shall be accompanied by the payment of a fee to be established by resolution of the City Council. The application shall specify the address of the mobilehome park, the space number or numbers for which rent is requested to be increased, the amount of the requested rent increase, the facts supporting the application. Supporting documentation shall be filed with the application and the applicant shall produce at the request of the Department any records, receipts, reports, or other documents that the Department may deem necessary for the Board to make its determination concerning the application. The application shall be made under penalty of perjury and supporting documents shall be certified or verified as requested by the Department.

(c) A rent increase application accompanied by the required fee shall be accepted and lodged by the Department but shall not be filed until it is substantially complete and the time periods provided by this Chapter for processing the application shall not begin to run until an application is substantially complete and filed. The Department shall determine within thirty (30) days after the lodging of an application whether said application is complete. If the Department determines that an application is not complete, it shall so notify the applicant in writing and the notice shall state what additional information is required to complete the application. An application which is substantially complete but lacks documentation to support certain claims can be processed for hearing, but any claimed expenses lacking adequate documentation shall not be allowed as operating expenses. Any application which has not been substantially completed within six (6) months of its submission to the Department shall be returned to the applicant. Thereafter, a new application and fee shall be required if the applicant wishes to apply for a rent increase.

(d) Upon receipt of a rent increase application, the Department shall mail a notice to the affected Homeowners informing them that an application has been lodged and is being reviewed for completeness. The notice shall also state the amount of the increase being sought. Homeowners may review the application in the Department and may also obtain copies of the application upon payment of the City’s copying costs. Upon determining that the application is substantially complete, the Department shall mail a notice to the applicant stating that the application is substantially complete and has been filed. At the same time, the Department shall mail a notice to the affected Homeowners stating that the application is substantially complete and informing them of the amount of the rent increase sought and that they have thirty (30) days from the date of the notice in which to submit written statements, photographs, documents, or other evidence relating to the application, to the Department. No written statements, photographs, documents or other evidence relating to the application may be filed later than ten (10) days before the hearing on the application. All materials submitted by a Park Owner, Homeowner or any other interested party are public records, may be inspected and may be copied upon payment of the City’s copying costs.

(e) The Board shall hold a public hearing on an application within sixty (60) days of the date that the application is determined to be substantially complete, except as provided in subsection (j) of this Section. Notice of the time, date and place of the hearing shall be mailed to the applicant and affected Homeowners at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing date. The Staff report on an application shall be provided to Board Members, and made available to the applicant, the Homeowners and their designated representatives, if any, at least five (5) days prior to the hearing.

(f) (1) At the public hearing, the applicant, affected Homeowners, their representatives and any interested person may offer any testimony that is relevant to the application. They may offer documents, written declarations, photographs or other written or documentary evidence for the first time at the hearing only if good cause is shown why such evidence could not, with reasonable diligence, have been filed with the Department ten (10) days prior to the hearing and that the material was filed with the Department as soon as possible. Board Members and Alternates may testify at a hearing on a rent increase application only when they have recused themselves and the application involves a park in which they reside, have a financial interest or manage, or in which a parent, grandparent or siblings of the Board Member or Alternate resides.

(2) All persons testifying at the hearing shall be sworn under penalty of perjury. Formal rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the hearing.

(3) The Board may approve the rent increase requested, approve a modified rent increase or deny the application pursuant to the standards established by subsections (g) and (h) of this Section and shall adopt a written resolution setting forth its findings and decision no later than seventy-five (75) days after the application was deemed substantially complete.

(g) The Board shall grant such rent increases as it determines to be fair, just and reasonable. A rent increase is fair, just and reasonable if it protects Homeowners from excessive rent increases and allows a fair return on investment to the Park Owner. The Board shall consider the following factors and any Guidelines adopted by the City Council, as well as any other relevant factors, in making its determination and no one (1) factor shall be determinative.

(1) Changes in the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers in the Los Angeles-Anaheim-Riverside Area published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. If the Bureau of Labor Statistics subsequently changes the geographic reporting area in which the City is located, the Board shall use the most current applicable reporting area established by the Bureau.

(2) The rent lawfully charged for comparable mobilehome spaces in the City of Carson.

(3) The length of time since either the last hearing and final determination by the Board on a rent increase application or the last rent increase if no previous rent increase application has been made.

(4) The completion of any capital improvements related to the mobilehome space or spaces in the rent increase application, including such items of cost as materials, labor, interest, permit fees and other items as established by evidence and deemed relevant by the Board.

(5) Changes in property taxes or other taxes related to the subject mobilehome park.

(6) Changes in the rent paid by the applicant for the lease of the land on which the subject mobilehome park is located.

(7) Changes in the utility charges for the subject mobilehome park paid by the applicant and the extent, if any, of reimbursement from the tenants.

(8) Changes in reasonable operating and maintenance expenses.

(9) The need for repairs caused by circumstances other than ordinary wear and tear.

(10) The amount and quality of services provided by the applicant to the affected tenant.

(11) Any existing written lease lawfully entered into between the applicant and the affected tenant.

(h) (1) The Board may provide that an increase in rent, or a portion of an increase in rent, granted by the Board be limited to the length of time necessary to allow the Park Owner to reasonably amortize the cost of a capital improvement, including interest and any costs necessary to the capital improvement, excluding attorneys’ fees. Such increases shall not continue beyond the time necessary for reasonable amortization of the cost of such improvement and shall be listed separately from the base rent for a space on the monthly rent statement, invoice or bill provided to the Homeowners. When calculating general rent increases, any capital improvement rent increase shall not be included in the existing rent.

(2) If the cost of a capital improvement for which an increase was granted under this subsection is later recovered by the Park Owner from a third party before the expiration of the amortization period approved by the Board, the Park Owner, any affected Homeowner or the Director of the Department or his designee, may file an application with the Department for the termination of the capital improvement rent increase on the ground that the Park Owner has recovered the cost of the improvement through insurance, litigation or other right of indemnity. The capital improvement rent increase shall be suspended pending determination of the application and if the application is denied the amortization period during which the increase may be collected shall be extended as necessary to allow the full amortization period originally allowed by the Board.

(3) Upon receipt of an application to terminate a capital improvement rent increase, and upon satisfactory proof of recovery of the cost of the improvement, such as, but not limited to, a court judgment or insurer’s acknowledgment of coverage, the Director of the Department shall give notice of the application to the Park Owner and affected Homeowners and the capital improvement rent increase shall be terminated within fifteen (15) days unless within ten (10) days of the notice it is protested by the Park Owner on the ground that he or she has not in fact recovered the cost of the improvement. If satisfactory proof of recovery of the cost of the improvement is not submitted with the application, the Department shall give notice of that determination to the applicant, the affected Homeowners and the Park Owner and the Director’s decision shall become final within fifteen (15) days of the notice unless protested by the applicant or an affected Homeowner within fifteen (15) days of the notice. If a protest is filed by an affected Homeowner or the Park Owner, mailed notice shall be given to the affected Homeowners and Park Owner that the protest will be heard by the Board on a date not later than thirty (30) days after the filing of the protest. The notice shall be mailed no later than fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing and the Board shall make its decision by written resolution setting forth its findings within forty-five (45) days after the filing of the protest. (Ord. 80-544, § 1; Ord. No. 83-655, § 1)

(i) Notice of the Board’s determination on an application shall be mailed to the applicant, the Park Owner and all affected Homeowners at the mobilehome spaces designated in the application. The determination of the Board shall be final.

(j) The time in which the Board must open the hearing on an application and the time in which the Board must make any final decision may be extended with the consent of the applicant or Park Owner and may be extended without the consent of the applicant or Park Owner if the need for the extension is caused by the conduct of the applicant or the Park Owner. In the event the Board is unable to make its decision within the time limits set forth in this Chapter, including any extensions of time consented to by the applicant, the Board’s inability to make a timely decision is not due to the conduct of the applicant or the Park Owner, or some cause beyond the Board’s control, such as, but not limited to, fire, earthquake or flood, the Board shall at the time it grants any rent increase based on subsections (g) and (h) of this Section grant a temporary additional rent increase to the applicant to compensate the applicant for the difference between the rental income received between the time when an increase should have been granted pursuant to the time limits set forth in this Chapter and the rental income that would have been received if the increase had been timely granted.

(k) Deleted by Ord. 98-1130. (Ord. 79-485U; Ord. 80-544, § 1; Ord. 82-624, §§ 1 – 4; Ord. 98-1130, §§ 8 – 15; Ord. 17-1622, § 5. Formerly 4704)

4705 Maximum Allowable Rent.
The maximum allowable rent (“MAR”) for any mobilehome space in a park in the City is the last rent approved by the Director pursuant to CMC 4704.010 or the last rent approved by the Board for either capital improvements expenditures or seeking a “fair return” rent increase pursuant to CMC 4704.020. Any park which has not sought approval of a rent increase from the Board by July 31, 1997 Ordinance (No. 98–1136) shall register, on a form provided by the Department, the rent for each space in the park on July 31, 1997, and the amenities and services provided to the Homeowners in the park on that date without any charge beyond the rent in effect on that date, within thirty (30) days of the date this ordinance (No. 98–1136) becomes effective. The rent so registered for each space shall become the MAR for that space unless that rent is challenged by a Resident Homeowner in the park within thirty (30) days after notice is sent by the Department to each Homeowner showing the rent that has been registered for each space. The challenge must be based on evidence showing that the rent registered exceeds that in effect in May of 1979 plus fifty (50) percent of the increase in the CPI since that date or exceeds the rent charged to the Resident Homeowner on July 31, 1997. Any challenge shall be submitted in writing to the Department. Upon receipt of the challenge, the Department shall notify the Park Owner that he or she has thirty (30) days in which to provide any information relevant to determining the MAR for the space or spaces for which the challenge has been filed. The Department shall set a public hearing to determine the MAR for each space for which a challenge has been filed no later than thirty (30) days after the expiration of the Park Owner’s time to respond. Notice of the time, date and place of the hearing shall be mailed to the Park Owner and affected Homeowners no later than fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing and no written or documentary evidence may be submitted later than ten (10) days prior to the hearing date. The hearing shall be held according to the provisions governing hearings on rent increase applications. The Board shall adopt a written resolution setting forth its findings and the MAR for the spaces for which a challenge was filed within fifteen (15) days after the date on which the public hearing is opened. No fee shall be charged for registering rents under this subsection or for filing a challenge to a rent or rents challenged pursuant to this subsection. (Ord. 98-1130, § 16; Ord. 17-1622, § 3)

4706 Tenancies Not Governed by the Mobilehome Residency Law.
(a) A Resident Homeowner whose tenancy is not regulated by the provisions of the Mobilehome Residency Law (Civil Code Sections 798 through 799.6) shall not be charged a fee for anything other than rent or utilities with the exception of incidental reasonable charges for services actually rendered.

(b) A tenancy which is not subject to the provisions of the Mobilehome Residency Law (Civil Code Sections 798 through 799.6) shall not be terminated nor shall its renewal be refused, except for one (1) or more of the following reasons:

(1) Failure of the Homeowner to comply with a local ordinance or State law or regulation relating to mobilehomes within a reasonable time after the Homeowner receives a notice of noncompliance from the appropriate governmental agency.

(2) Conduct by the Homeowner, upon the mobilehome park premises, which constitutes a substantial annoyance to other Homeowners.

(3) Failure of the Homeowner to comply with reasonable rule or regulation of the mobilehome park. No act or omission of the Homeowner shall constitute such a failure to comply unless and until the Park Owner has given the Homeowner written notice of the alleged rule or regulation violation and the Homeowner has failed to adhere to the rule or regulation within seven (7) days.

(4) Nonpayment of rent, utility charges, or reasonable incidental service charges.

(5) Condemnation of the mobilehome park.

(6) Change of use of the mobilehome park; provided, that:

(A) The Park Owner has complied with the provisions of Section 798.56 of the California Civil Code, Government Code Sections 65863.7 and 65863.8 and CMC 9128.21.

(B) The Park Owner gives the Homeowner written notice of the proposed change twelve (12) months or more before the date of the proposed change.

(C) The Park Owner gives each proposed Homeowner whose tenancy will commence within twelve (12) months of the proposed change, written notice thereof prior to the inception of his tenancy.

(c) Notice of termination or refusal to renew must be given in writing in the manner prescribed by Section 1162 of the Code of Civil Procedure at least sixty (60) days prior to the termination date of the tenancy. Said notice shall state the date the tenancy terminates, the reason for the termination or refusal to renew, and the specific facts upon which the Park Owner is relying. (Ord. 79-485U; Ord. 92-965, § 11; Ord. 98-1130, §§ 16, 17)

4707 Refusal of Homeowner to Pay Illegal Rent.
A Homeowner may refuse to pay any rent in excess of the maximum allowable rent (“MAR”) permitted by this Chapter. The fact that such unpaid rent is in excess of the MAR shall be a defense in any action brought to recover possession of a mobilehome space for nonpayment of rent or to collect the illegal rent. (Ord. 79-485U; Ord. 98-1130, § 18)

4708 Remedies.
(a) Any person who demands, accepts or retains any payment of rent in violation of the provisions of this Chapter shall be liable in a civil action to the person from whom such payment is demanded, accepted or retained for damages in the sum of three (3) times the amount by which the payment or payments demanded, accepted, or retained exceed the maximum rent which could lawfully be demanded, accepted or retained together with reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs as determined by the court.

(b) Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable in the manner provided by CMC 1200.

(c) Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6 is applicable to decisions of the Mobilehome Park Rental Review Board granting or denying rent increase applications and no legal challenge to any such decision of the Board may be brought unless it is filed within ninety (90) days of the Board’s final decision, as set forth in its written resolution making findings. The Board’s resolution granting or denying the increase shall state that the time within which judicial review must be sought is governed by Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6 and a copy of the resolution, including a certificate of mailing, shall be sent to the applicant, and to a representative of the residents of the affected mobilehome park, if one has been designated, by first class mail. (Ord. 79-485U; Ord. 94-1031, § 1)

4709 City Council Review of This Chapter.
The City Council shall review the provisions of this Chapter six (6) months after the date of adoption thereof, and at any other time deemed appropriate, in order to consider the following:

(a) Whether mobilehome space rent control continues to be necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare;

(b) Whether the implementation of the provisions of this Chapter have been adequate; and

(c) Whether the provisions of this Chapter should be amended to provide more effective regulations or to avoid unnecessary hardship. (Ord. 79-485U)

4710 Lease Regulations.
No Park Owner may require, directly or indirectly, that any Homeowner or prospective Homeowner sign a lease or rental agreement that provides that it shall be exempt from local rent control or provides for space rent in excess of that permitted by this Chapter as a condition of tenancy in the park and no Park Owner may deny a tenancy to a prospective purchaser of a mobilehome in the park on the ground that the prospective purchaser will not sign such a lease or rental agreement. (Ord. 91-941U, § 1; Ord. 91-941, § 1; Ord. 92-970U, § 2; Ord. 92-970, § 2; Ord. 98-1130, § 19)

4711 Utility Fees – Registration and Posting.
(a) Not less than ninety (90) days prior to imposing a separate charge for a utility service previously included in the rent pursuant to Civil Code Section 798.41, a Park Owner shall file notice thereof with the Department on a form provided by the City, which specifies the current rent for each space, the new charge to be imposed, the duration and expiration date of the separate charge if it has a limited duration or is amortized for a specified period, the rent reduction to be made simultaneously with imposition of the charge, the calculation of the new charge and rent reduction and the new MAR for each space.

(b) Not less than ninety (90) days prior to imposing, increasing, decreasing or eliminating a charge separately billed pursuant to Civil Code Section 798.49, a Park Owner shall file a notice with the Department on a form provided by the City which specifies for each space the current rent, the amount of the new charge or charge eliminated or the amount of any increase or decrease in an existing charge, the fee or assessment on which the charge or change therein is based, the basis for the amount of the charge or any change therein and the duration and expiration date of the charge if it has a limited duration or is amortized for a specified period.

(c) Within ten (10) days of executing any rental agreement or lease which is exempt from this Chapter pursuant to Civil Code Section 798.17, a Park Owner shall register that lease with the Department on a form provided by the City, which specifies the beginning and ending date of the lease and the rental rate(s) applicable during the duration of the lease, and shall attach thereto a copy of the lease.

(d) Every Park Owner shall post a copy of this Chapter in the park office or manager’s office and in any clubhouse, recreation building or room, auditorium or assembly room, shall give each prospective Homeowner and Resident a copy of this Chapter before the prospective Homeowner executes any lease or rental agreement with the park and shall file a signed receipt from each new Homeowner acknowledging receipt of a copy of this Chapter prior to execution of any lease or rental agreement with the Department within five (5) days of execution of the lease or rental agreement. (Ord. 92-970U, § 1; Ord. 92-970, § 1; Ord. 93-1000U, § 1; Ord. 93-1000, § 1; Ord. 98-1130, § 20)

CHAPTER 8
SALE AND DISPLAY OF NARCOTIC AND OTHER PARAPHERNALIA
Sections:

§ 4800    Minors.

§ 4801    Minors – Excluded.

§ 4802    Sale and Display Rooms.

§ 4803    Same – Nuisance.

4800 Minors.
No owner, manager or proprietor in charge of any room in any place of business selling, or displaying for the purpose of sale, any device, contrivance, instrument or paraphernalia for smoking or injecting or consuming marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled substance, as defined in the Health and Safety Code of the State of California (other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs), roach clips, cigarette papers and rollers designed for the smoking of the foregoing, shall allow or permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to be, remain in, enter or visit such room unless such minor person is accompanied by one (1) of his or her parents, or by his or her legal guardian. (Ord. 81-578, § 1)

4801 Minors – Excluded.
A person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall not be, remain in, enter or visit any room in any place used for the sale, or displaying for sale, devices, contrivances, instruments or paraphernalia for smoking or injecting marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled substance (other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs), including roach clips, and cigarette papers and rollers designed and used for smoking the foregoing, unless such person is accompanied by one (1) of his or her parents, or his or her legal guardian. (Ord. 81-578, § 1)

4802 Sale and Display Rooms.
A person shall not maintain in any place or business to which the public is invited the display for sale, or the offer to sell, of devices, contrivances, instruments or paraphernalia for smoking or injecting marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled substance (other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs), including roach clips, and cigarette papers and rollers designed and used for smoking the foregoing, unless within a separate room or enclosure from which minors not accompanied by a parent or legal guardian are excluded. A sign shall be posted at each entrance to such a room indicating in reasonably visible and legible words that narcotic paraphernalia are being offered for sale in such a room, and minors unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian are excluded. (Ord. 81-578, § 1)

4803 Same – Nuisance.
The distribution or possession for the purpose of sale, exhibition, or display in any place of business from which minors are not excluded as set forth in this Chapter, and where devices, contrivances, instruments or paraphernalia for smoking or injecting marijuana, hashish, PCP or any controlled substance (other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs), including roach clips, and cigarette papers and rollers designed and used for smoking the foregoing, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and may be abated pursuant to the provisions of Section 731 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the State of California. This remedy is in addition to any other remedy provided by law, including the penalty provisions applicable for violation of the terms and provisions of this Code. (Ord. 81-578, § 1)

CHAPTER 9
BURGLAR ALARMS
Sections:

§ 4900    Definitions.

§ 4901    Direct Dial Telephone Device.

§ 4902    Audible Alarm Requirements.

§ 4903    False Alarm.

§ 4904    Repair.

§ 4905    Permit Required.

§ 4906    Application for Permit.

§ 4907    Notification of False Alarm.

§ 4908    Public Nuisance Alarm.

§ 4909    Service Charge.

§ 4910    Service Charge – Appeal.

§ 4911    Suspension or Revocation.

§ 4912    Hearing.

§ 4913    Exemptions.

§ 4914    Violation and Enforcement.

4900 Definitions.
As used in this Chapter, the words hereinafter defined are used as so defined unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended:

(a) “Alarm Owner” shall mean the person who owns, leases, rents, uses or makes available for use by his agents, employees, representatives or family, any alarm system.

(b) “Alarm System” shall mean any device, whether known as a burglary, robbery or intrusion alarm, direct dial telephone device, audible or silent alarm or by any other name, which is used for the detection of an unauthorized entry into a building, structure or facility, or to signal the commission of an unlawful act. It shall include those devices which emit a signal within the protected premises only, are supervised by the proprietor of the premises where located, and are otherwise known as “proprietary alarm systems.” Auxiliary devices installed by a telephone company to protect telephone company systems which might be damaged or disrupted by the use of an alarm system are not included in this definition.

(c) “Audible Alarm” shall mean a device designed to notify persons in the immediate vicinity of the protected premises by emission of an audible sound of an unauthorized entry on the premises or of the commission of an unlawful act.

(d) “Direct Dial Device” shall mean a device which is connected to a telephone line and upon activation of an alarm system, automatically dials a predetermined telephone number and transmits a message or signal indicating a need for emergency response.

(e) “False Alarm” shall mean an alarm signal activated by causes other than the commission or attempted commission of an unlawful act which the alarm system is designed to detect. An alarm signal activated by violent conditions of nature or other extraordinary circumstances not subject to the control of the alarm owner shall not constitute a false alarm. (Ord. 82-587, § 1)

4901 Direct Dial Telephone Device.
The use of an alarm system which is equipped with a direct dial device, which when activated automatically dials any telephone number in any office of the Sheriff, is hereby prohibited. (Ord. 82-587, § 1)

4902 Audible Alarm Requirements.
The alarm owner of every audible alarm within the City shall post in a conspicuous place near the front entrance of the building protected by the alarm the names and telephone numbers of persons to be notified to render repairs or service during any hour of the day or night during which the audible alarm is operated. An audible alarm shall terminate its operation or the audible alarm shall automatically reset within thirty (30) minutes of its being activated. (Ord. 82-587, § 1)

4903 False Alarm.
The knowing commission of a false alarm is hereby prohibited. This Section does not prohibit a test of an alarm system, permission for which must be obtained in advance from the Sheriff. (Ord. 82-587, § 1)

4904 Repair.
After any false alarm, the alarm owner shall, upon request by the Sheriff, submit a written report to the Sheriff describing actions taken or to be taken to eliminate the cause of the false alarm. This report shall be submitted within ten (10) days of the date of request by the Sheriff. (Ord. 82-587, § 1)

4905 Permit Required.
No person shall install or have installed or maintain on any premises under his control an alarm system without first applying for and obtaining an alarm system permit for the subject premises in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 93-1018, § 1)

4906 Application for Permit.
Any person who is required to obtain an alarm system permit pursuant to CMC 4905 shall file an application in writing therefor in the office of the Finance Director on a form to be provided by the Finance Director. Such application shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 93-1018, § 1)

4907 Notification of False Alarm.
After each false alarm, the Sheriff shall notify the permittee of a false alarm, in writing, of the date and time that the Sheriff’s Department responded to the false alarm. (Ord. 93-1018, § 1)

4908 Public Nuisance Alarm.
An alarm system which generates more than three (3) false alarms in any twelve (12) month period is hereby declared a public nuisance. (Ord. 82-587, § 2; Ord. 93-1018, § 2)

4909 Service Charge.
A service charge in an amount prescribed by resolution of the City Council shall be billed to and paid by the permittee of a particular alarm system for the fourth and each and every subsequent false alarm in any twelve (12) month period. No service charge shall be charged to a permittee of an alarm system for the first three (3) false burglary alarms in a twelve (12) month period. The fourth and each and every subsequent false alarm in any twelve (12) month period allowed by a permittee shall constitute an infraction. (Ord. 93-1018, § 2)

4910 Service Charge – Appeal.
Within ten (10) days of the date of imposition of a service charge pursuant to CMC 4909, a permittee may appeal such imposition to the City Administrator. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall specify the grounds for the appeal. Upon receipt of a request for an appeal, the City Administrator shall schedule a hearing at which time the permittee shall have an opportunity to present evidence and be heard. The hearing shall be conducted as provided in CMC 4912. (Ord. 93-1018, § 2)

4911 Suspension or Revocation.
When grounds as hereafter provided exist, an alarm permit may be suspended or revoked after a hearing is provided as set forth in CMC 4912. No suspension shall be for a period longer than three hundred sixty-five (365) calendar days. No person shall use an alarm system during the suspension or revocation of an alarm system permit. The following shall constitute grounds for suspension or revocation of an alarm system permit:

(a) Violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter;

(b) Failure to pay the City the service charge imposed pursuant to CMC 4909 when due; or

(c) Making a false statement on the permit application. (Ord. 93-1018, § 2)

4912 Hearing.
When the City Administrator determines that grounds exist for suspension or revocation of an alarm system, or when an appeal of imposition of the service charge is filed pursuant to CMC 4910, the City Administrator shall set a hearing during which the permittee shall have an opportunity to present evidence and be heard. Notice of the hearing shall be given in writing to the permittee no less than ten (10) days before such hearing and shall state the time and place of the hearing and, if applicable, the grounds for the suspension or revocation. The hearing shall be conducted by the City Administrator or his or her authorized representative as the hearing officer.

Within ten (10) days after the date of the hearing, the hearing officer shall give written notice of the decision to the permittee. The decision of the hearing officer may be appealed to the City Council by the filing of a written request for appeal with the City Clerk within ten (10) days after the date of the notice of the decision by the hearing officer. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final unless appealed to the City Council in the manner provided herein. When an appeal is filed, any order of suspension shall be stayed pending the determination of the appeal. The decision of the City Council shall be final. (Ord. 93-1018, § 2)

4913 Exemptions.
The provisions of this Chapter do not apply to audible alarms affixed to motor vehicles or to a public telephone utility whose only duty is to furnish telephone service pursuant to tariffs on file with the California Public Utilities Commission. (Ord. 82-587, § 1; Ord. 93-1018, § 2)

4914 Violation and Enforcement.
A violation of this Chapter shall constitute an infraction and shall be punishable as provided in CMC 1200(b). The conviction or punishment of any person for violation of the provisions of this Chapter or for failing to secure a permit as required by this Chapter shall not relieve such person from paying the permit fee or service charge due and unpaid at the time of such conviction, nor shall the payment of any permit fee or service charge prevent criminal prosecution for the violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter. All remedies shall be cumulative, and the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this Chapter. The amount of any permit fee or service charge shall be deemed a debt to the City, and an action may be commenced in the name of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount thereof. (Ord. 82-587, § 1; Ord. 93-1018, § 2)

CHAPTER 10
PUBLIC LODGING REGULATIONS
Sections:

§ 41000    Public Lodgings – Registration Required.

§ 41001    Same – Alterations, Inspection of Register.

§ 41002    Same – Registering Under Fictitious Name Prohibited.

§ 41003    Same – Repeated Use Prohibited.

§ 41004    Same – Subletting Prohibited.

§ 41005    Same – Hourly Rates Prohibited.

41000 Public Lodgings – Registration Required.
Every person conducting any motel, lodging house or hotel in the City shall at all times keep and maintain therein a register, in which shall be inscribed with ink or indelible pencil, the name and complete residence address of each guest or person renting or occupying a room therein. Such register shall be signed by each person renting or occupying a room, and the proprietor of such motel, lodging house, or hotel or the proprietor’s agent shall thereupon write opposite such name or names so registered the number of each room assigned to or occupied by such guest or occupant, together with the time when such room is rented; and until all of such entries shall have been made in such register, no such person shall be suffered or permitted to occupy any room in such hotel, motel or lodging house. When the occupant or occupants of each room so rented shall quit and surrender the same, it shall be the further duty of the proprietor or proprietor’s agent to enter the time thereof in such register opposite the name of such occupant or occupants. (Ord. 85-709, § 1)

41001 Same – Alterations, Inspection of Register.
It shall be unlawful to erase a name or names or address or addresses or to permit such an erasure or to otherwise alter any entry on the register required by CMC 41000 made for any purpose. Such register shall be at all times open to the inspection of any duly authorized representative of the City. (Ord. 85-709, § 1)

41002 Same – Registering Under Fictitious Name Prohibited.
No person shall write or cause to be written, or knowingly permit to be written in any register in any motel, lodging house or hotel, any name or designation other than the true name of the person registering therein, or the name by which such person is generally known. (Ord. 85-709, § 1)

41003 Same – Repeated Use Prohibited.
No person conducting any motel, hotel or lodging house shall permit more than one (1) rental or occupancy of any room in said hotel, motel, or lodging house to commence between the hours of 6:00 a.m. of one (1) day and 6:00 a.m. of the following day. (Ord. 85-709, § 1)

41004 Same – Subletting Prohibited.
No person hiring a room in any hotel, motel, or other lodging house in the City shall rent or sublet said room to any other person. (Ord. 85-709, § 1)

41005 Same – Hourly Rates Prohibited.
No person or agent of such person conducting any hotel, motel or other lodging house shall let any room for sleeping or lodging purposes for hourly or other short-time rates (less than twenty-four (24) hours) or in any way advertise that any room is available at hourly or other short-time rates. (Ord. 85-709, § 1)

CHAPTER 11
SECONDHAND SMOKE CONTROL
Sections:

§ 41100    Definitions.

§ 41101    Smoking at Polling Places Prohibited.

§ 41102    Smoking in Public Places Prohibited.

§ 41103    Exception – Nonpublic Portions of City Buildings.

§ 41104    Exception – Carson Community Center Atrium and Outside Areas of City Buildings.

§ 41105    Posting of Signs.

§ 41106    Violation.

§ 41107    Smoking Prohibited.

§ 41108    Smoking Prohibited Within Reasonable Distances.

§ 41109    Other Requirements and Prohibitions.

§ 41110    Penalties and Enforcement.

§ 41120    Secondhand Smoke Generally.

41100 Definitions.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this Article shall have the meanings defined in this section unless the context clearly requires otherwise:

(a) “Smoke” means the gases, particles, or vapors released into the air as a result of combustion, electrical ignition or vaporization, when the apparent or usual purpose of the combustion, electrical ignition or vaporization is human inhalation of the byproducts, except when the combusting or vaporizing material contains no tobacco or nicotine and the purpose of inhalation is solely olfactory or congestion relief, such as, for example, smoke from incense or vapor from a congestion relieving vaporizer. The term “smoke” includes but is not limited to tobacco smoke, vapors from an electronic smoking device, crack cocaine smoke and marijuana smoke.

(b) “Business” means any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, association, or other entity formed for profit-making purposes.

(c) “Common area” means every unenclosed area of a multi-unit residence that residents of more than one (1) unit of that multi-unit residence are entitled to enter or use, including, for example, paths, courtyards, playgrounds, swimming pools, parking lots, and picnic areas.

(d) “Dining area” means any area, including streets and sidewalks, which is available to or customarily used by the general public or an employee, and which is designed, established, or regularly used for consuming food or drink.

(e) “Electronic smoking device” means an electronic device that can be used to deliver an inhaled dose of nicotine, or other substances (including but not limited to cannabis), including any component, part or accessory of such a device, whether or not sold separately. Includes any such device whether manufactured, distributed, marketed or sold as an electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic hookah, or any other product name or descriptor.

(f) “Employee” means any person who is employed or retained as an independent contractor by any employer or nonprofit entity in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, or any person who volunteers his or her services for an employer or nonprofit entity.

(g) “Employer” means any business or nonprofit entity that retains the service of one (1) or more employees.

(h) “Enclosed area” means an area in which outside air cannot circulate freely to all parts of the area, and includes an area that has:

(1) Any type of overhead cover whether or not that cover includes vents or other openings and at least three (3) walls or other vertical boundaries of any height whether or not those boundaries include vents or other openings; or

(2) Four (4) walls or other vertical boundaries that exceed six (6) feet in height whether or not those boundaries include vents or other openings.

(i) “Multi-unit residence” means property containing two (2) or more units, except the following specifically excluded types of housing:

(1) A hotel or motel that meets the requirements set forth in California Civil Code Section 1940(b)(2);

(2) A mobile home park;

(3) A campground;

(4) A marina or port;

(5) A single-family home;

(6) A single-family home with a detached or attached in-law or second unit when permitted pursuant to California Government Code Sections 65852.1, 65852.150, 65852.2 or an ordinance of the City of Carson/County of Los Angeles adopted pursuant to those sections.

(j) “Nonprofit entity” means any entity that meets the requirements of California Corporations Code Section 5003 as well as any corporation, unincorporated association or other entity created for charitable, religious, philanthropic, educational, political, social or similar purposes, the net proceeds of which are committed to the promotion of the objectives or purposes of the entity and not to private gain. A government agency is not a nonprofit entity within the meaning of this Article.

(k) “Person” means any natural person, business, cooperative association, nonprofit entity, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity including government agencies.

(l) “Place of employment” means any area under the legal or de facto control of an employer, that an employee or the general public may have cause to enter in the normal course of the operations, regardless of the hours of operation.

(m) “Public place” means any place, publicly or privately owned, which is open to the general public regardless of any fee or age requirement.

(n) “Reasonable distance” means a distance of twenty-five (25) feet in any direction from an area in which smoking is prohibited.

(o) “Recreational area” means any area that is owned or operated by the City of Carson and open to the general public for recreational purposes, regardless of any fee or age requirement. The term “recreational area” includes but is not limited to parks, picnic areas, playgrounds, sports fields, golf courses, walking paths, gardens, hiking trails, bike paths, horseback riding trails, swimming pools, roller- and ice-skating rinks, skateboard parks, amusement parks, and beaches.

(p) “Service area” means any publicly or privately owned area, including streets and sidewalks, that is designed to be used or is regularly used by one (1) or more persons to receive a service, wait to receive a service or to make a transaction, whether or not such service or transaction includes the exchange of money. The term “service area” includes but is not limited to information kiosks, automatic teller machines (ATMs), ticket lines, bus stops or shelters, mobile vendor lines or cab stands.

(q) “Tobacco product” means any substance containing tobacco leaf, and any product or formulation of matter containing biologically active amounts of nicotine that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, or otherwise distributed with the expectation that the product or matter will be introduced into the human body, but does not include any cessation product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for use in treating nicotine or tobacco dependence.

(r) “Unenclosed area” means any area that is not an enclosed area.

(s) “Unit” means a personal dwelling space, even where lacking cooking facilities or private plumbing facilities, and includes any associated exclusive-use enclosed area or unenclosed area, such as, for example, a private balcony, porch, deck, or patio. “Unit” includes but is not limited to an apartment; a condominium; a townhouse; a room in a long-term health care facility, assisted living facility, or hospital; a hotel or motel room; a room in a single room occupancy (“SRO”) facility; a room in a homeless shelter; a mobile home; a camper vehicle or tent; a single-family home; and an in-law or second unit. (Ord. 90-907, § 1; Ord. 11-1481, § 1; Ord. 14-1547, § 1; Ord. 17-1638, §§ 2(1), (2))

41101 Smoking at Polling Places Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke at any polling place located in the City during an election. (Ord. 90-907, § 1)

41102 Smoking in Public Places Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any building or facility owned or leased by the City or the Carson Redevelopment Agency. (Ord. 90-907, § 1)

41103 Exception – Nonpublic Portions of City Buildings.
The prohibition contained in CMC 41102 does not apply to those portions of any building or facility which are leased or let to persons or entities other than the City or the Carson Redevelopment Agency. (Ord. 90-907, § 1)

41104 Exception – Carson Community Center Atrium and Outside Areas of City Buildings.
The prohibition contained in CMC 41102 does not apply to the Carson Community Center atrium or to open balconies, walkways, or outside areas of buildings or facilities owned or leased by the City or the Carson Redevelopment Agency. (Ord. 90-907, § 1)

41105 Posting of Signs.
The City Administrator is directed to post and prominently display “No Smoking” signs at the entrances to buildings subject to the prohibition contained in CMC 41102. All such signs shall clearly and conspicuously recite the phrase “No Smoking” and/or use the international no smoking symbol. (Ord. 90-907, § 1)

41106 Violation.
Violation of this Chapter is an infraction, and shall be punishable as provided in CMC 1200(b). (Ord. 90-907, § 1)

41107 Smoking Prohibited.
(a) Smoking is prohibited in the unenclosed areas of the following places within the City of Carson, except places where smoking is already prohibited by State or Federal law, in which case those laws apply:

(1) Recreational areas;

(2) Service areas;

(3) Dining areas;

(4) Places of employment;

(5) Common areas; provided, that a person with legal control over a common area may designate a portion of the unenclosed area of the common area as a designated smoking area if the area meets all of the following criteria:

(a) The area must be located a reasonable distance from any unit or enclosed area where smoking is prohibited by this Article or other law; by binding agreement relating to the ownership, occupancy, or use of real property; or by designation of a person with legal control over the property. In the case of a nonsmoking area created by agreement or designation, this provision does not apply unless the person designating the smoking area has actual knowledge of, or has been given notice of, the agreement or designation. A designated smoking area may require modification or elimination as laws change, as binding agreements are created, and as nonsmoking areas on neighboring property are established;

(b) The area must not include, and must be a reasonable distance from, unenclosed areas primarily used by children and unenclosed areas with improvements that facilitate physical activity including, for example, playgrounds, tennis courts, swimming pools, school campuses, and sandboxes;

(c) The area must be no more than ten (10) percent of the total unenclosed area of the multi-unit residence for which it is designated;

(d) The area must have a clearly marked perimeter;

(e) The area must be identified by conspicuous signs;

(f) The area must be completely within an unenclosed area; and

(g) The area must not overlap with any enclosed or unenclosed area in which smoking is otherwise prohibited by this Article or other provisions of this Code, State law, or Federal law; and

(6) Other public places, when being used for a public event, including a farmers’ market, parade, craft fair, festival, or any other event which may be attended by the general public.

(7) Nothing in this Article prohibits any person, employer, or nonprofit entity with legal control over any property from prohibiting smoking on any part of such property, even if smoking is not otherwise prohibited in that area. (Ord. 02-1250, § 2; Ord. 11-1481, § 2)

41108 Smoking Prohibited Within Reasonable Distances.
(a) Smoking in all unenclosed areas shall be prohibited within a reasonable distance from any doorway, window, opening, crack, or vent into an enclosed area in which smoking is prohibited, except while actively passing on the way to another destination and provided smoke does not enter any enclosed area in which smoking is prohibited.

(b) Smoking in unenclosed areas shall be prohibited within a reasonable distance from any unenclosed areas in which smoking is prohibited under CMC 41107, except while actively passing on the way to another destination and provided smoke does not enter any unenclosed area in which smoking is prohibited.

(c) The prohibitions in subsections (a) and (b) of this Section shall not apply to unenclosed areas of private residential properties that are not multi-unit residences. (Ord. 11-1481, § 3)

41109 Other Requirements and Prohibitions.
(a) No person, employer, or nonprofit entity shall knowingly permit smoking in an area which is under the legal or de facto control of the person, employer or nonprofit entity and in which smoking is prohibited by law, unless otherwise required by State or Federal law.

(b) No person, employer, or nonprofit entity shall knowingly or intentionally permit the presence or placement of ash receptacles, such as, for example, ash trays or ash cans, within an area under the legal or de facto control of the person, employer or nonprofit entity and in which smoking or the use of tobacco products is prohibited by law, including, without limitation, within a reasonable distance required by this Article from any area in which smoking is prohibited. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the presence of ash receptacles in violation of this subsection shall not be a defense to a charge of smoking in violation of any provision of this Article.

(c) No person shall dispose of used smoking or tobacco product waste within the boundaries of an area in which smoking is prohibited, including inside the perimeter of any reasonable distance required by this Article.

(d) A person, employer, or nonprofit entity that has legal or de facto control of an unenclosed area in which smoking is prohibited by this Article shall post a clear, conspicuous and unambiguous “No Smoking” or “Smokefree” sign at each point of ingress to the area, and in at least one (1) other conspicuous point within the area. The signs shall have letters of no less than one (1) inch in height and shall include the international “No Smoking” symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it). Signs posted on the exterior of buildings to comply with this section shall include the reasonable distance requirement set forth in CMC 41108. For purposes of this Section, the City Manager or his/her designee shall be responsible for the posting of signs in regulated facilities owned or leased in whole or in part by the City. Notwithstanding this provision, the presence or absence of signs shall not be a defense to a charge of smoking in violation of any other provision of this Article.

(e) No person, employer, or nonprofit entity shall intimidate, threaten any reprisal, or effect any reprisal, for the purpose of retaliating against another person, who seeks to attain compliance with this Article.

(f) Each instance of smoking in violation of this Article shall constitute a separate violation. For violations other than for smoking, each day of a continuing violation of this Article shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 11-1481, § 4)

41110 Penalties and Enforcement.
(a) The remedies provided by this Chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity.

(b) Each incident of smoking in violation of this Article is an infraction subject to a $100.00 fine. Other violations of this Article may, in the discretion of the City Attorney, be prosecuted as infractions or misdemeanors when the interests of justice so require. Enforcement of this chapter shall be by any code enforcement official.

(c) Violations of this Article are subject to a civil action brought by the City of Carson punishable by a civil fine not less than $100.00 per violation.

(d) Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any provision of this Article shall also constitute a violation of this Article.

(e) Any violation of this Article is hereby declared to be a public nuisance which may be abated in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 7 of Article V as applicable to this Chapter. All costs to abate such public nuisance, including attorneys’ fees and court costs, shall be paid by the person causing the nuisance, including the property owner where the nuisance is occurring.

(f) In addition to other remedies provided by this Article or by other law, any violation of this Article may be remedied by a civil action brought by the City Attorney, including, but not limited to, administrative or judicial nuisance abatement proceedings, civil or criminal code enforcement proceedings, and suits for injunctive relief.

(g) Except as otherwise provided, enforcement of this Article is at the sole discretion of the City. Nothing in this Article shall create a right of action in any person against the City or its agents to compel public enforcement of this Article against private parties.

(h) Any person acting for the interests of itself, its members, or the general public may bring a civil action to enjoin a violation of this Article by a landlord, employer, business, or nonprofit entity or to enjoin repeat violations of this Article by an individual.

(i) Any violation of the provisions of this Chapter shall constitute a separate offense for each and every day during which such violation is committed or continued. (Ord. 11-1481, § 5; Ord. 17-1638, §§ 2(4), (5))

41120 Secondhand Smoke Generally.
For all purposes within the jurisdiction of the City, no person shall cause smoke to unreasonably interfere with the reasonable use and enjoyment of another person’s private residence. (Ord. 17-1638, § 2(3))

CHAPTER 12
ACCUMULATION OF VEHICLES
FOR SALE
Sections:

Part 1. General Provisions

§ 41201    Definitions.

§ 41202    Limitations of Chapter.

§ 41203    Prohibition.

§ 41204    Violation – Penalty.

§ 41205    Declaration of Nuisance.

Part 2. Procedure for Abatement

§ 41206    Inspection of Private Property.

§ 41207    Notification of Violation.

§ 41208    Public Hearing Before Director of Public Safety.

§ 41209    Appeal to City Council.

§ 41210    Removal of Vehicles.

§ 41211    Notice of Abatement – Vehicle Owner.

§ 41212    Retrieval of Vehicles.

§ 41213    Abandonment.

§ 41214    Notice of Abatement – Land Owner.

§ 41215    Costs of Abatement – Assessed Against Land.

Part 1. General Provisions

41201 Definitions.
As used in this Chapter, unless the context otherwise clearly indicates, the following words and phrases are defined as follows:

(a) “Vehicle” shall mean a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway. “Vehicle” shall not include a device designed to be moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.

(b) “Highway” shall mean a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. “Highway” shall include street.

(c) “Accumulation of vehicles for sale” shall mean the presence on a single parcel of vacant land of one (1) or more vehicles such that, because of signs or placards on or near the vehicles, it appears that a primary purpose of parking the vehicles at that location is to advertise to the public the private sale of the vehicles. For purpose of this Section, “vacant” shall mean property which is either: (i) undeveloped (including undeveloped fenced property); or (ii) developed but unoccupied by the property owner or a lessee or other authorized tenant.

(d) “Director” shall mean the Director of Public Safety of the City of Carson or the authorized designee thereof.

(e) “Owner of the land” shall mean the owner of the land on which the accumulation of vehicles for sale is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll.

(f) “Owner of the vehicle” shall mean the last registered owner and legal owner of record. (Ord. 97-1121, § 2)

41202 Limitations of Chapter.
This Chapter shall not apply to the accumulation of vehicles for sale on private property which is the place of business of a duly licensed vehicle dealer. (Ord. 97-1121, § 2)

41203 Prohibition.
It is unlawful for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any premises in the City to maintain such premises in such a manner that an accumulation of vehicles for sale is found to exist thereon. (Ord. 97-1121, § 2)

41204 Violation – Penalty.
Notwithstanding any other remedy provided by this Chapter, any violation of this Chapter constitutes an infraction subject to the penalties provided in CMC 1200(b). After three (3) violations, every additional violation constitutes a misdemeanor offense subject to the penalties provided in CMC 1200(a). Any person who is found guilty of an infraction or a misdemeanor under this Chapter shall be guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which any violation of CMC 41203 is committed, continued or permitted by such a person and shall be punishable accordingly. (Ord. 97-1121, § 2)

41205 Declaration of Nuisance.
All property on which there exists an accumulation of vehicles for sale is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be subject to abatement pursuant to the procedures set forth in this Chapter. The procedures for abatement set forth in this Chapter shall not be exclusive, and shall not in any manner limit or restrict the City from enforcing other City ordinances or abating public nuisances in any other manner as provided by law. (Ord. 97-1121, § 2)

Part 2. Procedure for Abatement

41206 Inspection of Private Property.
The Director may enter upon private property on which there exists an accumulation of vehicles for sale for the purpose of determining the identification numbers of the vehicles. Prior to entering upon private property for such inspection, the Director shall comply with any applicable warrant requirements unless the nature of the signs or placards on or near the vehicles reasonably appear to invite or encourage members of the general public to enter the premises for the purpose of viewing or inspecting the vehicles. (Ord. 97-1121, § 2)

41207 Notification of Violation.
(a) Whenever the Director finds that any premises in the City is being maintained contrary to CMC 41205, the Director shall send a written Notice and Order to Abate Public Nuisance by registered mail to the owner of the land and to the owners of the vehicles that are part of the accumulation of vehicles for sale, unless the Director is unable to gain access to the property or any of the vehicles is in such condition that vehicle identification numbers or license plates are not available to determine ownership.

(b) The notice issued pursuant to subsection (a) of this Section shall contain all of the following:

(1) A statement that the accumulation of vehicles for sale at the property constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to CMC 41205.

(2) A warning that an additional violation of CMC 41205 may result in the impoundment of vehicles determined to be part of an accumulation of vehicles for sale.

(3) A warning that vehicles determined to be part of an accumulation of vehicles for sale may be impounded pursuant to this Chapter even if moved to other private property, so long as signs or placards offering the vehicles for sale remain on or near the vehicles.

(4) A statement that the Notice and Order to Abate Public Nuisance may be appealed to the Director in accordance with CMC 41208 within ten

(10) calendar days of the date appearing on the notice. (Ord. 97-1121, § 2)

41208 Public Hearing Before Director of Public Safety.
(a) Any recipient of a Notice and Order to Abate Public Nuisance may appeal such notice by filing a written appeal with the City Clerk within ten (10) calendar days of the date appearing on the notice. The appeal shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Council.

(b) Upon the timely submission of an appeal, the Director shall hold a hearing on the question of the existence of an accumulation of vehicles for sale in violation of CMC 41205. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed to the appellant(s) by registered mail at least ten (10) calendar days before the hearing.

(c) At the hearing, the Director shall hear and consider all relevant evidence including, but not limited to, testimony from owners, City personnel, witnesses and other interested parties. The Director may consider staff reports and other written evidence relative to the matter. The hearing may be continued from time to time. The hearing may be informally conducted, and the rules of evidence need not apply.

(d) Within ten (10) calendar days of the conclusion of the hearing, the Director shall issue a written decision. The Director shall sustain the issuance of the Notice and Order to Abate Public Nuisance upon determining, based on a preponderance of the evidence, the existence of an accumulation of vehicles for sale in violation of CMC 41205.

(e) No later than three (3) City business days after the Director’s decision, notice of the decision and a copy thereof shall be mailed by registered mail to the appellant(s). Such notice shall indicate that the decision may be appealed to the City Council by filing a written appeal with the City Clerk within ten (10) calendar days of the date appearing on the decision.

(f) The decision of the Director shall be final and effective ten (10) calendar days after the date appearing on such decision unless by 6:00 p.m. of the last City business day (Monday through Thursday) before the tenth day any person, including any member of the City Council or the City Manager, has filed a written appeal of the decision with the City Clerk. (Ord. 97-1121, § 2)

41209 Appeal to City Council.
(a) Any person, including any member of the City Council or the City Manager, may appeal the decision of the Director by filing a written appeal with the City Clerk within ten (10) calendar days of the date appearing on such decision. Any appeal that is not filed by a member of the City Council or the City Manager shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Council.

(b) Upon the timely submission of an appeal, the City Council shall hold a de novo public hearing on the question of the existence of an accumulation of vehicles for sale in violation of CMC 41205. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed to the appellant(s) by registered mail at least ten (10) calendar days before the hearing.

(c) At the hearing, the City Council shall hear and consider all relevant evidence including, but not limited to, testimony from owners, City personnel, witnesses and other interested parties. The City Council may consider staff reports and other written evidence relative to the matter. The hearing may be continued from time to time. The hearing may be informally conducted, and the rules of evidence need not apply.

(d) Within ten (10) calendar days of the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall issue a decision by resolution. The City Council shall sustain the issuance of the Notice and Order to Abate Public Nuisance upon determining, based on a preponderance of the evidence, the existence of an accumulation of vehicles for sale in violation of CMC 41205. The determination of the City Council shall be final and shall be made by resolution.

(e) No later than three (3) City business days after the City Council’s decision, notice of the decision and a copy of the resolution shall be mailed by registered mail to the appellant(s). Such notice shall contain the substance of the following statement:

You are hereby notified that the time within which judicial review of this decision may be sought is governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6.

(f) The appellant may seek judicial review of the City Council’s decision in accordance with California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 et seq. or as otherwise permitted by law. (Ord. 97-1121, § 2)

41210 Removal of Vehicles.
(a) The Director may enter upon private property and remove any vehicle found to be part of an accumulation of vehicles for sale, if any of the following circumstances have occurred:

(1) Within the past thirty (30) calendar days, but at least eleven (11) calendar days prior to the removal of the vehicle, a Notice and Order to Abate Public Nuisance pertaining to the vehicle was issued; provided, that removal shall not occur if an appeal of such notice has been filed pursuant to CMC 41208.

(2) Within the past thirty (30) calendar days, but at least eleven (11) calendar days prior to the removal of the vehicle, the Director sustained the issuance of a Notice and Order to Abate Public Nuisance pertaining to the vehicle; provided, that removal shall not occur if an appeal of such decision has been filed pursuant to CMC 41209.

(3) Within the past thirty (30) calendar days, but at least three (3) calendar days prior to the removal of the vehicle, the City Council sustained the issuance of a Notice and Order to Abate Public Nuisance pertaining to the vehicle.

(b) Prior to entering upon private property for such removal, the Director shall comply with any applicable warrant requirements. (Ord. 97-1121, § 2)

41211 Notice of Abatement – Vehicle Owner.
(a) Within forty-eight (48) hours of the removal of any vehicle pursuant to CMC 41210, excluding weekends and holidays, the Director shall send a Notice of Abatement by registered mail to the owner of the vehicle.

(b) The notice issued pursuant to subsection (a) of this Section shall contain all of the following:

(1) A description of the vehicle removed. To the extent possible, such description shall include the name or make, the manufacturer, the license plate number and the mileage of each vehicle.

(2) The date of removal of the vehicle.

(3) The property from which the vehicle was removed.

(4) A statement that the vehicle was removed pursuant to this Chapter.

(5) The location and procedure for retrieval of the vehicle.

(6) A statement that if the owner fails to retrieve the vehicle within thirty (30) calendar days of the date appearing on the Notice of Abatement, then the vehicle shall be deemed to be permanently abandoned.

(7) A statement that vehicles deemed to be permanently abandoned may be sold at public auction or otherwise disposed of. (Ord. 97-1121, § 2)

41212 Retrieval of Vehicles.
Any vehicle removed pursuant to CMC 41210 shall be released to the owner thereof if claimed within thirty (30) calendar days after such removal and upon payment of the City’s reasonable administrative, towing, storage and impound fees. The Director may waive payment of such fees, upon request of the owner of the vehicle, on a demonstration of good cause. (Ord. 97-1121, § 2)

41213 Abandonment.
Any vehicle that is not retrieved by the owner thereof within thirty (30) calendar days after the mailing of a written Notice of Abatement, when such owner has not requested a hearing in accordance with this Chapter, shall be deemed to be permanently abandoned. Vehicles deemed to be permanently abandoned may be sold at public auction or otherwise disposed of at the end of the thirty (30) calendar days following such notice. (Ord. 97-1121, § 2)

41214 Notice of Abatement – Land Owner.
(a) Within ten (10) City business days of the removal of any vehicle pursuant to CMC 41210, the Director shall send a Notice of Abatement by registered mail to the owner of the land.

(b) The notice issued pursuant to subsection (a) of this Section shall contain all of the following:

(1) A description of the vehicle removed. To the extent possible, such description shall include the name or make, the manufacturer, the license plate number and the mileage of each vehicle.

(2) The date of removal of the vehicle(s).

(3) The property from which the vehicle was removed.

(4) A statement that the removal occurred pursuant to this Chapter.

(5) An itemized statement of the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the land, as such costs are determined by the Director of Finance of the City of Carson.

(6) A statement that if the indicated costs are not paid within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of the notice, then such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the Government Code and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection.

(c) If more than one (1) vehicle is removed from a property pursuant to CMC 41210, then the Director may send a single Notice of Abatement to the owner of the land. Such notice shall contain the information set forth in subsection (b) of this Section with respect to each vehicle removed from the property. (Ord. 97-1121, § 2)

41215 Costs of Abatement – Assessed Against Land.
If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to CMC 41214 are not paid within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of the notice, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.5 and shall be transmitted to the Tax Collector for collection. Notice of such assessment shall be sent by certified mail at the time of imposing the assessment and shall specify that the property may be sold after three (3) years by the Tax Collector for unpaid delinquent assessments. (Ord. 97-1121, § 2)

CHAPTER 13
LOITERING BY CRIMINAL STREET GANGS
Sections:

§ 41301    Prohibited Acts.

§ 41302    Powers of Law Enforcement Officers Not Limited.

§ 41303    Parental Control.

§ 41304    Penalty.

41301 Prohibited Acts.
(a) It is unlawful for any person who is a member of a “criminal street gang” as that term is defined in California Penal Code Section 186.22(f) or who is acting in concert with a member of a criminal street gang to loiter or idle in a “public place” as defined in subsection (b) of this Section under any of the following circumstances:

(1) With the intent to publicize a criminal street gang’s dominance over certain territory in order to intimidate nonmembers of the gang from entering, remaining in, or using the public place or adjacent area;

(2) With the intent to conceal ongoing commerce in illegal drugs or other unlawful activity.

(b) For purposes of this Chapter, a “public place” means the public way and any other location open to the public, whether publicly or privately owned, including, but not limited to, any street, sidewalk, avenue, highway, road, curb area, alley, park, playground or other public ground or public building, any common area of a school, hospital, apartment house, office building, transport facility, shop, privately owned place of business, to which the public is invited, including any place of amusement, entertainment, or eating place. Any “public place” also includes the front yard area, driveway and walkway of any business, hotel, motel, or multifamily residential dwelling. (Ord. 04-1311, § 2)

41302 Powers of Law Enforcement Officers Not Limited.
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed in any way to limit the power or right of a law enforcement officer to make any investigation, detention or arrest as such law enforcement officer would be permitted to make in absence of this Chapter. (Ord. 04-1311, § 2)

41303 Parental Control.
Any parent(s), legal guardian(s), or other adult person(s) authorized by said parent(s) or guardian(s) to have the care and custody of a minor, who knowingly permits or by insufficient control allows a minor to violate the provisions of this Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 04-1311, § 2)

41304 Penalty.
Violation of this Chapter shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months, or both. (Ord. 04-1311, § 2)

CHAPTER 14
SPECTATORS PROHIBITED AT ILLEGAL SPEED CONTESTS OR EXHIBITIONS OF SPEED
Sections:

§ 41401    Purpose.

§ 41402    Definitions.

§ 41403    Spectators at Illegal Speed Contests or Exhibitions of Speed – Violation.

§ 41404    Relevant Circumstances to Prove a Violation.

41401 Purpose.
The City of Carson finds and declares that pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 23109, motor vehicle speed contests and exhibitions of speed conducted on public streets and highways are illegal. Motor vehicle speed contests and exhibitions of speed are more commonly known as street races or drag races. Streets within the City have been the site of illegal street racing over the past several years. Street racing threatens the health and safety of the public, interferes with pedestrian and vehicular traffic, creates a public nuisance, and interferes with the right of private business owners and residents to enjoy the use of their property within the City. Illegal street races occur on a regular basis on various streets within the City. Groups of racers and spectators gather on City streets late at night and in the early morning hours, blocking the streets and sidewalks to traffic, placing bets, and otherwise encouraging, aiding, and abetting the racing process.

Illegal street racers accelerate to high speeds without regard to oncoming traffic, pedestrians, or vehicles which are parked or moving nearby. The racers drive quickly from street to street, racing and then moving to other locations upon the arrival of the police. Participants in this illegal activity are very sophisticated, using cell phones, police scanners, and other electronic devices to communicate with each other to avoid arrest. They also use the Internet to provide information on where to race and give advice on how to avoid detection and prosecution. Traffic accidents, property crimes, and calls for police service have increased dramatically as a result of such activities.

In many cases, illegal street races have the potential to attract dozens of spectators. The mere presence of spectators at these events fuels the illegal street racing and creates an environment in which these illegal activities can flourish.

This Chapter is adopted to prohibit spectators at illegal street races with the aim of significantly curbing this criminal activity. In discouraging spectators, the act of organizing and participating in illegal street races will be discouraged. (Ord. 07-1381, § 1)

41402 Definitions.
For the purposes of this Chapter, certain words and phrases used in this Chapter shall be construed as set forth in this Section unless it is apparent from the entire context that a different meaning is intended.

(a) “Illegal speed contest” or “illegal exhibition of speed” means any speed contest or exhibition of speed referred to in California Vehicle Code Sections 23109(a) and 23109(c).

(b) “Preparations” for an illegal speed contest or exhibition of speed means, but is not limited to, situations in which (1) a group of motor vehicles or individuals has arrived at an illegal speed contest or exhibition of speed location for the purpose of participating in or being spectators at an illegal speed contest or exhibition of speed event; (2) a group of individuals has lined one (1) or both sides of a public street or highway for the purpose of participating in or being a spectator at an illegal vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed event; (3) a group of individuals has gathered on private property open to the general public for the purpose of participating in or being a spectator at an illegal speed contest or exhibition of speed event; (4) one (1) or more individuals have impeded the free public use of a public street or highway by actions, words, or physical barriers for the purpose of conducting an illegal speed contest or exhibition of speed event; (5) two (2) or more vehicles have lined up with motors running for an illegal speed contest or exhibition of speed; (6) one (1) driver or more is revving his engine or spinning his tires in preparation for an illegal speed contest or exhibition of speed; or (7) an individual is stationed at or near one (1) or more motor vehicles, serving as a race starter for an illegal speed contest or exhibition of speed.

(c) “Spectator” means any individual who is present at an illegal speed contest or exhibition of speed, or at a location where preparations are being made for such event, for the purpose of viewing, observing, watching or witnessing the event as it progresses. “Spectator” includes any individual at the location of an illegal vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed, without regard to how the individual arrived at such event. (Ord. 07-1381, § 1)

41403 Spectators at Illegal Speed Contests or Exhibitions of Speed – Violation.
It shall be unlawful for any individual to:

(a) Knowingly gather, attend, or assist an illegal speed contest or illegal exhibition of speed as defined by Vehicle Code Section 23109; or

(b) Knowingly gather, attend or assist in preparations for any such event.

The Public Services General Manager, or his or her designee, is authorized and directed to enforce and administer the provisions of this Chapter. Violations of this Chapter may be enforced by administrative proceeding, civil action, or by criminal action as an infraction or misdemeanor at the discretion of the prosecuting attorney, with the amount of any fine or criminal penalty established by the City Council. In any action, attorneys’ fees may be recovered by the prevailing party. (Ord. 07-1381, § 1)

41404 Relevant Circumstances to Prove a Violation.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, to prove a violation of CMC 41403, admissible evidence may include, but is not limited to, any of the following:

(a) The time of day;

(b) The nature and description of the scene;

(c) The number of people at the scene;

(d) The location of the individual charged in relation to any individual or group present at the scene;

(e) The number and description of motor vehicles at the scene;

(f) That the individual charged has previously participated in an illegal speed contest or exhibition of speed;

(g) That the individual charged has previously aided and abetted an illegal speed contest or exhibition of speed;

(h) That the individual charged has previously attended an illegal speed contest or exhibition of speed; or

(i) That the individual charged previously was present at a location where preparations were being made for an illegal speed contest or exhibition of speed or where an exhibition of speed or illegal speed contest was in progress. (Ord. 07-1381, § 1)

CHAPTER 15
RESIDENCY AND LOITERING RESTRICTIONS FOR SEX OFFENDERS*
Sections:

§ 41501    Definitions.

§ 41502    Violation of Child Safety Zone.

§ 41503    Violation of Residential Exclusion Zone.

§ 41504    Sex Offender Violation – Dwellings.

§ 41505    Sex Offender Violation – Multiple Dwellings and Mobilehome Parks – Permanent Resident.

§ 41506    Sex Offender Violation – Hotel/Motel Rooms.

§ 41507    Sex Offender Violation – Hotel/Motel Rooms – Permanent Resident.

§ 41508    Responsible Party Violation – Permanent Residence.

§ 41509    Responsible Party Violation – Temporary Residence.

§ 41510    Responsible Party Violation – Hotel/Motel Rooms.

§ 41511    Penalties.

§ 41512    Criminal Penalties Do Not Satisfy Administrative or Civil Actions.

§ 41513    Civil Actions.

*Editor’s Note: Ordinance No. 08-1413U added this chapter as Article IV, Chapter 14. This chapter was editorially renumbered to avoid duplication.

41501 Definitions.
For purposes of this Chapter only, and unless the context clearly requires a different meaning, the words, terms and phrases set forth in this Section are defined as follows:

A. “Dwelling” as defined by CMC 9191.202.

B. “Dwelling unit” as defined by CMC 9191.214.

C. “Dwelling, single-family” as defined by CMC 9191.210.

D. “Dwelling, multiple” as defined in CMC 9191.206.

E. “Child” or “children” as defined in CMC 9191.086.

F. “Child day care” or “community day care facility” as defined in CMC 9191.090 and 9191.126.

G. “Dwelling, second unit” as defined by CMC 9191.208.

H. “Residential hotel,” “transient hotel” and “motel” as defined in CMC 9191.298, 9191.302 and 9191.402.

I. “Residential condominium” and “condominium unit” as defined in CMC 9191.162 and 9191.166.

J. “Child safety zone” shall mean any school or public place at or near which children attend or normally congregate.

K. “Loitering” shall mean to commit any act as defined in California Penal Code Section 653b.

L. “Mobilehome” as defined by CMC 9191.394.

M. “Owner’s authorized agent” shall mean any person, firm, association, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, organization, club, company, corporation, business trust or the manager, lessee, agent, servant office or employee authorized to act for the owner of a property.

N. “Public park or playground” as defined by CMC 9191.430.

O. “Permanent residence” shall mean any occupant who, as of a given date, has either at his or her own expense or at the expense of another obtained the right of occupancy in a residential dwelling for which rent was charged and paid in advance for a minimum of one (1) month.

P. “Property owner” shall mean the owner of record of any parcel of real property as designated on the County Assessor’s tax roll or a holder of a subsequently recorded deed to the property, and shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant, tenant in common, or joint tenant, of the whole or part of such a building or land.

Q. “Residential exclusion zone” means a zone in which a sex offender is prohibited from temporarily or permanently residing, and includes those areas located in the following distances:

1. Two thousand (2,000) feet of the closest property line of the subject property to the closest property line of a public or private school or park; or

2. Three hundred (300) feet of the closest property line of the subject property to the closest property line of a child care center.

R. “Responsible party” shall mean the property owner and/or the owner’s authorized agent.

S. “Sex offender” means any person for whom registration is required pursuant to Section 290 of the California Penal Code, regardless of whether that person is on parole or probation.

T. “Temporary residence” means any occupant who, for a period of less than one (1) month, either at his or her own expense or at the expense of another, obtains the right of occupancy for which rent is charged. (Ord. 08-1413U, § 5; Ord. 08-1414U, § 3; Ord. 08-1413, § 5; Ord. 15-1570, § 2)

41502 Violation of Child Safety Zone.
No sex offender shall commit any act of “loitering” in a child safety zone prohibited by California Penal Code Section 653b, which specifically provides at subsection (a) that it shall constitute a misdemeanor to “loiter about any school or public place at or near which children attend or normally congregate.” (Ord. 08-1413U, § 5; Ord. 08-1414U, § 3; Ord. 08-1413, § 5; Ord. 15-1570, § 3)

41503 Violation of Residential Exclusion Zone.
No sex offender shall permanently or temporarily reside in a residential exclusion zone. (Ord. 08-1413U, § 5; Ord. 08-1414U, § 3; Ord. 08-1413, § 5)

41504 Sex Offender Violation – Dwellings.
No sex offender shall obtain occupancy in a dwelling unit, mobilehome, a single-family dwelling, second unit dwelling, multiple dwelling, or a residential condominium unit already occupied by a sex offender, unless those persons are legally related by blood, marriage or adoption. (Ord. 08-1413U, § 5; Ord. 08-1414U, § 3; Ord. 08-1413, § 5)

41505 Sex Offender Violation – Multiple Dwellings and Mobilehome Parks – Permanent Resident.
No sex offender shall be a permanent or temporary resident in a multiple dwelling, including multiple detached units, if ten (10) percent or up to a maximum of six (6) units of the total dwelling units within the multiple dwelling are already occupied by sex offenders (“occupied units”). Notwithstanding the above, a sex offender may be a permanent or temporary resident of an occupied unit within a multiple dwelling, without violating the restrictions contained herein, if the occupied unit is occupied by another sex offender legally related to the sex offender by blood, marriage or adoption. (Ord. 08-1413U, § 5; Ord. 08-1414U, § 3; Ord. 08-1413, § 5)

41506 Sex Offender Violation – Hotel/Motel Rooms.
No sex offender shall obtain occupancy in a guest room of a hotel, residential hotel, or motel already occupied by a sex offender, unless those persons are legally related by blood, marriage or adoption. (Ord. 08-1413U, § 5; Ord. 08-1414U, § 3; Ord. 08-1413, § 5)

41507 Sex Offender Violation – Hotel/Motel Rooms – Permanent Resident.
No sex offender shall be a permanent or temporary resident in a hotel, residential hotel, or motel if ten (10) percent or up to a maximum of six (6) units of the total dwelling units within the hotel, residential hotel, or motel are already occupied by sex offenders (“occupied units”). Notwithstanding the above, a sex offender may be a permanent or temporary resident of an occupied unit within a hotel, residential hotel, or motel without violating the restrictions contained herein, if the occupied unit is occupied by another sex offender legally related to the sex offender by blood, marriage or adoption. (Ord. 08-1413U, § 5; Ord. 08-1414U, § 3; Ord. 08-1413, § 5)

41508 Responsible Party Violation – Permanent Residence.
No responsible party shall knowingly rent a mobilehome or dwelling unit to more than one (1) sex offender during any given period of tenancy, unless those persons are legally related by blood, marriage or adoption. (Ord. 08-1413U, § 5; Ord. 08-1414U, § 3; Ord. 08-1413, § 5)

41509 Responsible Party Violation – Temporary Residence.
No responsible party shall knowingly rent a mobilehome or dwelling unit to more than one (1) sex offender during any given period of tenancy, unless those persons are legally related by blood, marriage or adoption. (Ord. 08-1413U, § 5; Ord. 08-1414U, § 3; Ord. 08-1413, § 5)

41510 Responsible Party Violation – Hotel/Motel Rooms.
No responsible party shall knowingly exceed the number of units occupied by a sex offender subject to CMC 41507 or rent a guest room in a hotel, residential hotel, or motel to more than one (1) sex offender, unless those persons are legally related by blood, marriage or adoption. (Ord. 08-1413U, § 5; Ord. 08-1414U, § 3; Ord. 08-1413, § 5)

41511 Penalties.
Every person who fails to obey and comply with any provisions of CMC 9122.9, 9138.72 or 9182.31 or this Chapter or who violates any such provision or who causes such failure, disobedience or violation shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in CMC 1200. (Ord. 08-1413U, § 5; Ord. 08-1414U, § 3; Ord. 08-1413, § 5)

41512 Criminal Penalties Do Not Satisfy Administrative or Civil Actions.
Neither the arrest, prosecution, conviction, imprisonment, or payment of any fine for the violation of CMC 9122.9, 9138.72 or 9182.31 or this Chapter shall satisfy or diminish the authority of the City to institute administrative or civil actions seeking enforcement of any or all of the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 08-1413U, § 5; Ord. 08-1414U, § 3; Ord. 08-1413, § 5)

41513 Civil Actions.
Any person required to comply with any or all of the provisions of CMC 9122.9, 9138.72 or 9182.31 or this Chapter shall be liable in an action filed by the City in any court of competent jurisdiction in order to enforce such provision and to pay such reasonable costs of the suit as the court may deem appropriate, including any and all attorney fees incurred by the City in the prosecution of said enforcement action. (Ord. 08-1413U, § 5; Ord. 08-1414U, § 3; Ord. 08-1413, § 5)

CHAPTER 16
UNMANNED AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS
Sections:

§ 41601    Purpose and Intent.

§ 41602    Definitions.

§ 41603    Prohibitions.

§ 41604    Exemptions.

§ 41605    Enforcement.

41601 Purpose and Intent.
The purpose of this Chapter is to reasonably regulate the use of unmanned aircraft systems in order to promote public safety and protect people attending large venue special events. This Chapter is intended to operate in conjunction with the laws, regulation and policies of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). (Ord. 15-1569, § 1)

41602 Definitions.
(a) “Drone(s)” shall mean an unmanned aircraft or unmanned aircraft system (UAS) that can fly under the control of a remote pilot or by a global positioning system (GPS) guided autopilot mechanism including, but not limited to, toy or model airplanes, helicopters, and/or other similar personal and/or recreational devices.

(b) “Large venue special events” shall mean any event held in a public park or an open-air facility that is open to the public and intended to attract large groups of people. (Ord. 15-1569, § 1)

41603 Prohibitions.
Unless otherwise exempt under this Chapter, no person shall fly, deploy, or launch drones in airspace below four hundred (400) feet within a half-mile of any large venue special event, including but not limited to any Carson stadium, public parks, public facilities, including Cal State University Dominguez Hills sports facilities during large venue special events. (Ord. 15-1569, § 1)

41604 Exemptions.
This Chapter shall not prohibit the lawful use of drones or UASs by any law enforcement agency. (Ord. 15-1569, § 1)

41605 Enforcement.
Violations of this Chapter are punishable pursuant to Chapter 2 (Penalty Provisions) of Article I (General Provisions). (Ord. 15-1569, § 1)

ARTICLE V
SANITATION AND HEALTH
Chapters:

1    Health Code

2    Collection of Solid Waste and Recyclable Materials

3    Litter and Weed Control

4    Graffiti Prevention and Removal

5    Noise Control Ordinance

6    Swimming Pools

7    Property Maintenance

8    Storm Water and Urban Runoff Pollution Control

9    Residential Property Report

10    Water Conservation and Sustainability Measure

CHAPTER 1
HEALTH CODE
Sections:

§ 5100    Adoption of Public Health Licensing Regulations and Health Code.

§ 5101    Conflict.

5100 Adoption of Public Health Licensing Regulations and Health Code.
Division 1 of Title 8 of the Los Angeles County Code (Public Health Licensing), and Division 1 of Title 11 of the Los Angeles County Code (the Health Code), both as amended and in effect on July 1, 1998, hereby are adopted by reference and shall collectively be known as the Health Code of the City of Carson.

A certified copy of Division 1 of Title 8 and Division 1 of Title 11 of the Los Angeles County Code have been deposited in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Carson and shall be at all times maintained by the Clerk for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 98-1136, § 2)

5101 Conflict.
In the event of any conflict or inconsistency between the provisions of the Health Code adopted by CMC 5100 and any other provision of the Carson Municipal Code, the provisions of the Carson Municipal Code shall govern. (Ord. 98-1136, § 2)

CHAPTER 2
COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLABLE MATERIALS*
Sections:

§ 5200    Legislative Policy.

Part 1. Definitions

§ 5201    Definitions.

Part 2. Franchises, Permits and Rates

§ 5220    Franchise Requirement.

§ 5221    Collector Fees.

§ 5222    Transfer of Permit or Franchise.

§ 5223    Revocation of Permit or Franchise.

§ 5224    Interim Suspension.

§ 5225    Notice of Hearing – Revocation.

§ 5226    Appeals.

§ 5227    Council Action.

§ 5228    Rates.

§ 5229    Collection of Charges.

§ 5229.1    Permits and Licenses.

§ 5229.2    Seamless Service Requirements.

§ 5229.3    Violations.

Part 3. Vehicles

§ 5230    Vehicle Identification.

§ 5231    Vehicle Standards.

§ 5232    Operation of Equipment.

§ 5233    Violations.

Part 4. Exclusions

§ 5240    Residential Householder Exclusion.

§ 5241    Gardener’s Exclusion.

§ 5242    Commercial/Industrial Exclusions.

§ 5243    Contractors’ Exclusions.

§ 5244    Document Destruction Service.

Part 5. General Requirements

§ 5250    Workers’ Compensation Insurance.

§ 5251    Collector’s Liability Insurance.

§ 5252    Noise.

§ 5253    Office for Inquiries and Complaints.

§ 5254    Litter.

§ 5255    Transfer of Loads on Public Streets.

§ 5256    Unauthorized Removal from Containers.

Part 6. Residential Collection and Recycling

§ 5260    Residential Collection – Mandatory Service.

§ 5261    Residential Collection – Disposal and Status of Solid Waste or Recyclable Materials.

§ 5262    Residential Collection – Frequency and Hours of Collection.

§ 5263    Residential Collection – Solid Waste Containers.

§ 5264    Residential Collection – Recyclable Materials Containers.

§ 5265    Residential Collection – Placement of Containers.

§ 5266    Residential Collection – Care of Containers.

§ 5267    Residential Collection – Special Collections.

Part 7. Commercial/Industrial Collection

§ 5270    Commercial/Industrial Exclusive Franchise.

§ 5271    Commercial/Industrial – Disposal and Status of Solid Waste.

§ 5272    Commercial/Industrial – Frequency and Hours of Collection.

§ 5273    Commercial/Industrial – Containers.

§ 5274    Commercial/Industrial – Maintenance and Placement of Containers.

§ 5275    Commercial/Industrial – Care of Containers.

§ 5276    Commercial/Industrial – Special Circumstances.

*Editor’s Note: Prior ordinances codified herein include portions of Ordinance Nos. 47, 69-110, 78-447, 79-479 and 84-703U.

5200 Legislative Policy.
The City Council has found and determined, and hereby finds and determines, in order to meet the requirements of the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989, including requirements for source reduction of the solid waste stream, diversion of solid waste from landfills and conservation of natural resources, it is necessary to regulate the collection of solid waste from commercial/industrial premises in addition to residential premises and to encourage recycling of solid waste materials. In addition thereto, the requirements of the Environmental Protection Agency and the Southern California Air Quality Management District and other regulatory agencies with respect to air pollution and traffic congestion management require regulation, and, where possible, reduction of the number of waste collection vehicles and vehicle trips with attendant discharge of air contaminants and pollution. Reduction of the number of heavy waste collection vehicles using the City streets daily will reduce traffic hazards and congestion and promote safety. Notwithstanding the City’s collective diversion rate City wide, each and every solid waste enterprise operating in the City shall be individually responsible for meeting current and future diversion mandates of the State of California.

The City Council further finds and determines that the storage, accumulation, collection and disposal of solid waste, including without limitation garbage, trash, debris and other discarded materials, is a matter of great public concern in that improper control of such matters may create a public nuisance, air pollution, fire hazard, rat and insect infestation and other problems affecting the public health, safety and welfare. Regulation of the collection of garbage, refuse and other discarded materials from all residential, commercial and industrial properties within the City will provide the most orderly and efficient solution to such problems and promote the public health, safety and welfare. Regulation of solid waste business in the City will also promote public health and safety by, among other things, requiring newer and safer vehicles, regular maintenance, reduction of spillage and litter in the public streets, establishing accountability for the cleaning of refuse bins and containers, and accountability to the public.

The City Council hereby finds and determines that the public health, safety and welfare will be served by providing for exclusive franchises for residential refuse collection services, and for commercial and industrial collection services subject to the rights of certain existing commercial/industrial collectors who are qualified under Public Resources Code Sections 49520 and 49521 to continue the solid waste collection services for five (5) years following notice given pursuant to that section. Such five (5) year period expires March 1, 1996. Notwithstanding such expiration date, any solid waste collection services that continue service pursuant to Public Resources Code Sections 49520 and 49521 (as may be amended) shall not expand their account base or solicit new accounts during such period of continued services. (Ord. 91-956, § 1; Ord. 18-1831, § 2)

Part 1. Definitions

5201 Definitions.
The following words and phrases, for the purpose of this Chapter, are defined and shall be construed as hereunder set out:

(a) City Administrator. “City Administrator” shall mean the City Administrator of the City of Carson (“City”) or his or her designee.

(b) Collection. “Collection” shall mean the operation of gathering together within the City and/or transporting by means of a motor vehicle any solid waste or recyclable material.

(c) Collector. “Collector” shall mean any person who has been issued a franchise to provide residential or commercial/industrial solid waste or recyclable materials collection services in the City, or who has been issued a permit and/or license by the City to operate as a commercial/industrial solid waste collector and is authorized by Public Resources Code Sections 49520 and 49521 to operate as a commercial/industrial solid waste collector for the unexpired period of time set forth in a notice given by the City pursuant to such Section 49520.

(d) Commercial/Industrial Business Owner. “Commercial/industrial business owner” shall mean any person, firm, corporation or other enterprise or organization holding or occupying, singly or with others, commercial/industrial premises, whether or not the holder of the title of the commercial/industrial premises.

(e) Commercial/Industrial Collector. “Commercial/industrial collector” means a collector providing solid waste collection services to commercial and industrial premises, including construction and/or demolition sites.

(f) Commercial/Industrial Premises. “Commercial/industrial premises” shall mean all occupied real property in the City except property occupied by Federal, State or local governmental agencies which do not consent to their inclusion, and except residential premises, and shall include without limitation, multiple housing (including but not limited to housing projects containing or consisting of four (4) or more units, whether apartment houses, condominiums, mixed condominiums and rental housing, or mobile home parks) wholesale or retail establishments, restaurants, other food establishments, bars, stores, shops, offices, manufacturing, repair, research and development, professional, services, sports or recreational facilities and construction and demolition sites.

(g) Construction Site or Demolition Site. “Construction site” or “demolition site” shall mean any real property in the City of Carson in, on or from which a building or structure is being fabricated, assembled, erected or demolished and which produces construction or demolition solid waste which must be removed from the property, and requires the use of commercial refuse containers (two (2), three (3), four (4), six (6) or eight (8) yard containers) or fifteen (15), twenty-five (25) or forty (40) yard roll-off boxes.

(h) Construction or Demolition Waste. “Construction or demolition waste” shall mean any solid waste generated as the result of construction or demolition, including without limitation discarded packaging or containers and waste construction materials, whether brought on site for fabrication or used in construction or resulting from demolition, excluding liquid waste and hazardous waste.

(i) Disposal. “Disposal” means the complete operation of treating and/or disposing of solid waste after the collection thereof.

(j) Hazardous Waste. “Hazardous waste” shall mean and include waste defined as hazardous by Public Resources Code Section 40141, namely a waste or combination of wastes, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may do either of the following: (i) cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible, illness; (ii) pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of, or otherwise managed. “Hazardous waste” includes extremely hazardous waste and acutely hazardous waste, and such other waste as may hereafter from time to time be designated as such by the Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) or other agency of the United States Government, or by the California Legislature or any agency of the State of California empowered by law to classify or designate waste as hazardous, extremely hazardous or acutely hazardous.

(k) Holiday. “Holiday” shall mean:

New Year’s Day

Memorial Day

Independence Day

Thanksgiving Day

Christmas Day

“Holiday” shall also mean any other day designated as such in a contract between a collector and the labor union serving as the exclusive representative of said collector’s employees, provided such holiday is approved by the City Council.

(l) In the City or Within the City. “In the City” or “Within the City” shall mean within the City limits of the City as such limits now exist or may hereafter exist by virtue of the annexation of territory to or detachment of territory from the present limits of the City.

(m) Manure. “Manure” shall mean the waste droppings from any animal not disposed of through sewers.

(n) Person. “Person” shall mean any individual, association, firm, partnership, corporation, or any other group or combination thereof acting as a unit.

(o) Processing. “Processing” means the reduction, separation, recovery and conversion of solid waste.

(p) Public Agency. “Public agency” shall mean any governmental agency or department thereof, whether, Federal, State, or local.

(q) Recyclable Materials. “Recyclable materials” shall mean the following solid waste materials generated on or emanating from residential or commercial/industrial premises and no longer useful or wanted thereon: glass bottles and jars – any food or beverage container (excluding ceramics and chemical containers); aluminum – cans, foil, pie tins and similar items (excluding dirt or organic material); steel or bi-metal cans not to exceed one (1) gallon size; PET – plastic soda bottles or other bottles with the designated “PET” symbol; HDPE – plastic milk and water bottles with the designated “PET” symbol (excluding detergent or bleach bottles and other plastic products); newspaper; cardboard – separated and not having waxed surfaces; computer printout (excluding carbon); and white ledger – white bond paper, office paper, white envelopes (excluding coated paper); and such additional materials as the City Council may designate from time to time.

(r) Recycling. “Recycling” means the process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating, and reconstituting materials that would otherwise become solid waste, and returning them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused, or reconstituted products which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace. Recycling does not include transformation as defined in Public Resources Code Section 40201.

(s) Recycling Container. “Recycling container” shall mean a container provided to residential premises for use in collecting and moving recyclable materials to curbside for collection by the collector. Said container shall have a capacity of at least eighteen (18) gallons and shall be marked with the City recycling logo. The type, color and design of the container provided shall be subject to approval by the City Administrator.

(t) Residential Collector. “Residential collector” means the collector who collects solid waste and recyclable materials from residential premises under an exclusive contract or franchise.

(u) Residential Householder. “Residential householder” shall mean any person holding and/or occupying residential premises, whether or not the owner, singly or with his or her family, in the City.

(v) Residential Owner. “Residential owner” shall mean the owner of any residential premises within the City.

(w) Residential Premises. “Residential premises” shall mean any residential property within the City, except rental housing projects, condominiums, apartment houses or other residential housing with four (4) or more dwelling units.

(x) Resource Recovery. “Resource recovery” shall mean any use or refuse or solid waste collected pursuant to this Chapter, except for land disposal or transfer for land disposal. “Resource recovery” shall include, but is not limited to, transformation, composting and multi-material recycling.

(y) Solid Waste. “Solid waste” shall mean all putrescible and nonputrescible solid and semisolid wastes, generated in or upon, related to the occupancy of, remaining in or emanating from residential premises or commercial/industrial premises, including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, demolition and construction wastes, discarded home and industrial appliances, manure, vegetable or animal solid or semisolid wastes, and other solid and semisolid wastes, as defined in Public Resources Code Section 49503, excluding liquid wastes and abandoned vehicles; provided however, that “solid waste” shall not include hazardous waste. Notwithstanding the foregoing, residential solid waste shall not include items greater than four (4) feet in length, eighteen (18) inches in diameter, or more than sixty (60) pounds in weight.

(z) Solid Waste Container. “Solid waste container” shall mean any vessel, tank, receptacle, box or bin used or intended to be used for the purpose of holding solid waste for collection.

(aa) Standard Solid Waste Container. “Standard solid waste container” shall mean a state-of-the-art bin or refuse container used in connection with commercial industrial premises with a two (2), three (3), four (4), six (6) or eight (8) cubic yard capacity, designed for mechanical pick-up by collection vehicles and equipped with a lid, or where appropriate for the commercial/industrial premises being served, a fifteen (15), twenty-five (25) or forty (40) cubic yard roll-off body or compactor, and shall include other types of containers suitable for the storage and collection of commercial/industrial refuse if approved in writing by the City Administrator.

(bb) Standard Residential Solid Waste Container. “Standard residential solid waste container” shall mean a container made of metal, hard rubber or plastic with a capacity of forty-five (45) gallons and a weight of no more than sixty (60) pounds when placed for collection. Well secured, unpunctured, heavy plastic bags may also serve as standard residential refuse containers, provided they weigh no more than sixty (60) pounds when placed for collection. (Ord. 91-956, § 2; Ord. 91-959, § 1)

Part 2. Franchises, Permits and Rates

5220 Franchise Requirement.
No person shall collect and/or dispose of solid waste in the City unless such person has been awarded a solid waste collector franchise and has entered into a franchise agreement with the City, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Chapter. No person shall collect recyclable materials generated on or emanating from residential premises in the City unless such person has been awarded a residential recycling franchise and has entered into a franchise agreement with the City. Any such solid waste or residential recycling franchise shall be in addition to any business license or permit otherwise required by the Carson Municipal Code. No permit issued by any other governmental agency authorizing collection of solid waste or residential recycling materials shall be valid in the City. Commercial/industrial collectors presently operating without a franchise in the City may continue to operate only until the expiration of the notice provided to them in compliance with Public Resources Code Section 49520 and only if such collectors are qualified under Public Resources Code Sections 49520 and 49521 and have an existing solid waste collector permit from the City. (Ord. 91-956, § 2; Ord. 91-959, § 1)

5221 Collector Fees.
Each collector shall pay an annual fee in an amount  determined by resolution of the City Council and obtain a franchise or permit for collection of solid waste and/or recyclable materials. (Ord. 91-956, § 2)

5222 Transfer of Permit or Franchise.
An existing solid waste collector permit or a franchise issued under this Chapter shall not be transferred, delegated, sublet, subcontracted to or assigned to another person without the approval of the City Council. This restriction includes the transfer of ownership or the majority of the ownership or control of the permittee or franchisee, or transfer of a majority of the permittee’s or franchisee’s stock to another person. (Ord. 91-956, § 2)

5223 Revocation of Permit or Franchise.
After a hearing as provided in this Chapter, the City Administrator may revoke or suspend any solid waste collector permit or franchise for violation of a provision of this Chapter or any other applicable law, ordinance, or regulation of any public agency. (Ord. 91-956, § 2)

5224 Interim Suspension.
The City Administrator, without a hearing, may suspend a franchise or solid waste permit for not more than sixty (60) days, if the City Administrator finds that continued operation by the franchisee or permittee will constitute a threat to the public health, safety, or general welfare. (Ord. 91-956, § 2)

5225 Notice of Hearing – Revocation.
The City Administrator shall mail notice of a hearing to revoke a solid waste permit or franchise to the collector not less than fifteen (15) days prior to such hearing. In the event of the revocation of a franchise or solid waste permit, the City Administrator shall notify the applicant in writing of the reasons therefor. Such notification may be made in person or by mail. (Ord. 91-956, § 2)

5226 Appeals.
Within fifteen (15) calendar days after notice by the City Administrator of revocation of a solid waste permit or franchise has been sent to the collector, the collector may file with the City Clerk an appeal of such decision to the City Council. (Ord. 91-956, § 2)

5227 Council Action.
The City Council may either affirm the action of the City Administrator, send the matter back to the City Administrator for further consideration, or set the matter for hearing before itself. If the Council sets the matter for hearing, it shall base its action upon the standards delineated in CMC 5223. Notice of such hearing shall be sent to the collector not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. (Ord. 91-956, § 2)

5228 Rates.
The City Council may, by resolution, establish rates to be charged to residential owners and commercial/industrial business owners by the franchised collector for the collection of solid waste and recyclable materials. The City Council may, by resolution, establish rates to be charged by other commercial/industrial collectors who are qualified and permitted to provide solid waste collection services under Public Resources Code Sections 49520 and 49521. No collector shall charge any rate or fee which is greater than the rate established by the City Council, unless otherwise authorized in this Chapter. Every commercial/industrial business owner and residential owner shall pay the rates established from time to time by the City Council for collection services rendered pursuant to this Chapter in the manner set forth in Section 5229. The City Council shall establish rate categories as may be appropriate for collection services provided by the commercial/industrial collectors. (Ord. 91-956, § 2; Ord. 91-959, § 1)

5229 Collection of Charges.
The City shall collect fees for residential solid waste collection services by causing fees to be placed on the Los Angeles County Tax rolls through procedures established by the Los Angeles County Tax Collector. No charge shall be made directly to a residential householder by the franchised residential collector, except as otherwise specifically authorized by the City Council. Every commercial/industrial collector shall be solely responsible for collecting the charges for such collector’s services for providing commercial/industrial collections pursuant to this Chapter, and the City shall have no liability or responsibility therefor. (Ord. 91-956, § 2)

5229.1 Permits and Licenses.
Every collector shall obtain and maintain at all time during the collector’s operations a permit and business license issued by the City, and all applicable permits and licenses required by any public agency having jurisdiction. (Ord. 91-956, § 2)

5229.2 Seamless Service Requirements.
(a) Definitions. Whenever the terms set forth below are used in this Section, they shall have the meanings set forth herein below:

(1) “Change in contract” shall mean any change of any provider with whom the City contracts to provide waste collection and recycling services including the pick-up, transfer, disposal and sorting of residential and commercial solid waste and recycling.

(2) “Change in control” shall mean any sale, assignment, transfer, or other disposition of all or substantially all of the assets or a controlling interest (including by consolidation, merger, or reorganization) of the incumbent operator, or any person who controls such incumbent operator, to a new operator.

(3) “City” shall mean the City of Carson.

(4) “Provider” shall mean any corporation, company, partnership, trust, estate, association, joint venture or other legal or commercial entity, as well as any subcontractor of such an entity, operating within the City that employs workers to perform waste collection and recycling services under contract with the City, including the pick-up, transfer, disposal and sorting of residential, commercial, and industrial solid waste and recycling.

(5) “Incumbent operator” shall mean any person, as defined herein, who owns, controls, and/or operates a provider prior to a change in control or change in contract.

(6) “New operator” shall mean any person, as defined herein, who owns, controls, and/or operates any provider following a change in control or change in contract.

(7) “Person” shall mean an individual, corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust, estate, association, joint venture, agency, instrumentality, or any other legal or commercial entity, whether domestic or foreign.

(8) “Qualified displaced worker” shall mean any person employed by an incumbent operator, or any subcontractor of an incumbent operator, who:

(i) Is not an “exempt” employee within the meaning of the Fair Labor Standards Act (“FLSA”); and

(ii) Has been employed at a provider by the incumbent operator, or any subcontractor of the incumbent operator, for at least thirty (30) consecutive calendar days prior to the execution of the transfer document.

(9) “Transfer document” shall mean the legal instrument or agreement effecting a change in control or change in contract.

(10) “Wages and benefits” shall mean all wages or compensation, and, where referenced in an applicable collective bargaining agreement, provisions addressing how overtime shall be calculated, employer and employee contributions for medical insurance and retirement benefits, any tool, shoe or uniform allowance, sick leave, vacation time and personal or family leave.

(b) Employee Retention.

(1) An incumbent operator shall, within ten (10) days of the execution of a transfer document, provide the new operator and the Carson City Manager, or his or her designee, a list of all of the employees of the incumbent operator at any provider, including each employee’s name, last known address, date of hire and job classification at the time of the transfer. The new operator shall offer employment at a provider to all qualified displaced workers in accordance with the terms of this Section.

(2) All scope of services and work hours performed by an incumbent operator that is to be performed by the new operator shall be performed, to the extent commercially feasible, by qualified displaced workers. Nothing herein shall be construed as requiring the new operator to create new employment positions that the new operator does not need in order to perform waste collection and recycling services under contract with the City. However, prior to reducing the amount of work hours or positions utilized to perform waste disposal services at a provider, a new operator must obtain written approval from the City Manager, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld.

(3) The new operator is prohibited from discharging any qualified displaced worker offered employment as required herein, except for cause, for at least one hundred eighty (180) days from the effective date of the transfer document, or the date on which the new operator actually begins operating any provider, whichever shall later occur.

(4) At the end of such one hundred eighty (180) day period, the new operator shall perform a written performance evaluation for each qualified displaced worker retained pursuant to this Section. If such qualified displaced worker’s job performance during such one hundred eighty (180) day period is deemed to be “satisfactory” or better, the new operator shall offer the employee continued employment consistent with subsection (d) of this Section.

(c) Preferential Hire. In the event that, during the one hundred eighty (180) day transition period described above, the new operator determines that fewer positions are needed in order to perform waste collection and recycling services under contract with the City of Carson, including the pick-up, transfer, disposal and sorting of residential, commercial, and industrial solid waste and recycling, the new operator shall retain qualified displaced workers, as are determined to be commercially needed, by seniority. Seniority shall be determined by reference to any collective bargaining agreement covering the qualified displaced workers or, if no such agreement exists, then by reference to the initial hire date with the incumbent operator of each qualified displaced worker. Any qualified displaced workers not retained by the new operator shall be placed on a preferential hiring list and considered by the new operator for any job openings that may arise.

(d) Maintenance of Wages and Benefits. Each new operator shall provide all employees at a provider with wages and benefits not less than the greater of those (1) in effect at the provider immediately prior to the point of execution of the transfer document or (2) in any collective bargaining agreement, whether effective or expired, between the incumbent operator and any qualified displaced workers.

(e) Retaliation and Discrimination Barred – No Waiver of Rights.

(1) No incumbent operator or new operator shall discharge or otherwise discriminate against any employee, including a qualified displaced worker, for making a complaint, participating in any administrative proceeding, or using any civil remedy to enforce his or her rights, or for otherwise asserting his or her rights under this Section.

(2) Any waiver by a qualified displaced worker of any or all of the provisions of this Section shall be deemed contrary to public policy and shall be void and unenforceable, except where such waiver occurs in a bona fide collective bargaining agreement. Any attempt by an incumbent operator or new operator to have a waste or recycling worker waive rights given by this Section shall be deemed to be in contravention of public policy and shall also constitute a willful violation of this Section.

(f) Enforcement.

(1) Any qualified displaced worker claiming a violation of this Section may bring an action against an incumbent operator or new operator in the Superior Court of the State of California, to enforce the provisions of this Section. The court is authorized to award liquidated damages for each violation in an amount equivalent to one hundred eighty (180) days of such qualified displaced worker’s average regular rate of pay and, where appropriate, back pay, any other actual damages, reinstatement, injunctive relief, punitive damages, and any other legal or equitable relief. The court is further authorized to award treble damages for willful violations of this Section. Violations of this Section are hereby declared to constitute irreparable harm to any qualified displaced worker.

(2) A court in any proceeding to enforce the provisions of this Section shall award reasonable attorneys’ fees, expert witness fees, and costs to any plaintiff who prevails in an action to enforce the provisions of this Section.

(3) The rights and remedies set forth herein are in addition to any other rights which an employee might have, under any Federal or State statute or regulation or municipal ordinance or regulation or at common law.

(g) Incorporation Into Any City Franchise or License Agreements. The terms of this Section shall be included, by reference, in all contracts to provide waste disposal services, including the pick-up, transfer, and disposal and recycling of residential and commercial trash, to which any provider is a party. All providers shall include the terms of this Section, by reference, in all subcontracts which any provider may enter into involving the provision of waste disposal services, including the pick-up, transfer, disposal of residential and commercial trash and recyclables. In addition, the following language shall be included in all franchises, licenses, or other agreements for waste disposal services between the City and any provider:

It is understood between the parties that Qualified Displaced Workers, as that term is defined in Carson Municipal Code § 5229.2 are third-party beneficiaries to this contract and Contractor agrees that, as such, Qualified Displaced Workers shall have the right to enforce the provisions of this agreement relating to employee retention and initial wages and benefits. This right shall be independent of the City’s right to enforce any and all portions of the contract and shall be in addition to any rights that such workers may have under any other federal, state or local statute or at equity. In the event that a Qualified Displaced Worker prevails in an action to enforce this contract, that Qualified Displaced Worker shall be entitled to his or her costs, including a reasonable attorney’s fee, in addition to any other remedies that the worker may be due at law or in equity.

(Ord. 10-1447, § 1)

5229.3 Violations.*
(a) Any person or entity collecting and/or disposing of solid waste or recyclable materials in violation of CMC 5220 et seq. will be advised in writing by the City or the collector to cease such activities immediately (the “written warning”), which written warning shall demand the person or entity to remove all vehicles and solid waste containers being utilized in unlawful collection activities from the City no later than three (3) business days from the date of the written warning. This written warning requirement is not applicable where the registered owner of the vehicle or solid container cannot be identified.

(1) If, after the provision of the written warning, such person or entity continues to collect and/or dispose of solid waste or recyclable materials in violation of CMC 5220 et seq., such person or entity will be fined up to $1,000 for each violation. Each separate day, or any portion thereof, during which any violation of this Chapter occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense.

(2) Such person may also be assessed, in accordance with subsection (c) of this Section, a daily impoundment fine, in an amount determined from time to time by resolution of the City Council, and administration charges, in the event that a vehicle or solid waste container utilized in unlawful collection activities is impounded pursuant to subsection (b) of this Section. The administration charges consist of towing and transportation costs for the vehicle or solid waste container, transportation and disposal of contents of the solid waste container, storage, and administrative and ancillary costs, in reasonable amounts reflecting actual administrative costs as determined by the City Manager.

(b) The City may impound any vehicle or solid waste container placed or located in the City in violation of CMC 5220 et seq., in accordance with the procedures set forth in subsection (c) of this Section. In addition, the collector is authorized to impound any solid waste container placed or located in the City in violation of CMC 5220 et seq., in accordance with the procedures set forth in subsection (c) of this Section.

(c) The following terms and conditions shall apply to the impoundment of a vehicle or solid waste container that was utilized in unlawful collection activities:

(1) If, after the provision of the written warning set forth in subsection (a) of this Section, the City or the collector finds that there is a continued presence of an unauthorized vehicle or solid waste container being utilized for such unlawful collection activities, the City or the collector will initiate hauling orders on the fourth business day after the date of such written warning unless the vehicle or solid waste container has been removed from the City.

(2) All impounded vehicles or solid waste containers will be transported by the City or the collector to a location designated by the City for storage. Thereafter, the City or the collector shall give notice to the registered owner (at the address obtained from the Department of Motor Vehicles) within three (3) business days of impoundment, by first-class mail, stating that the registered owner may remove the vehicle or solid waste container from the designated storage location upon payment of the daily impoundment fine and administration charges (the “Impoundment Notice”). Failure to mail the Impoundment Notice to the registered owner within three (3) business days of impoundment shall prohibit the City or the collector from charging more than fifteen (15) days’ impoundment fine. This Impoundment Notice requirement is not applicable where the registered owner of the vehicle or solid waste container cannot be identified. The Impoundment Notice shall contain:

i. The name, address, and telephone number of City Hall;

ii. The description of the vehicle, including, if available, the make, model, year, license plate number, and mileage;

iii. The location of the place of storage of the vehicle;

iv. The authority and purpose for the removal and impoundment of the vehicle;

v. The notice shall also inform the owner of an opportunity for a post-storage hearing to determine the validity of the storage or to determine mitigating circumstances establishing that the vehicle should be released; and

vi. A statement that, in order to receive a post-storage hearing, the owner(s), or agents thereof, shall request a hearing in person, in writing, or by telephone within ten (10) days of the date of the notice.

(3) The post-storage hearing shall be conducted within forty-eight (48) hours of a written request for hearing, excluding weekends and holidays. Failure of the legal and registered owners, or their respective agents, to request or to attend a scheduled hearing shall satisfy the post-storage hearing requirement. If a post-storage hearing is requested, the vehicle release fee must be paid before the commencement of the post-storage hearing.

i. The City shall designate one of its own officers or employees, who is not the same person who directed the seizure of the vehicle, as the Hearing Officer to conduct the post-storage hearing.

ii. The Hearing Officer shall establish whether there are reasonable grounds for the storage of the vehicle and mitigating circumstances establishing that the vehicle should be released. If it is determined at the post-storage hearing that there are no reasonable grounds for the storage of the vehicle, the City shall be responsible for the costs incurred for towing and storage.

(4) Subject to a contrary outcome of a post-storage hearing, the impounded vehicle or solid waste container shall be released to the registered owner once the daily impoundment fine and administration charges have been paid to the City or the collector.

(d) The City or the collector shall release a vehicle or solid waste container to the registered owner, without payment of the daily impoundment fine or administration charges, under any of the following circumstances:

(1) The vehicle or solid waste container was stolen from the registered owner;

(2) The vehicle or solid waste container was subject to bailment and was driven and/or placed at a location by an employee of the business establishment, including a parking service or repair garage.

(e) After the expiration of six (6) weeks from the date of the initial impound, the City may treat the vehicle or solid waste container as lost or abandoned property.

(f) Any daily impoundment fines or administration charges collected by the collector shall be remitted by the collector to the City on a monthly basis, by the fifteenth of each calendar month, along with a report of activities and an accounting of amounts collected. (Ord. 10-1452)

*Editor’s Note: Both Ords. 10-1447 and 10-1452 added CMC 5229.2. This section as added by Ord. 10-1452 has been editorially renumbered to avoid duplication of section numbers.

Part 3. Vehicles

5230 Vehicle Identification.
No person may operate any vehicle for the collection of solid waste, or collection of recyclable materials from residential premises, other than a collector who has a valid solid waste collection franchise or permit and business license and who has paid all required license, franchise, permit or other City charges. Each vehicle used by the collector shall have an identification number printed or painted in legible numbers not less than five (5) inches in height in plain sight from four (4) directions. (Ord. 91-956, § 2; Ord. 91-959, § 1)

5231 Vehicle Standards.
Any vehicle utilized by a collector (as defined in CMC 5201(c) for the collection, transportation or disposal of solid waste and/or recyclable materials shall comply with the following standards:

(a) Each vehicle shall be constructed and used so that no solid waste, oil, grease, or other substance will blow, fall or leak out of the vehicle.

(b) A broom and shovel shall be carried on each vehicle at all times.

(c) Each vehicle shall comply with all applicable statutes, laws, or ordinances of any public agency.

(d) Each vehicle must be under seven (7) years of age unless specifically authorized in writing by the City Administrator.

(e) Routine inspections by the California Highway Patrol shall be conducted annually and certificates for said inspection shall be filed annually with the City Administrator.

(f) All vehicles shall at all times be kept clean and sanitary, in good repair and well and uniformly painted to the satisfaction of the City Administrator.

(g) Each vehicle shall be equipped with watertight bodies fitted with close-fitting metal covers.

(h) The collector’s name or firm name and telephone number shall be printed or painted in legible letters not less than five (5) inches in height on both sides of all of collector’s vehicles used in the City.

(i) High intensity fog lamps shall be maintained on any vehicle eighty (80) inches or wider, which shall consist of two (2) red tail lamps in addition to the standard tail lamps. The fog lamps shall be used when visibility is less than fifty (50) feet.

(j) All equipment shall be maintained at all times in a manner to prevent unnecessary noise during its operation.

(k) As the collector replaces existing equipment, the type and make of the new equipment shall be subject to prior approval by the City Administrator. (Ord. 91-956, § 2; Ord. 91-959, § 1)

5232 Operation of Equipment.
All persons operating solid waste collection and transportation equipment shall do so in compliance with all applicable Federal, State and local laws and ordinances. Such vehicles shall not be operated in a manner which results in undue interference with normal traffic flows. No such vehicle shall be parked or left unattended on the public streets. No such vehicle shall be parked overnight on a public street or thoroughfare in the City. (Ord. 91-956, § 2)

5233 Violations.
Should the City Administrator give notification at any time to a collector that any of such collector’s vehicles is not in compliance with the standards of this Chapter, such vehicle shall be forthwith removed from service by the collector. The vehicle shall not again be utilized in the City until it has been inspected and approved by the City Administrator. The collector shall maintain its regular collection schedule regardless of such action. (Ord. 91-956, § 2)

Part 4. Exclusions

5240 Residential Householder Exclusion.
No provision of this Chapter shall prevent residential householders from collecting and disposing of occasional loads of solid waste generated in or on their residential premises, or from composting green waste, or from selling or disposing of recyclables generated in or on their residential premises. No residential householder shall employ or use any person other than the franchised residential collector to haul or transport such materials to a transfer station or landfill for a fee, charge or other consideration. (Ord. 91-956, § 2; Ord. 91-959, § 1)

5241 Gardener’s Exclusion.
No provisions of this Chapter shall prevent a gardener, tree trimmer or person engaged in a similar trade from collecting and disposing of grass cuttings, prunings, and other similar material not containing garbage as an incidental portion of providing such gardening, tree trimming or similar service. (Ord. 91-956, § 2; Ord. 91-959, § 1)

5242 Commercial/Industrial Exclusions.
(a) Source Separated Recyclables.

(1) No provision of this Chapter shall prevent a commercial/industrial business owner from selling to a buyer, for a monetary or other valuable consideration, any source separated recyclables, including without limitation, any saleable scrap, discard, reject, by-product, ferrous or nonferrous metal, worn-out or defective part, junk, pallet, packaging material, paper or other similar item generated in, on or by a commercial/industrial premises or business and no longer useful to such commercial/industrial business but having market value, whether such buyer is a recycler, junk dealer, or other enterprise engaged in the business of buying and marketing such materials in the stream of commerce, provided however, that such buyer is not engaged in the business of collecting solid waste for a fee or other charge or consideration and that no such materials are transported to a landfill or transfer station (as defined in Public Resources Code Section 40200) for disposition. “Source separated recyclables” within the meaning of this Section shall mean recyclables separated on the commercial/industrial premises from solid waste for the purpose of sale, not mixed with or containing more than incidental or minimal solid waste, and having a market value.

(2) No provision of this Chapter shall prevent a recycler, junk dealer or other enterprise engaged in the business of buying and marketing such materials in the stream of commerce and who is not engaged in the business of collecting solid waste or providing solid waste collection services for a fee or other charge, or consideration, from buying any materials mentioned in this subsection (a) for a monetary or other valuable consideration and who buys such materials for marketing and not for disposition in a landfill or transfer station (as defined in Public Resources Code Section 40200), nor shall any provision of this Chapter prevent such recycler, junk dealer or enterprise who buys such materials from removing and transporting such materials to a destination for marketing in the stream of commerce. No such buyer shall buy or transport such material without a business license issued by the City of Carson, as required by the Carson Municipal Code.

(b) Renovation, Rebuilding, Repairs. No provision of this Chapter shall prevent a commercial/industrial business owner from arranging for any worn, spent, defective or other part or equipment used in such commercial/industrial business and requiring renovation, rebuilding, recharging, regeneration or repair, to be picked up, renovated, rebuilt, recharged, regenerated or otherwise restored and repaired and returned to such commercial/industrial business owner, nor shall any provision of this Chapter prevent any person engaged in the business of renovating, rebuilding, recharging, regenerating, or otherwise restoring or repairing such part or equipment from transporting the same from or returning it to the commercial/industrial business or from removing, transporting or disposing of any such part of equipment replaced as a part of a repair or equipment service contract. (Ord. 91-959, § 2)

5243 Contractors’ Exclusions.
No provision of this Chapter shall prevent a licensed contractor having a contract for the demolition and/or reconstruction of a building, structure, pavement, or concrete installation from marketing any saleable items salvaged from such demolition or reconstruction, or from having such salvageable items or demolition waste removed and transported from the premises on which such waste is generated, pursuant to the provisions of the demolition and/or construction contract; provided, that such demolition waste is not transported to a transfer station or landfill. (Ord. 91-959, § 2)

5244 Document Destruction Service.
No provision of this Chapter shall prevent a confidential or sensitive document destruction service from transporting or disposing of documents by shredding, lumping, incinerating, or other means, as a part of such document destruction service. (Ord. 91-959, § 2)

Part 5. General Requirements

5250 Workers’ Compensation Insurance.
Each collector shall at all times provide, at its own expense, Workers’ Compensation Insurance coverage for all its employees. Each collector shall file and maintain a certificate or certificates with the City Administrator showing said insurance to be in full force and effect at all times that the collector conducts collection in the City. (Ord. 91-956, § 2)

5251 Collector’s Liability Insurance.
Each collector shall furnish the City a policy or certificate of comprehensive general and automobile liability insurance insuring the collector against bodily injury, property damage and automobile liability in the sum of not less than $1,000,000 single combined limit. Such insurance shall be primary and not excess, shall be procured from an insurer authorized to do business in the State of California, shall name the City of Carson and its officers, employees and agents as additional insureds and shall not be cancelled or modified without first giving the City thirty (30) days prior written notice. (Ord. 91-956, § 2)

5252 Noise.
A collector shall so conduct its operations as to cause the least possible obstruction and inconvenience to public traffic or disruption to the peace and quiet of the area within which collections are made. Noise emitting from any collection within five hundred (500) feet of residential property shall not exceed a level of seventy-five (75) decibels when measured at a distance of twenty-five (25) feet. (Ord. 91-956, § 2)

5253 Office for Inquiries and Complaints.
Every collector shall maintain an office at some fixed location and shall maintain a telephone at the office, listed in the telephone directory including Carson in the name under which it conducts business in the City, and shall at all times during the hours between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except holidays, have some person at said office to answer inquiries and receive complaints. The telephone number shall be a toll-free number from all portions of the City. (Ord. 91-956, § 2)

5254 Litter.
Any person who deposits or causes to be deposited any solid waste or recyclable material on the public right-of-way or on private property within public view, except in a container provided therefor as herein provided, shall immediately sweep up and remove the same.

Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Section shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 2 of Article I of this Code. (Ord. 91-956, § 2)

5255 Transfer of Loads on Public Streets.
No person shall transfer solid waste recyclable materials from one collection vehicle to another on any public street or road unless such transfer is essential to the method of operation and is approved by the City Administrator, or is necessary owing to mechanical failure or accidental damage to a vehicle. (Ord. 91-956, § 2; Ord. 91-959, § 3)

5256 Unauthorized Removal from Containers.
No person other than the collector who provides collection services at the premises, or the residential householder occupying or the residential owner who owns the residential premises in or upon which a solid waste container or recyclable material container is placed at curbside for collection, or the owner or employee of the owner of the container, shall remove any material from such container. (Ord. 91-956, § 2)

Part 6. Residential Collection and Recycling

5260 Residential Collection – Mandatory Service.
Every residential householder shall utilize the services of the collector having the exclusive franchise therefor. No residential householder shall enter into an agreement for residential refuse or recyclable material collection services with a vendor other than the exclusive franchisee. (Ord. 91-956, § 2)

5261 Residential Collection – Disposal and Status of Solid Waste or Recyclable Materials.
(a) Solid Waste. All solid waste collected by a collector shall be disposed of by the collector in accordance with all Federal, State and local laws and regulations.

(b) Recyclable Material. Upon placement at the residential curbside for collection, all recyclable materials shall become the property of the collector holding the exclusive franchise for residential collection services. (Ord. 91-956, § 2)

5262 Residential Collection – Frequency and Hours of Collection.
(a) Frequency. The residential collector shall collect all solid waste and recyclable materials placed for collection in compliance with this Chapter from each occupied residential premises in accordance with a schedule which has been approved by the City Administrator. Said schedule shall identify the routes and days of pickup within each collection district set up within the City. Unless otherwise approved by the City Council, collection of solid waste shall take place no less than once in each calendar week. Collection of recyclable materials shall take place no less than once in each calendar week. Not more than seven (7) days shall elapse between solid waste collections, nor between recyclable material collections.

When the collection day falls on a holiday, the collector shall choose one (1) of the following options:

(1) Collect on the holiday.

(2) Collect one (1) day prior to or one (1) day after the holiday, providing regular weekly collection can be maintained as provided in the first paragraph of this Section.

(b) Hours. No collection shall take place between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on the next day. No collection shall be made on Sunday unless specifically authorized in writing by the City Administrator. Hours and days of collection are subject to change by the City Council. (Ord. 91-956, § 2)

5263 Residential Collection – Solid Waste Containers.
Every residential householder shall provide sufficient standard residential refuse containers (with handles) to accommodate the amount of solid waste generated by the residential premises. Such container shall be the property of the residential householder. Notwithstanding the foregoing, and subject to written approval of the City Administrator, the collector may provide substitute containers at no extra cost to the residential householder. Such container shall be the property of the collector. No cardboard box or paper bag may be used as a container for solid waste.

Any solid waste not susceptible to placement in a standard residential refuse container may be placed for collection at the same place and time as the container if it is securely tied in bundles not heavier than sixty (60) pounds, not longer than four (4) feet in length, nor more than eighteen (18) inches in diameter. (Ord. 91-956, § 2)

5264 Residential Collection – Recyclable Materials Containers.
The collector shall provide each residential premises with one (1) recycling container, at no cost to the residential householder. If one (1) recycling container is inadequate, the collector shall provide a second recycling container for each residential premises, at no cost to the residential householder. Such containers shall be the property of the collector. (Ord. 91-956, § 2)

5265 Residential Collection – Placement of Containers.
Every residential householder shall place each solid waste container, recycling container or bundle for collection at the curb in front of the premises, or at the curb at the side of the premises where the premises are adjacent to more than one (1) street. When the premises are adjacent to a paved alley with a minimum width of fifteen (15) feet, the residential householder shall place the container or bundle within two (2) feet of the rear property line for collection. No person shall place such containers or bundles for collection prior to 6:00 p.m. on the day prior to the day on which collection is scheduled to commence in the district. No person shall leave such containers or bundles at the place of collection after 10:00 p.m. on the day of collection in the district. (Ord. 91-956, § 2; Ord. 97-1108, § 2)

5266 Residential Collection – Care of Containers.
Upon collection, all solid waste containers shall be replaced, by the collector, upright, where found, with the lids replaced, and all recycling containers shall be replaced in an upright or upside down position, at the location where found by the collector. (Ord. 91-956, § 2)

5267 Residential Collection – Special Collections.
The exclusive residential collector shall provide, upon request from a residential householder, special collection of solid waste, at such times and at such rates as may be agreed upon by the collector and the person requesting the service. In the event that no such agreement is reached, such charges and times shall be determined by the City Administrator, and such special collections shall be provided as determined by the City Administrator. (Ord. 91-956, § 2)

Part 7. Commercial/Industrial Collection

5270 Commercial/Industrial Exclusive Franchise.
All solid waste collected from commercial/industrial premises for a fee, service charge, or other consideration shall be collected by a solid waste collection enterprise with an exclusive franchise granted by the City Council (“franchised collector”), subject only to certain limited continuation rights of certain qualified collectors under Public Resources Code Sections 49520 and 49521 as hereinafter provided. No person, firm, corporation or other solid waste enterprise shall negotiate or contract for, undertake to receive, collect or transport solid waste from within the City for a fee, service charge, or other consideration, or receive directly or indirectly any such fee, service charge, or other consideration therefor, except only as hereinafter specifically provided.

Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, each commercial/industrial business owner shall utilize the services of the franchised collector for the collection of solid waste from the commercial/industrial premises held or occupied by said commercial/industrial business owner and shall pay for such services the fees approved by the City Council. No commercial/industrial business owner shall enter into an agreement for solid waste collection services with any person, firm, or corporation other than the franchised collector, except as otherwise provided in this Chapter. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent a commercial/industrial business which has its own recycling or resource recovery program for recyclable materials generated by such business and not utilizing a commercial or industrial solid waste enterprise (as defined in Public Resources Code Section 40193) which provides collection services for a fee, service charge, or other consideration, from continuing such recycling or resource recovery program and the recyclable materials included in such program are excepted from the exclusive franchise between the City and the franchised collector.

Notwithstanding the foregoing, certain solid waste enterprises that have been authorized by license or permit to provide solid waste hauling services for commercial/industrial premises in the City and have provided such services for more than three (3) previous years and meet the requirements of Public Resources Code Sections 49520 and 49521, may continue to provide these services until March 1, 1996. Such solid waste enterprises are hereinafter referred to as “excepted collectors.” The exclusive franchise of the franchised collector shall not preclude a commercial/industrial business served by such an excepted collector from continuing to use the solid waste collection services of such excepted collector until March 1, 1996, or until the business of such excepted collector terminates prior to such date. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if collection service provided by an excepted collector to a commercial/industrial trial business owner is terminated for any reason, said business owner shall not use the service of any collector other than the franchised collector. (Ord. 91-956, § 2; Ord. 91-959, § 3)

5271 Commercial/Industrial – Disposal and Status of Solid Waste.
Commercial/industrial collectors shall collect and dispose of all solid waste generated and presented for collection at each commercial/industrial premises in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter, except as otherwise provided in this Chapter. Any such collection and/or disposal shall be in accordance with all applicable Federal, State, and local laws and regulations and any controlling franchise agreement between the City and a franchisee. All solid waste collected by a commercial/industrial collector shall be the exclusive property of said collector. (Ord. 91-956, § 2)

5272 Commercial/Industrial – Frequency and Hours of Collection.
(a) Frequency. Commercial/industrial collectors shall collect solid waste from commercial/industrial premises on a schedule which is agreed upon between the commercial/industrial business owner and the collector. In no event shall such collection schedule permit the accumulation of solid waste in quantities detrimental to public health or safety.

(b) Hours. No collection of solid waste from multiple housing or within five hundred (500) feet of occupied residential property shall be made between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on the next day. No collection shall be made on Sunday unless specifically authorized in writing by the City Administrator. Hours and days of collection are subject to change by the City Council. (Ord. 91-956, § 2)

5273 Commercial/Industrial – Containers.
Every commercial/industrial business served by the franchised collector shall have the option to: (i) provide the necessary standard refuse container or containers to accommodate solid waste generated from said commercial/industrial business; (ii) to use the container or containers provided by the franchised collector. Any such refuse containers shall be a standard refuse container which is compatible with the franchised collector’s collection equipment. Where a commercial/industrial business owner is served by an excepted collector, such excepted collector and business owner shall determine who furnishes the container by private agreement between them.

Every collector who provides any container or other equipment used for the storage of commercial/industrial trial solid waste shall:

(a) Place and maintain on the outside of such container, bin or other equipment, in legible letters and numerals not less than one (1) inch in height said collector’s name or firm name, and telephone number, in a color contrasting to the background color of the container; and

(b) Provide containers on casters and/or hasps or locks upon request by the commercial/industrial business owner or the City Administrator. (Ord. 91-956, § 2)

5274 Commercial/Industrial – Maintenance and Placement of Containers.
Solid waste containers provided by the collector shall be maintained in a clean and healthful condition by the collector. Solid waste containers which are not provided by the collector shall be maintained in a clean and healthful condition by the commercial/industrial business owner. Every commercial/industrial business owner shall provide a solid waste container location on the commercial/industrial premises and shall keep said area in good repair, clean and free of refuse outside of the container. Every collector shall remove any solid waste or litter that is spilled or deposited on the ground as a result of the collector’s emptying of the container or other activities of the collector. (Ord. 91-956, § 2)

5275 Commercial/Industrial – Care of Containers.
Upon collection of solid waste by the collector, all containers shall be replaced, upright, where found, with the lids closed. No person other than the owner thereof shall in any way, break, damage, roughly handle or destroy containers owned by said commercial/industrial business owner. (Ord. 91-956, § 2; Ord. 91-959, § 3)

5276 Commercial/Industrial – Special Circumstances.
If particular commercial/industrial business premises require collections at times, frequencies or in a manner such that the franchised collector is unable to perform said collection in the normal course of business, or where unusual quantities of solid waste or special types of material are to be collected and disposed of, or where special methods of handling are required, or where the quantity of solid waste requires the use of multiple (more than three (3)) containers, the collector and the commercial/industrial business owner may make arrangements for such collection and rates on mutually agreeable terms. In the event that the business owner and the franchised collector do not agree as to the methods and rates for the service provided for in this Section, the City Administrator shall determine the rates and method of service. If the franchised collector is unable or unwilling to provide such service, the City Administrator may authorize the business owner to use another contractor for such special service until the franchised collector can provide such service in its normal course of business. (Ord. 91-956, § 2; Ord. 91-959, § 3)

CHAPTER 3
LITTER AND WEED CONTROL
Sections:

§ 5300    Name of Chapter.

§ 5301    Definitions.

§ 5302    Littering Prohibited.

§ 5303    Litter in Public Places.

§ 5303.1    Spilling or Depositing Noxious or Offensive Substances on Public Ways – Prohibited.

§ 5304    Placement of Litter in Receptacles So As to Prevent Scattering.

§ 5305    Sweeping Litter into Gutters Prohibited.

§ 5306    Merchant’s Duty to Clear Street of Litter.

§ 5307    Litter Thrown by Persons in Vehicles.

§ 5308    Truck Loads Causing Litter.

§ 5309    Litter in Parks.

§ 5310    Throwing or Distributing Commercial Handbills in Public Places.

§ 5311    Placing Commercial and Noncommercial Handbills on Vehicles.

§ 5312    Depositing Commercial and Noncommercial Handbills on Uninhabited or Vacant Premises.

§ 5313    Prohibiting Distribution of Handbills Where Property Posted.

§ 5314    Distributing Commercial and Noncommercial Handbills at Inhabited Private Premises.

§ 5315    Dropping Litter from Aircraft.

§ 5316    Affixing Signs on Utility Poles.

§ 5317    Litter on Occupied Private Property.

§ 5318    Owner to Maintain Premises Free of Litter.

§ 5319    Litter on Vacant Lots.

§ 5320    Clearing of Dangerous Litter from Open Private Property by the City – Summary Proceeding.

§ 5321    Sidewalk and Parkway.

§ 5322    Noxious Growths.

§ 5323    Notice Requiring Removal of Noxious Growths or Litter.

§ 5324    Notice Form.

§ 5325    Hearing.

§ 5326    Abatement Order.

§ 5327    Service of Order.

§ 5328    Abatement by City.

§ 5329    Cost of Abatement.

§ 5330    Special Assessments – Lien.

§ 5331    Cost Assessment.

§ 5332    Cost Paid to City.

§ 5333    Correction of Erroneous Assessments.

§ 5334    Violation a Public Nuisance.

5300 Name of Chapter.
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Anti-Litter and Weed Control Ordinance. (Ord. 51, § 5300)

5301 Definitions.
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein, unless the context indicates that a different meaning is intended.

A. “Aircraft” means any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or designated for navigation or for flight in the air. The word “aircraft” shall include helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons.

B. “Authorized Private Receptacle” means a litter storage and collection receptacle as required and authorized in Chapter 2 of this Article.

C. “Commercial Handbill” means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, booklet, paper, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original and copies of any matter of literature:

(1) Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing; or

(2) Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or

(3) Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, or exhibition, or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms of this clause shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, when either of the same is held, given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good order; provided, that nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, without a license, where such license is or may be required by any law of this State, or under any provision of this Code; or

(4) Which, while containing reading matter is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.

D. “Garbage” means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.

E. “Litter” means “garbage,” “refuse,” and “rubbish” as defined herein and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.

F. “Lot,” when used hereinafter, means a lot, parcel, tract or piece of land, improved or unimproved, including the sidewalk area abutting or adjoining said lot, parcel, tract or piece of land, and the parkways or areas lying between the curb line and the street line of the adjoining or abutting lot bounded on the sides by the prolongation in a straight line of the side lines of the lot in front of which such parkway or area exists.

G. “Newspaper” means any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the United States, in accordance with Federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and, in addition thereto, shall mean and include any newspaper, periodical or current magazine regularly published, with not less than four (4) issues per year, and sold to the public by subscription.

H. “Noncommercial Handbill” means any printed or written matter, any sample, or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of a commercial handbill or newspaper.

I. “Park” means a park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any public area, owned or used by the City and devoted to active or passive recreation.

J. “Private Premises” means any dwelling, house, building or other structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building, or other structure.

K. “Public Place” means any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys, or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds, and buildings.

L. “Refuse” means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned, wrecked or junked vehicles, or parts thereof, and solid market and industrial wastes.

M. “Rubbish” means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, metal, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.

N. “Street Line” means the boundary line between a public street right-of-way and an abutting lot or parcel of land, or between a private street open to public use and an abutting lot or parcel of land.

O. “Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 51, § 5301)

5302 Littering Prohibited.
No person shall deposit, or cause to be deposited, or place, or cause to be placed, or leave, or permit to be or remain, upon any public thoroughfare or vacant lot, any garbage, swill, cans, bottles, papers, ashes, refuse, or carcass of any dead animal, offal, trash or rubbish, or any noisome, nauseous or offensive matter. (Ord. 51, § 5302)

5303 Litter in Public Places.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place, except in public receptacles, in authorized private receptacles for collection, or in official City dumps. (Ord. 51, § 5303)

5303.1 Spilling or Depositing Noxious or Offensive Substances on Public Ways – Prohibited.
A. No person shall deposit, drop, dump, drain, place, throw, or run, or cause or permit to be deposited, dropped, dumped, drained, placed, thrown or run, into or upon any public road, highway, street, alley, drainage ditch, storm drain or flood control channel, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, any offensive or noxious substance, including, but not limited to, bottles, cans, garbage, glass, plaster, nails, paper, mud, paint, sand, oil, petroleum products, building material residue or concrete residue.

B. Any person who violates the provisions of subdivision A hereof shall immediately remove such noxious or offensive substance or cause same to be removed. If such person fails to comply with this provision, the Superintendent of Streets may remove and dispose of such material. The City may thereafter maintain an action in the appropriate court against such person to recover the cost of removing and disposing of such material. (Ord. 51, § 5303.1)

5304 Placement of Litter in Receptacles So As to Prevent Scattering.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place or upon private property. (Ord. 51, § 5304)

5305 Sweeping Litter into Gutters Prohibited.
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, or other public place, the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. (Ord. 51, § 5305)

5306 Merchant’s Duty to Clear Street of Litter.
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, or other public place, the accumulation of litter from any building or lot, or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises free of litter. (Ord. 51, § 5306)

5307 Litter Thrown by Persons in Vehicles.
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place, or upon private property. (Ord. 51, § 5307)

5308 Truck Loads Causing Litter.
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents, or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley, or other public place. Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street or other public place sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind. (Ord. 51, § 5308)

5309 Litter in Parks.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park, or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided herein. (Ord. 51, § 5309)

5310 Throwing or Distributing Commercial Handbills in Public Places.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbills in or upon any sidewalk, street, or other public place, nor shall any person hand out or distribute or sell any commercial handbills in any public place; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful, on any sidewalk, street, or other public place, for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it. (Ord. 51, § 5310)

5311 Placing Commercial and Noncommercial Handbills on Vehicles.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any vehicle; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful, in any public place, for a person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept it. (Ord. 51, § 5311)

5312 Depositing Commercial and Noncommercial Handbills on Uninhabited or Vacant Premises.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. (Ord. 51, § 5312)

5313 Prohibiting Distribution of Handbills Where Property Posted.
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill upon any private premises if requested by anyone thereon not to do so or if there is placed on said premises, in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words “NO TRESPASSING,” “NO PEDDLERS OR AGENTS,” “NO ADVERTISEMENT,” or any similar notice indicating in any manner that the occupants of said premises do not desire to be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any such handbills left upon such premises. (Ord. 51, § 5313)

5314 Distributing Commercial and Noncommercial Handbills at Inhabited Private Premises.
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant, or other person then present in or upon such private premises; provided, however, that in case of inhabited private premises which are not posted, as provided in this Chapter, such person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises, if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets, or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be used when so prohibited by Federal postal law or regulations.

Exemption for Mail and Newspapers. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers (as defined herein). (Ord. 51, § 5314)

5315 Dropping Litter from Aircraft.
No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit any litter, handbill or any other object. (Ord. 51, § 5315)

5316 Affixing Signs on Utility Poles.
No person shall affix, or cause to be affixed, a sign, placard or handbill on any utility pole or tree if such sign, placard or handbill will be visible from any public right-of-way. The placement of each sign, placard or handbill on a utility pole or tree in violation of this Section shall constitute a separate offense which shall be deemed an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.00.

This Section shall not apply to a sign, placard or handbill posted by the owner of a utility pole to warn persons of dangers associated with the pole or to identify the owner of the utility pole.

Employees of the Community Safety Division and all City officers are hereby authorized to remove any sign, placard or handbill affixed in violation of this Section. Such materials shall be kept at the City Hall for a period of one (1) week after being removed and may be obtained by the owner thereof during such time upon the payment of $1.00 per sign, placard or handbill.

If notice that a sign, placard or handbill has been affixed in violation of this Section is sent to the person or organization for whose benefit said sign, placard or handbill was affixed at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the removal of said sign, placard or handbill by employees of the Community Safety Division or any City officer, the person or organization for whose benefit the sign, placard or handbill was affixed in violation of this Section shall be liable to the City for the actual cost of removal. (Ord. 51, § 5316; Ord. 78-448U, § 1; Ord. 80-529, § 1)

5317 Litter on Occupied Private Property.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property within the City, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property. (Ord. 51, § 5317)

5318 Owner to Maintain Premises Free of Litter.
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this Section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection, or within any building when not in violation of any health, fire, building, or other regulation, order, ordinance, statute, or any provision of this Code. (Ord. 51, § 5318)

5319 Litter on Vacant Lots.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property whether owned by such person or not. (Ord. 51, § 5319)

5320 Clearing of Dangerous Litter from Open Private Property by the City – Summary Proceeding.
A. Notice to Remove. The Street Superintendent or any other City Officer designed by the City Council to act hereunder, is hereby authorized and empowered to notify the owner, or person shown as the owner upon the last equalized tax assessment roll, or any open or vacant private property, or the agent of such owner, to properly dispose of litter located on such owner’s property which is dangerous to public health, safety or welfare. Such notice shall be by Registered or Certified Mail, addressed to said owner at his last known address, or at the address shown upon the last equalized tax assessment roll. A copy of said notice shall also be posted on the premises or in front thereof.

B. Action Upon Noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner, person or agent so notified, to properly dispose of such litter dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice provided for in subsection A above, or within twenty (20) days after the date of such notice in the event the same is returned to the City Post Office Department because of its inability to make delivery thereof, provided the same was properly addressed as herein specified, the Street Superintendent or other designated City Officer, is hereby authorized and empowered to pay for the disposing of such litter or to order its disposal by the City. Thereafter proceeding for the collection of the cost thereof shall be in accordance with CMC 5329. (Ord. 51, § 5320)

5321 Sidewalk and Parkway.
No person owning or having charge or control or occupancy of any lot or private premises shall allow grass or weeds to accumulate or grow upon an abutting paved sidewalk area above its established grade or upon any part of said sidewalk area from curb to street line; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be construed to require the removal from the borders of any sidewalk of any ornamental plant, lawn, shrub, or trees of a reasonable growth; provided, that the same are not, in the opinion of the Street Superintendent, obstructions to the free use of such sidewalk by pedestrians. (Ord. 51, § 5321)

5322 Noxious Growths.
No person owning or having control or charge or occupancy of any lot or private premises shall allow weeds, vines, shrubs or brush which bear seeds of a wingy or downy nature, or which attain such a large growth as to become a fire menace when dry, or which contain poisonous oils, or which are otherwise noxious or dangerous to the life, health, comfort or convenience of the community, to grow or remain upon such lot or private premises.

No person shall sow or disseminate, or allow or permit to mature; or sell or in any manner transfer, transport or convey, any seed or any noxious weed.

No person owning, managing, or having charge or control of or occupancy of the lot or private premises shall suffer or permit any weeds, grass, rank growth or brush to grow or exist in excess of twelve (12) inches above the grade in the area of growth. It is the duty of every such person to prevent such growth or existence. In any prosecution for violation of this Section, it shall not be necessary to establish any facts excepting that the person accused owned, managed or had charge, control or occupancy of a lot or private premises whereon such condition existed, to establish the guilt of such person. (Ord. 52, § 5322)

5323 Notice Requiring Removal of Noxious Growths or Litter.
A. If and when it shall appear that weeds, vines, shrubs or brush, grass or litter have been placed upon or are upon or in front of private property in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter or of any other provision of this Code, the Street Superintendent may, by appropriate written order, direct the removal thereof and shall cause notices to be posted upon or in front of such property to the effect that such weeds, vines, shrubs, brush, or litter must be removed within seven (7) days from and after the date of such posting. The City Clerk shall also send a similar notice to the owner of the subject property as shown upon any City Record or upon the last equalized tax roll, whichever he shall determine to be the best means for reaching the actual owner, through the United States mail, but the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the power of the City or its officers or employees to proceed as provided in this Part. Such notice shall be mailed not less than ten (10) days prior to the date set for a hearing upon objections as provided in CMC 5325.

B. Such notices shall be conspicuously posted on or in front of the property on or in front of which the nuisance exists, as follows:

(1) One (1) notice shall be posted on or in front of each separately owned parcel;

(2) Not more than two (2) notices to any such parcel of fifty (50) to one hundred (100) feet frontage are required;

(3) Notices shall be placed at intervals of not more than one hundred (100) feet if the frontage of a parcel is greater than one hundred (100) feet, with one (1) notice for each one hundred (100) feet of frontage. (Ord. 51, § 5323)

5324 Notice Form.
The heading of the notice shall be “Notice to Destroy Weeds and Rank Growths and to Remove Oversized Growths or Litter” in letters not less than one (1) inch in height. The notice shall be substantially in the following form:

NOTICE TO DESTROY WEEDS AND RANK GROWTHS AND TO REMOVE OVERSIZE GROWTHS OR LITTER

Notice is hereby given that, pursuant to Chapter 3 of the Carson Municipal Code providing for the elimination of weeds, vines, brush, shrubs or litter growing upon or accumulated upon or in front of this property, and obstructing the use of sidewalks, parkings, or streets, or dangerous or injurious to neighboring property or the health and welfare of residents of the vicinity, you are notified that the following conditions exist upon this property in violation of law, to wit:

(Description of area and conditions)

The Property to which this Notice applies is the following: (Description of property, by tax description, street address, lot number, parcel number or other description sufficient to identify the premises.)

Said conditions subject the owners, managers, or persons having charge, control or occupancy thereof to fine and imprisonment. In addition, such conditions constitute a public nuisance which must be abated by the removal thereof, or the cutting of oversize growths. Otherwise, such conditions will be corrected and the nuisance abated by the City and the cost of removal assessed upon the land from or in front of which the same are removed and will constitute a lien upon such land until paid. Reference is hereby made to Chapter 3 of Article V of the Carson Municipal Code above referred to for further particulars.

A copy of said Code is on file in the Office of the City Clerk, City Hall, Carson, California.

All property owners having any objections to the proposed removal of said weeds, rubbish, refuse, dirt, rank growths, or other material dangerous or injurious to neighboring property as aforesaid, are hereby notified to file a written statement of such objections, specifying the address or description of the property concerned, the reasons for objections, and the name, address, phone number (if any), and status (owner, manager, lessee, tenant or other) of the objector, which statement shall be filed with the City Clerk not later than the _______ day of ____________, 19__, a date more than five (5) days after the posting of this notice.

Upon receipt of such written statement, the City Clerk will set such matter upon the Agenda of the City Council and objectors will be notified by mail of time and place of the meeting at which the City Council will hear and consider such objections. Such meeting shall be not sooner than three (3) days after the mailing of such notices.

(Ord. 51, § 5324)

5325 Hearing.
At the time and place stated in the notices mailed by the City Clerk, the Council shall hear and consider all objections to the proposed removal or correction of said public nuisance or conditions. It may continue the hearing from time to time. By motion or resolution at the conclusion of the hearing, the Council shall allow or overrule any objections. The decisions of the Council shall be final and conclusive and need not depend upon any particular evidence, showing or findings. (Ord. 51, § 5325)

5326 Abatement Order.
At the conclusion of said hearing, the Council may order the Street Superintendent or other City Officer to abate said nuisance by entering upon private property to abate and remove the same. (Ord. 51, § 5326)

5327 Service of Order.
The City Officer shall serve by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid, a copy of said abatement order forthwith upon those persons who have filed written statements of objections. The abatement order shall specify that unless the nuisance is removed and abated within seven (7) days from the date of mailing, said officer will abate the same and will, if necessary, enter upon or into the private property of said person without further notice or liability therefor in order to abate said nuisance. (Ord. 51, § 5327)

5328 Abatement by City.
The Street Superintendent, or other designated City Officer, may enter upon any private property and abate any nuisance found thereon, or in front thereof, more than seven (7) days after Notice to Abate such nuisance has been posted as required by this Chapter, if no person has filed a written statement of objections as herein provided within five (5) days thereafter; in the event objections have been duly filed and overruled by the City Council, such officer may enter upon any private property and abate any nuisance found thereon, or in front thereof, in accordance with the order of the City. (Ord. 51, § 5328)

5329 Cost of Abatement.
Said Officer shall keep an account of the cost of abatement in front of or on each separate lot or parcel of land where the work is done by him. He shall submit to the City Council for confirmation an itemized written report showing such cost. The City Clerk shall send a notice to the owner of the subject property as shown upon any City record or upon the last equalized tax roll, whichever he shall determine to be the best means for reaching the actual owner, through the United States mail, showing the cost of abatement on each separate lot or parcel of land of such owner and designating the time fixed for the receiving and considering by the City Council of said report and for the hearing upon objections to it. The failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the power of the City or its officers or employees to proceed as provided in this Part, nor shall it invalidate the assessment against the subject property. A copy of the report shall be posted for at least three (3) days prior to its submission to the Council on or near the Council Chamber door with a notice of the time of submission. At the time fixed for receiving and considering the report, the Council shall hear it and shall hear any objections of the property owners liable to be assessed for the abatement. The Council may modify the report if it is deemed necessary, and shall then confirm the report by motion or resolution. (Ord. 51, § 5329)

5330 Special Assessments – Lien.
The cost of abatement in front of or upon each lot or parcel of land constitutes a special assessment against the lot or parcel. After the assessment is made and confirmed, it is a lien on the lot or parcel. (Ord. 51, § 5330)

5331 Cost Assessment.
After confirmation of a report, a certified copy of the same shall be filed with the County Auditor on or before August 10th. The descriptions of the parcels reported shall be those used for the same parcels on the County Assessor’s Map Book for the current year. The County Auditor shall enter each assessment on the County Tax Roll opposite the parcel of land. The amount of the assessment shall be collected at the time and in the manner of ordinary municipal taxes. If delinquent, the amount is subject to the same penalties and procedures for foreclosure and sale provided for ordinary municipal taxes. As an alternative method, the County Tax Collector, in his discretion, may collect the assessments without reference to the general taxes, by issuing separate bills and receipts for the assessments. Laws relating to the levy, collection, and enforcement of county taxes shall apply to such special assessment taxes. (Ord. 51, § 5331)

5332 Cost Paid to City.
The City Officer designated by the Council shall receive the amount due on the abatement cost and shall issue receipts at any time after the confirmation of the report, prior to August 1st of the current year. (Ord. 51, § 5332)

5333 Correction of Erroneous Assessments.
A. Any assessment erroneously made may be cancelled or reduced so as to correct such error, and the tax paid on account thereof, not including any penalties or interest, may be refunded to the person who paid the same, in accordance with the following procedure:

(1) A claim or error may be filed with the City Clerk at any time before the expiration of one (1) year following April 10th of the tax year in which such assessment appears or would first appear on the tax bill for the affected property. Such claim shall be in writing, in such form and detail as shall be required by the City Clerk, and shall be verified.

(2) Any claim filed shall be forwarded to the Street Superintendent for review and report to the City Treasurer. If the Street Superintendent shall determine that such assessment was erroneously made, in whole or in part, the City Treasurer shall direct the County Auditor-Controller to correct the tax rolls as to the affected property by removing or reducing the erroneous assessment, and the direction of the City Treasurer shall be authority for the Auditor-Controller to so correct the tax rolls. If such assessment shall have been paid, the part determined to be erroneously levied shall be refunded to the person who paid the same, by the City Treasurer. In lieu of proof otherwise, the City Treasurer may presume that the person or persons to whom the litter tax was assessed was the person or persons who paid the same.

(3) Any claimant whose claim is not favorably acted upon in whole or in part within sixty (60) days after the filing of the same, or whose claim is denied, in whole or in part, in writing, by the City Treasurer, may, within ten (10) days after such denial or after the expiration of such period, appeal such denial or failure to act favorably to the City Council, by written letter filed with the City Clerk.

(4) The City Council shall consider such disputed assessment at an open meeting, upon reasonable notice to the claimant, and shall afford the claimant an opportunity to be heard. If the City Council shall find the disputed assessment to be erroneous in whole or in part, it may direct the City Treasurer to correct the assessment accordingly, to cause the tax rolls to be corrected, and to make a refund of any portion of the assessment paid, all in the manner as hereinabove provided for such corrections and refunds.

(5) Not later than thirty (30) days after the correction of any assessment or refund of any monies hereunder, except by direction of the City Council, the City Treasurer shall transmit to the City Council a report of such action, together with the report of the Street Superintendent.

B. Whenever the tax rolls have been corrected or a refund has been made hereunder by reason of an erroneous assessment, a corrected written report of the type required by CMC 5329, relating to the work for which such erroneous assessment was levied, may be prepared by the officer who prepared the original report. Such report shall show the cost of abatement in front of or on the parcel or lot where the work has been done and shall state that it is proposed to assess such cost against such lot or parcel. A copy of such corrected report shall be mailed to the owner of said lot or parcel as shown upon the current assessment rolls. In all other respects, CMC 5329 through 5332 shall apply to such corrected assessment, except that the time for doing all things therein specified shall relate from the date of confirmation of the corrected assessment. (Ord. 51, § 5333)

5334 Violation a Public Nuisance.
Violation of this Chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance which may be abated as provided in Part 3 of Division 4 of the Civil Code of the State and in Chapter 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the State, which remedy shall be in addition to any other remedy provided in this Chapter or by State law, including Section 372 of the Penal Code of the State. (Ord. 51, § 5334)

CHAPTER 4
GRAFFITI PREVENTION AND REMOVAL*
Sections:

Part 1. General Provisions

§ 5400    Short Title.

§ 5401    Definitions.

§ 5402    Graffiti Constitutes a Nuisance.

§ 5403    Permitting Graffiti to Remain Prohibited.

§ 5404    Penalties.

Part 2. Removal of Graffiti from Public and Private Property with Consent of Property Owner

§ 5405    Removal from Public Property.

§ 5406    Notice to Owners or Possessors of Private Property.

§ 5407    Abatement of Graffiti by Property Owner Using City-Issued Paint and Paint Rollers.

§ 5408    Abatement of Graffiti on Private Property by City Crews.

Part 3. Summary Abatement of Graffiti on Private Property by City without Consent of Property Owner

§ 5409    Initiation of Abatement Proceedings.

§ 5410    Hearing Prior to Abatement – Notice of Hearing.

§ 5411    Posting and Serving Notice of Hearing.

§ 5412    Conduct of Hearing.

§ 5413    Order of Abatement.

§ 5414    Abatement.

§ 5414.1    Ease of Removal Provisions.

§ 5415    Assessment of Cost.

Part 4. Graffiti Prevention

§ 5416    Sale of Graffiti Implements.

§ 5416.1    Signs Required.

§ 5416.2    Storage Requirements.

§ 5417    Prohibition of Possession of a Graffiti Implement in a Public Facility.

Part 5. Parental Liabilities

§ 5418    Responsibility of Perpetrator, Parents.

§ 5419    Remedy Cumulative.

§ 5420    Reward Fund.

§ 5421    Criteria to Qualify for Reward.

§ 5422    Persons Ineligible to Receive Reward.

§ 5423    Procedures for Payment of Reward.

§ 5424    Inconsistent Provisions.

*Editor’s Note: Prior ordinance history includes Ordinance Nos. 82-616 and 88-837.

Part 1. General Provisions

5400 Short Title.
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Graffiti Prevention and Removal Ordinance. (Ord. 90-913, § 1)

5401 Definitions.
For purposes of this Chapter:

(a) “Broad tipped marker” shall mean an indelible marker with a tip that exceeds four (4) millimeters in width.

(b) “Director” shall mean the Director of Public Safety for the City of Carson or his or her designee.

(c) “Engraver” shall mean an implement used to cut, scratch, etch, or engrave glass.

(d) “Graffiti” shall mean any writing, printing, symbol, figure, design, painting, marking, inscription, or other defacement that is written, sprayed, painted, scratched, etched, engraved, drawn, marked, or otherwise applied, with any paint, aerosol paint, indelible marker, engraver, chalk, ink, dye, graffiti implement or other substance capable of defacing property, to any exterior surface of a building, wall, window, fence, tree, sidewalk, curb, or other structure without the prior consent of the owner or person in possession thereof.

(e) “Graffiti element” shall mean a broad tipped marker, an engraver, a graffiti stick, spray paint, or etching creams and substances.

(f) “Graffiti stick” means any device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure and, upon application, of leaving a mark at least four (4) millimeters in width.

(g) “Hearing Officer” shall mean the Director or his or her successor or such City employee or officer as shall be designated by the Director or his or her successor.

(h) “Indelible marker” shall mean any marker, pen or similar implement which contains a fluid which is not soluble in water and has a flat, pointed or angled writing surface.

(i) “Spray paint” means any pressurized container containing six (6) ounces or less of the substance commonly known as paint or dye. (Ord. 90-913, § 1; Ord. 93-1007, § 1; Ord. 94-1030, § 1; Ord. 02-1243, § 1)

5402 Graffiti Constitutes a Nuisance.
Pursuant to California Government Code Section 38771 the City Council hereby declares the maintenance of graffiti visible from a public street or alley to constitute a nuisance, the abatement of which shall be provided as set forth herein. (Ord. 90-913, § 1)

5403 Permitting Graffiti to Remain Prohibited.
No person shall permit any graffiti which is within public view to remain on any building, structure, tree, shrub, sidewalk or curb owned or possessed by such person. (Ord. 90-913, § 1)

5404 Penalties.
Violation of this Chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, or by imprisonment in the County jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 90-913, § 1)

Part 2. Removal of Graffiti from Public
and Private Property with Consent
of Property Owner

5405 Removal from Public Property.
The Director is hereby authorized to remove graffiti from any property or structure owned by the City of Carson, and pursuant to California Government Code Section 53069.3 is authorized to remove graffiti from any other publicly owned structure after securing the consent of the public entity having jurisdiction over the structure. (Ord. 90-913, § 1)

5406 Notice to Owners or Possessors of Private Property.
Whenever the Director determines that graffiti is being maintained upon any premises within the City in violation of CMC 5403, the Director shall send written notice to the owner or possessor of the premises of such condition and shall require that the graffiti be removed. The notice and order shall be sent to the owner as shown on the most recent equalized assessment roll and a copy shall be posted on the subject property. The notice shall state that the owner must remove the graffiti or consent to its removal by the City within fifteen (15) days from the date the notice was mailed. The notice and order shall also state that if the property owner or possessor desires to remove the graffiti or to cause it to be removed, such person may apply to the Director for the issuance of paint and paint rollers for the removal of the graffiti, as provided in CMC 5407. (Ord. 90-913, § 1)

5407 Abatement of Graffiti by Property Owner Using City-Issued Paint and Paint Rollers.
(a) Applications for Paint and Paint Rollers. The Director shall establish procedures for the issuance of paint and paint rollers to persons for the removal of graffiti from private property. These procedures shall require the person applying for such paint and rollers to sign a form stating: (1) that the applicant is the owner or in possession of the private property from which graffiti is to be removed; (2) the address or other location thereof; (3) that such person shall utilize such paint and rollers to remove graffiti from the property so identified within three (3) weeks after the date of receipt of the paint and rollers; and (4) that the person receiving such paint and rollers will pay the cost thereof to the City unless the graffiti for the removal of which such paint and rollers are issued shall have been removed within said three (3) weeks.

(b) Issuance of Paint and Rollers. Upon receipt and verification of a complete application for paint and rollers for removal of graffiti, the Director shall issue an amount of paint that in the discretion of the Director is necessary to cover the graffiti on the property. The paint shall be issued for the removal of the graffiti only and not for the painting or repair of a more extensive area. Said form shall be dated and signed by an employee of the Department of Public Safety when such paint and rollers are issued. Successive issues of paint may be made if graffiti should reappear following removal at any such location. (Ord. 90-913, § 1; Ord. 94-1030, § 2)

5408 Abatement of Graffiti on Private Property by City Crews.
Upon receipt of the property owner’s written consent or the written consent of a person authorized by the owner to give consent, the Director is hereby authorized to provide for the abatement of graffiti on privately owned property through the utilization of the City’s labor, equipment and materials. Except as set forth herein, the Director is authorized to provide for the abatement of graffiti only and is not authorized to provide for the painting or repair of a more extensive area. In the case of a surface that has been defaced with graffiti after removal more than five (5) times within twelve (12) months, such abatement may include retrofitting the surface with such features or qualities as may be established by the Director as necessary to reduce the attractiveness of the surface for graffiti, or as necessary to permit more convenient, expedient or efficient removal of graffiti therefrom. (Ord. 90-913, § 1; Ord. 94-1030, § 3)

Part 3. Summary Abatement of Graffiti on Private Property by City without Consent of Property Owner

5409 Initiation of Abatement Proceedings.
The Director may initiate proceedings to abate any graffiti maintained contrary to the provisions of this Chapter only after the following has occurred:

(a) The Director has determined that graffiti within public view exists on particular premises in the City;

(b) A notice of such condition has been sent to the property owner pursuant to CMC 5405; and

(c) The property owner has failed to either remove the graffiti or consent to its removal by the City within the time period specified in the notice. (Ord. 90-913, § 1)

5410 Hearing Prior to Abatement – Notice of Hearing.
Prior to the City abating graffiti on private property without the consent of the owner, a hearing before the Director shall be held at which time the property owner shall be given an opportunity to be heard regarding the proposed abatement. A notice of the time and place of the hearing before the Director shall be sent to the property owner not less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing. (Ord. 90-913, § 1)

5411 Posting and Serving Notice of Hearing.
(a) The Director shall cause to be served upon the owner as shown on the latest equalized tax assessment roll of the affected premises a copy of said notice and shall cause a copy thereof to be conspicuously posted on the affected premises.

(b) Said notice shall be posted and served, as aforesaid, at least ten (10) days before the time fixed for such hearing; proof of posting and service of such notice shall be made by declaration under penalty of perjury filed with the Hearing Officer.

(c) The failure of any person to receive the notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings under this Chapter. (Ord. 90-913, § 1)

5412 Conduct of Hearing.
The hearing to determine whether a nuisance exists shall be conducted by the Director or his duly authorized representative as the Hearing Officer. At the hearing, the Director shall consider all relevant evidence including but not limited to applicable staff reports. Any interested person shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard in conjunction therewith. Based upon the evidence so presented, the Director shall determine whether a nuisance within the meaning of this Chapter exists. (Ord. 90-913, § 1)

5413 Order of Abatement.
The Director or his designee (within ten (10) working days of the hearing) shall give written notice of his decision to the owner and to any other person requesting the same. The notice shall contain an order of abatement, if a nuisance is determined to exist, directed to the owner of the affected property or the person in the control and/or charge of the property, and shall set forth the nature of the graffiti, its location on the premises and the time and manner for its abatement. The Director may impose such conditions as are reasonably necessary to abate the graffiti. The decision of the Director may be appealed to the City Council by the filing of a written request for appeal with the City Clerk within ten (10) days after the Director’s notice of the decision to the owner. (Ord. 90-913, § 1)

5414 Abatement.
If the Director’s decision is not appealed and the nuisance is not abated within the time set by the order of abatement, the Director is authorized to enter upon the premises and to abate the graffiti nuisance with City equipment and City personnel. The Director shall then prepare a statement of the fact of such abatement and of the expense incurred in abatement and shall file the statement with the City Clerk. Such statement shall identify the premises and state the cost of the action taken. If the premises includes more than one (1) lot, each separate lot, or all of the lots may be set forth in the same statement. (Ord. 90-913, § 1)

5414.1 Ease of Removal Provisions.
(a) Retrofitting. In the case of a surface that has been defaced with graffiti after removal more than five (5) times within twelve (12) months, the abatement authorized by CMC 5414 may include retrofitting the surface with such features or qualities as may be established by the Director as necessary to reduce the attractiveness of the surface for graffiti, or as necessary to permit more convenient, expedient or efficient removal of graffiti therefrom.

(b) Common Utility Colors and Paint-Type. Any gas, telephone, water, sewer, cable, telephone or other utility operating in the City, other than an electric utility, shall paint their above-surface metal fixtures which are installed after the effective date of this Section with a uniform paint type and color as directed by the Director.

(c) Conditions on Encroachment Permits. Encroachment permits issued by the City may, among other things, be conditioned on the following:

(1) The permittee shall apply an anti-graffiti material of a type and nature that is acceptable to the Director to the encroaching structure;

(2) The permittee shall immediately remove any graffiti from the encroaching structure;

(3) The City shall have the right to remove graffiti and to paint the encroaching structure;

(4) The permittee shall provide the City with sufficient matching paint and anti-graffiti material on demand for use in the painting over or removal of graffiti from the encroaching structure.

(d) Conditions on Discretionary Approvals. Conditional use permits, variances, and building permits issued by the City may, among other things and, to the extent permitted by this Code or other similar land use entitlement or development or design applications, be conditioned on the following:

(1) The applicant shall apply an anti-graffiti material of a type and nature that is acceptable to the Director to such of the publicly-viewable surfaces to be constructed on the site deemed by the Director to be likely to attract graffiti (“Graffiti Attracting Surfaces”);

(2) The applicant shall grant in writing the right of entry over and access to the property, upon forty-eight (48) hours posted notice, by authorized City employees or agents, for the purpose of removing and painting over graffiti on graffiti attracting surfaces previously designated by the Director. Such grant shall be made an express condition of approval and shall be deemed to run with the land;

(3) The applicant, and any and all successors in interest, shall, for a period of two (2) years after approval, provide the City with sufficient matching paint and anti-graffiti material on demand for use in the painting over or removal of designated graffiti from graffiti attracting surfaces;

(4) Applicants for subdivision maps shall covenant that the owners of the lots shall immediately remove any graffiti placed on publicly viewable trees or structures thereon to the City's satisfaction, and said covenant shall run with the land in a form satisfactory to the City. (Ord. 94-1030, § 4)

5415 Assessment of Cost.
Upon completion of the work required to abate the graffiti, the cost to the City to perform such work shall be assessed against the property owner pursuant to the procedures set forth in CMC 5329 through 5333. (Ord. 90-913, § 1)

Part 4. Graffiti Prevention

5416 Sale of Graffiti Implements.
No person shall sell, give, or in any way furnish any graffiti implement to another person who is under the age of eighteen (18) years. This Section shall not apply to the furnishing of a graffiti implement to a minor for the minor’s use or possession under the supervision of a minor’s parent, guardian, instructor or employer. (Ord. 90-913, § 1; Ord. 93-1007, § 2)

5416.1 Signs Required.
Any person engaged in the retail sale of graffiti implements must display at the location of retail sale a sign clearly visible and legible to employees and customers which states as follows:

Graffiti vandalism is a crime and blight on our community. Any person who maliciously defaces real or personal property with paint, ink, dye, marker or engraver is guilty of vandalism which is punishable by a fine, imprisonment, or both. It is unlawful to sell a broad tipped marker, an engraver, or an aerosol container of paint of six (6) ounces or less to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years who is not accompanied by a parent or guardian.

The letters shall be at least three-eighths (3/8) of an inch in height. (Ord. 93-1007, § 3)

5416.2 Storage Requirements.
Any business or establishment offering for sale to the public any graffiti implement shall keep, store and maintain such graffiti implements in a place that is either: locked and secured; or within fifteen (15) feet of the cash register/clerk’s counter and in direct unobstructed view of the clerk while standing at the cash register; or otherwise inaccessible to the public without employee assistance. (Ord. 93-1007, § 4)

5417 Prohibition of Possession of a Graffiti Implement in a Public Facility.
The City Administrator or his designee is hereby authorized to post a notice at appropriate locations indicating that pursuant to California Penal Code Section 594.1 no person shall carry a graffiti implement into or upon any public street, alley, sidewalk, or other public area, including any City owned building, grounds, park or other City facility, without the permission of an authorized City officer. (Ord. 90-913, § 1; Ord. 93-1007, § 5)

Part 5. Parental Liabilities

5418 Responsibility of Perpetrator, Parents.
Any person applying graffiti on City-owned property or within the incorporated area of the City shall have the duty to remove same within twenty-four (24) hours after notice by the City or the private owner of the property involved. The removal shall be done in a manner prescribed by the Director and may be deemed by the City to satisfy any payment or penalty that might otherwise be imposed. Any person applying graffiti shall be responsible for the removal or for the payment therefor. Failure of any person to remove the graffiti or to pay for its removal shall constitute an additional violation of this Chapter. Every person who defaces property by inscribing graffiti thereon shall be liable for any resulting damages incurred by the property owner in an amount not to exceed $10,000 for each such act of defacement. Pursuant to Section 1714.1(b) of the California Civil Code, every parent or legal guardian having custody or control of a minor who defaces property by inscribing graffiti thereon shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor for such damages. (Ord. 90-913, § 1; Ord. 94-1030, § 5)

5419 Remedy Cumulative.
The remedies provided in this Chapter are in addition to other remedies and penalties available under the Carson Municipal Code and the laws of the State of California. (Ord. 90-913, § 1)

5420 Reward Fund.
(a) Pursuant to California Government Code Section 53069.5, the City Council on April 3, 1989 approved the establishment of a reward fund for the purpose of encouraging persons having information regarding the identity or whereabouts of any person or persons whose willful misconduct resulted in damage to property by reason of inscribing thereon graffiti as defined in CMC 5401, to provide such information to the appropriate law enforcement authorities.

(b) By Resolution 90-094, the City Council established the “Graffiti Reporting Reward Fund” (hereinafter “the Reward Fund”). The Reward Fund is maintained in the City Treasury. The amount of the Reward Fund shall be maintained at $10,000. The maximum reward that may be paid out of the Reward Fund is $1,000 per person per incident reported. All contributions to the City by the public for the Reward Fund shall be deposited in the Reward Fund by the City Treasurer. (Ord. 92-993, § 1)

5421 Criteria to Qualify for Reward.
(a) Persons who desire to receive a payment from the Reward Fund shall:

(1) Submit written, oral, physical or other evidence regarding the circumstances surrounding damage to property by reason of graffiti inscribed thereon to the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department, the City’s Public Safety Department, or to any other law enforcement agency; and

(2) Cooperate with the Sheriff’s Department, the City Department of Public Safety and with any prosecuting attorneys during the investigation, trial preparation and trial phases of the criminal justice process involving persons suspected of causing the damage.

(b) Persons who satisfy the criteria listed in subsection (a) of this Section shall be considered for receipt of up to $1,000 reward upon the arrest and punishment of the person or persons charged with damage to property by inscribing graffiti thereon. For purposes of this Section, the term “punishment” includes, but is not limited to: (i) the imposition of criminal penalties following the conviction of, or entry of a plea of no contest by, the person charged with the offense; (ii) the voluntary enrollment by the person charged with the offense in the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Juvenile Diversion Program; or (iii) court imposed enrollment in counseling or other diversion programs. (Ord. 92-993, § 1; Ord. 93-1016, § 1)

5422 Persons Ineligible to Receive Reward.
Law enforcement personnel and any Federal, State or City of Carson employee discovering the identity or whereabouts of a person or persons arrested for causing the damage during the scope and course of his or her employment shall not be eligible to receive a reward under this Part. Any person charged with causing, or complicity in, the damage shall not be eligible to receive the reward. (Ord. 92-993, § 1)

5423 Procedures for Payment of Reward.
(a) The City Administrator shall request that the Sheriff’s Department furnish the City with a report of each person punished (as such term is defined in CMC 5421(b)) for damage to property in the City of Carson by inscribing graffiti thereon. The report shall list the names of persons providing information to the Sheriff’s Department or other law enforcement agency that assisted in obtaining the arrest or punishment of the person or persons causing the damage. Such report shall set forth the relative importance of the information submitted by each person, if there is more than one, and shall include a recommended pro rata distribution of the reward to persons who submit information leading to the punishment. The report shall be reviewed and approved by the Sheriff’s Department officer handling the case or the attorney prosecuting the case. The City Administrator shall request that such report be submitted to the City within thirty (30) days of the punishment. If more than one (1) person is standing trial for causing the damage, the report shall not be forwarded until the last person charged is either punished or acquitted.

(b) Upon receipt of the report referred to in subsection (a) of this Section and any public comment, the City Council shall consider and approve or disapprove the disbursement of up to a $1,000 reward payment from the Fund per person and per incident. No money shall be paid out of such account without the approval of the City Council. (Ord. 92-994, § 1; Ord. 93-1016, § 2)

5424 Inconsistent Provisions.
In the event of an inconsistency between the provisions of Resolution 90-094 and this Part, the provisions of this Part shall control. (Ord. 92-993, § 1)

CHAPTER 5
NOISE CONTROL ORDINANCE
Sections:

§ 5500    Adoption of Los Angeles County Noise Control Ordinance.

§ 5501    Definitions.

§ 5502    Amendments to Noise Control Ordinance.

§ 5503    Violation – Penalty.

5500 Adoption of Los Angeles County Noise Control Ordinance.
Except as hereinafter provided, Chapter 12.08 of Title 12 of the Los Angeles County Code, entitled “Noise Control Ordinance of the County of Los Angeles,” as amended and in effect on August 1, 1995, is hereby adopted by reference and shall be known as the Noise Control Ordinance of the City of Carson.

A copy of said Chapter 12.08 of Title 12 of the Los Angeles County Code, as amended, is attached and has been deposited with the office of the City Clerk of the City of Carson and shall be at all times maintained by said Clerk for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 95-1068, § 1)

5501 Definitions.
Whenever any of the following names or terms are used in said Noise Control Ordinance, each such name or term shall be deemed and construed to have the meaning ascribed to it in this Section as follows:

“Board of Supervisors of the County” shall mean the City Council of the City of Carson.

“County of Los Angeles,” “the County,” “unincorporated areas of the County,” and “unincorporated County” shall, except as provided in Section 12.08.108 as amended, mean the City of Carson.

“County Ordinance 1494, as amended” shall mean Article IX of the Carson Municipal Code. (Ord. 95-1068, § 1)

5502 Amendments to Noise Control Ordinance.
Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 5500, the Noise Control Ordinance is hereby amended as follows:

(a) By amending Section 12.08.180 to read:

12.08.180. “Health officer” means the Director of Public Safety of the City of Carson and shall be deemed to include the Director of the Department Health Services of the County of Los Angeles, or his duly authorized representatives, while performing public health services, including noise level measurements, under contract with the City.

(b) By amending subsection B of Section 12.08.390 to read:

12.08.390B. Unless otherwise herein provided, no person shall operate or cause to be operated, any source of sound at any location within the unincorporated county, or allow the creation of any noise on property owned, leased, occupied or otherwise controlled by such person which causes the noise level, when measured on any other property either incorporated or unincorporated, to exceed any of the following exterior noise standards:

Standard No. 1 shall be the exterior noise level which may not be exceeded for a cumulative period of more than 15 minutes in any 30 minute period. Standard No. 1 shall be the applicable noise level from subsection A of this Section; or, if the ambient L50 exceeds the foregoing level, then the ambient L50 becomes the exterior noise level for Standard No. 1.

Standard No. 2 shall be the exterior noise level which may not be exceeded for a cumulative period of more than 7.5 minutes in any 30 minute period. Standard No. 2 shall be the applicable noise level from subsection A of this Section plus 5dB; or, if the ambient L25 exceeds the foregoing level, then the ambient L25 becomes the exterior noise level for Standard No. 2.

Standard No. 3 shall be the exterior noise level which may not be exceeded for a cumulative period of more than 2.5 minutes in any 30 minute period. Standard No. 3 shall be the applicable noise level from subsection A of this Section plus 20dB; or, if the ambient L8.3 exceeds the foregoing level, then the ambient L8.3 becomes the exterior noise level for Standard No. 3.

Standard No. 4 shall be the exterior noise level which may not be exceeded for a cumulative period of more than 30 seconds in any 30 minute period. Standard No. 4 shall be the applicable noise level from subsection A of this Section plus 15dB; or, if the ambient L1.7 exceeds the foregoing level, then the ambient L1.7 becomes the exterior noise level for Standard No. 4.

Standard No. 5 shall be the exterior noise level which may not be exceeded for any period of time. Standard No. 5 shall be the applicable noise level from subsection A of this Section plus 20dB; or, if the ambient L0 exceeds the foregoing level then the ambient L0 becomes the exterior noise level for Standard No. 5.

(c) By amending subsection B1 of Section 12.08.440 to read:

12.08.440B1. Noise Restrictions at Affected Structures. The contractor shall conduct construction activities in such a manner that the maximum noise levels at the affected buildings will not exceed those listed in the following schedule:

1. At Residential Structures.

a. Mobile Equipment. Maximum noise levels for Non-scheduled, intermittent, short-term operation of twenty (20) days or less for construction equipment:

a) Maximum noise levels for non-scheduled, intermittent, short-term operations of twenty (20) days or less for construction equipment:

 

Single-family Residential

Multi-family Residential

Daily, except Sundays and legal holidays, 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.

75dBA

80dBA

Daily, 8:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. and all day Sunday and legal holidays

60dBA

64dBA

b) Maximum noise level for repetitively scheduled and relatively long-term operation of twenty-one (21) days or more for construction equipment:

 

Single-family Residential

Multi-family Residential

Daily, except Sundays and legal holidays, 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.

65dBA

70dBA

Daily, 8:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. and all day Sunday and legal holidays

55dBA

60dBA

(d) By amending Section 12.08.460 to read:

12.08.460. Loading and Unloading Operations. Loading, unloading, opening, closing or other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials, garbage cans or similar objects between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to cause noise disturbance is prohibited.

(e) By amending subsection C of Section 12.08.570 to read:

12.08.570C. Outdoor Activities. Nonproprietary activities conducted on public grounds under the direct authority of the public governing body, including, but not limited to (i) athletic events and (ii) entertainment or cultural events with a concurrent attendance not in excess of two thousand five hundred (2,500) persons; and the equivalent of the foregoing nonproprietary activities when conducted on private school grounds under the direct authority of the private school governing body.

(f) By amending subsection M.2 of Section 12.08.570 to read:

12.08.570M.2. Drilling or redrilling or redrilling work which is done in full compliance with Article IX of the Carson Municipal Code, including CMC 9148.2.

(g) By adding subsection N to Section 12.08.570 to read:

12.08.570.N. City Construction Activities. All construction activities and operations undertaken by the City.

(h) By amending Section 12.08.580 to read:

12.08.580. Variance procedures.

A. Variance from the requirements of this Chapter may be granted by the Planning Commission (“Commission”) for a period not to exceed two (2) years, subject to such terms, conditions and requirements as may be reasonable under the circumstances.

B. Every applicant for a variance shall file with the Director of Community Development (“Director”) a written application on a form prescribed by the Director. The application shall state the name and address of the applicant, the nature of the noise source involved, all actions taken to comply with the provisions of this Chapter, the reasons why immediate compliance cannot be achieved, a proposed method for achieving compliance, a proposed time schedule for its accomplishment, and such other information as the Director may require. The application shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount established by resolution of the City Council. Upon receipt of said application and fee, the Director shall refer it with the recommendations thereon within sixty (60) days to the Commission for action thereon in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.

C. The Commission shall hold a public hearing within forty-five (45) days, if possible, following acceptance of the application. Notice of the hearing shall be given in the manner prescribed by CMC 9172.22C.

D. After the hearing, the Commission shall, by resolution, render its decision to approve or disapprove a variance. A variance from the terms of this Chapter may be granted only if the Commission makes the findings that:

1. Additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or modify its activity, operation or noise source to comply with this Chapter; or

2. The activity, operation or noise source cannot feasibly be done in a manner that would comply with the provisions of this Chapter, and no reasonable alternative is available to the applicant.

E. In granting a variance, the Commission may prescribe any conditions or requirements as may be deemed reasonably necessary to minimize adverse effects upon the community or the surrounding neighborhood. In this regard, the Commission shall consider the magnitude of nuisance caused by the offensive noise, the uses of property within the area of impingement by the noise, operations carried on under existing nonconforming rights or conditional use permit or zone variances, the time factors related to study, design, financing and construction of remedial work, the economic factors related to age and useful life of the equipment, the general public interest, health and welfare, the feasibility of plans submitted for correction, and the effect on the community if the variance were refused.

F. Notice of the Commission decision shall be given as provided in CMC 9173.32.

G. The decision of the Commission shall become effective and final fifteen (15) days after the date of its action unless an appeal is filed in accordance with CMC 9173.4.

H. An appeal shall be considered by the Council as provided in CMC 9173.4, and the fees therefor shall be as specified in CMC 9173.9 thereof.

I. After a variance has been granted, the procedure for modification of the conditions of the variance shall be as set forth in CMC 9172.22G.

J. A variance shall become automatically null and void, unless otherwise provided in this Chapter, or unless extended as provided in subsection K hereof, if any of the following occurs:

1. The variance has not been used within the time specified in the variance or, if the time is not specified, within one hundred eighty (180) days of its effective date;

2. Circumstances which terminate the variance pursuant to any termination provision included as a condition of the variance;

3. The use has been suspended or has ceased to exist for a period of one (1) year, or has been changed to another use in connection with which the variance is not required, or the deviation from the regulation which was authorized by the variance has ceased to exist for a period of one (1) year;

4. Upon a change of ordinance provisions so as to automatically permit in all respects that which was permitted by variance.

K. The procedure for extension of any variance granted hereunder shall be as set forth in CMC 9172.22H.2.

L. The applicable statute of limitations for court actions or proceedings relating to decisions, proceedings, acts or determinations pursuant to this Chapter shall be as set forth in CMC 9173.5.

(i) By deleting therefrom Sections 12.08.590, 12.08.600, 12.08.610, 12.08.620, 12.08.630, 12.08.640, and 12.08.670. (Ord. 95-1068, § 1)

5503 Violation – Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 or be imprisoned in the County Jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day such a violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. (Ord. 95-1068, § 1)

CHAPTER 6
SWIMMING POOLS
Sections:

§ 5600    Legislative Policy.

§ 5601    Definitions.

§ 5602    Responsibilities of Owners and Operators of Swimming Pools.

§ 5603    Nuisance Abatement and Assessment Procedures.

§ 5604    Inspection.

§ 5605    Notice to Abate.

§ 5606    Hearing.

§ 5607    Abatement – City May Perform Work.

§ 5608    Abatement – Assistance of Other Agencies or Contractors.

§ 5609    Assessment of Abatement Costs Against Owner.

§ 5610    Interfering with Health Officer’s Duties Prohibited.

5600 Legislative Policy.
The City Council finds that improperly operated or maintained swimming pools that provide a breeding place for mosquitos are dangerous or injurious to the health, welfare or safety of residents of the vicinity and as such constitute a public nuisance. (Ord. 95-1076, § 1)

5601 Definitions.
“Swimming pool” is defined as any public or private above, at or below grade artificial basin, chamber, tank or structure used or intended to be used for wading, swimming, diving, bathing, or any form of water recreation, therapy or sport. (Ord. 95-1076, § 1)

5602 Responsibilities of Owners and Operators of Swimming Pools.
All owners of property that contains a swimming pool and all operators of a swimming pool shall at all times properly maintain and operate the swimming pool in a manner that does not allow the swimming pool to become a breeding place for mosquitos, including emptying and keeping dry a swimming pool that is abandoned and/or not in service. Violation of this Section is an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed $250.00. (Ord. 95-1076, § 1)

5603 Nuisance Abatement and Assessment Procedures.
Pursuant to authority provided in Article 6, Chapter 10, Part 2, Division 3 of Title 4 of the Government Code of the State of California, and other applicable law, the City hereby establishes a procedure which may be utilized for abatement of public nuisances consisting of improperly operated or maintained swimming pools that provide a breeding place for mosquitos. This procedure is in addition to any other procedure that is authorized for such abatement. The purpose of this procedure is to enable the City to issue a notice to abate requiring the owner of any parcel of land or premises as shown on the last equalized assessment roll to abate such public nuisance and upon failure of the owner to satisfy the requirement by the date specified, to authorize the City to abate such public nuisance and to cause the cost of such abatement to become a special assessment against the property. (Ord. 95-1076, § 1)

5604 Inspection.
If upon inspection the City Health Officer, or a duly authorized representative of the City Health Officer, ascertains the presence of a swimming pool that is providing a breeding place for mosquitos, the City Health Officer, or a duly authorized representative of the City Health Officer, may issue a notice to abate for the parcel or premises upon which the public nuisance is discovered to each owner of record as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. The notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the property and a copy shall also be mailed to each owner of record as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. The notice to abate shall require the owner to abate the public nuisance within twenty-five (25) days from the date of the notice, or attend a hearing at a specified time and place, not sooner than ten (10) days nor longer than fifteen (15) days from the date of posting the notice or of mailing the notice, whichever is later, to show cause why the owner should not be required to abate the public nuisance. The failure of any person to receive the notice shall not affect the validity of any proceeding under this Section. (Ord. 95-1076, § 1)

5605 Notice to Abate.
The notice to abate shall do the following:

(a) State the finding of the City that a public nuisance exists on the property and the location of the public nuisance on the property;

(b) Direct the owner within twenty-five (25) days of the notice to take appropriate steps to abate, eliminate, and prevent the recurrence of the public nuisance;

(c) Inform the owner that before complying with the requirements of the notice, the owner may appear at a hearing before the City Council at a time and place stated in the notice; and

(d) Inform the owner that if he fails to comply with the requirements of the notice by the date specified: (a) the City, or its contractor, may enter upon the property and abate the public nuisance, (b) the City will bill the property owner for the cost of abatement, including administrative costs, and (c) that if the owner fails to pay the bill timely, the cost of the abatement, including administrative costs, shall become a special assessment against the property to be collected on the next regular property tax bill levied against the property. (Ord. 95-1076, § 1)

5606 Hearing.
Before complying with the requirements of the notice to abate, the owner of the property of the swimming pool may appear at a hearing before the City Council at a time and place fixed by the City and stated in the notice. At the hearing, the City Council shall determine whether the initial finding as set forth in the notice is correct and shall permit the owner to represent testimony. If, after hearing all the facts, the City Council makes a determination that a public nuisance exists on the property, the City Council shall order compliance with the requirements of the notice or with alternative orders issued by the City Council. (Ord. 95-1076, § 1)

5607 Abatement – City May Perform Work.
In the event that the public nuisance is not abated by the date specified in the notice or by the date established by alternative orders issued by the City Council, the City, or its contractor, may enter the property and abate the public nuisance. (Ord. 95-1076, § 1)

5608 Abatement – Assistance of Other Agencies or Contractors.
The City Health Officer, or a duly authorized representative of the City Health Officer, may request any City department or agency having the necessary personnel and equipment to perform the work required to abate the public nuisance. The City may also use the services of contractor(s) under contract(s) awarded by the City. In the event a contract has been awarded, the contractor shall keep a complete account and submit an itemized written report with respect thereto to the City upon completion of the abatement work. (Ord. 95-1076, § 1)

5609 Assessment of Abatement Costs Against Owner.
In the event that the City, or its contractor, abates the public nuisance pursuant to CMC 5607 or 5608, the City may make the cost of the abatement, including administrative costs, a special assessment against the property. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment. (Ord. 95-1076, § 1)

5610 Interfering with Health Officer’s Duties Prohibited.
No person shall refuse to obey any lawful order of the City Health Officer, or a duly authorized representative of the City Health Officer, made in the performance of his duties within the power conferred upon him by state law or by the municipal law of this City, including this Section. Violation of this Section shall be punishable as a misdemeanor. (Ord. 95-1076, § 1)

CHAPTER 7
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
Sections:

Part 1. General Provisions

§ 5700    Short Title.

§ 5701    Definitions.

§ 5702    Maintenance of Property.

§ 5703    Declaration of Public Nuisance.

§ 5704    Violation – Penalty.

Part 2. Enforcement Procedure

§ 5705    Manner of Giving Notice.

§ 5706    Notification of Nuisance.

§ 5707    Public Hearing Before Director of Public Safety.

§ 5708    Appeal to City Council.

§ 5709    Abatement by Owner.

§ 5710    Abatement by City.

§ 5711    Summary Abatement of Imminently Dangerous Public Nuisance.

§ 5712    Record of Cost of Abatement.

§ 5713    Report – Hearing and Procedures.

§ 5714    Assessment of Cost.

§ 5715    Summary Abatement of Mosquito Breeding Sources.

Part 1. General Provisions

5700 Short Title.
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Property Maintenance Ordinance. (Ord. 96-1098, § 1)

5701 Definitions.
For purposes of this Chapter, “Director” shall mean the Director of Public Safety of the City of Carson or the designee thereof.

“Beneficiary” means a lender under a promissory note to pay money secured by a deed of trust on property. The word “beneficiary” as used in this Chapter means and includes any assignee or successor to such beneficiary, whether such assignee or successor acquires its interest in the beneficiary’s promissory note either before a note of default is recorded. In the event that a property may provide security for the loan or obligation of more than one (1) beneficiary, the beneficiary who causes its notice of default to be recorded shall be responsible for registering the property as set forth in this Chapter. (Ord. 96-1098, § 1; Ord. 13-1510, § 4)

5702 Maintenance of Property.
It is unlawful for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any premises in the City to maintain such premises in such a manner that any of the following conditions are found to exist thereon:

(a) Buildings which are abandoned, partially destroyed or permitted to remain unreasonably in a state of partial construction for an extended period of time (see also CMC 4124);

(b) Doorways, windows, or other openings leading into vacant structures which have not been secured by such means as will protect against entry;

(c) Paint deterioration upon any buildings causing dry rot, warping or a lack of weather protection (see also CMC 4124);

(d) Any area, whether in a natural state or as a result of grading operations, excavation or fill, which causes erosion, subsidence, surface water damage problems or dust to the magnitude to be potentially injurious to public health and safety or welfare of adjacent properties;

(e) Garages converted without building permits which are being utilized as living quarters;

(f) Vacant lots which are not fenced by such means as will protect against entry;

(g) Vacant lots which are not posted with at least two (2) signs designating “No Trespassing” and “No Posting of Signs”;

(h) Wrecked, disabled or abandoned motor vehicles, motors, equipment, automotive parts or accessories which are visible from the public right-of-way (see also CMC 4513);

(i) Vehicles, trailers, recreational vehicles or boats kept or stored in yard areas, other than on legally paved driveways, which are visible from the public right-of-way;

(j) Rubbish, cans, bottles, or other waste matter of any type upon any alley, sidewalk or vacant lot within the City (see also CMC 4124);

(k) Attractive nuisances dangerous to children, including but not limited to: abandoned and/or broken equipment and appliances; unprotected and/or hazardous pools, ponds and excavations; and neglected machinery;

(l) Broken or discarded furniture, household equipment or appliances on the premises for unreasonable periods and visible from the public right-of-way (see also CMC 4124);

(m) Boxes, lumber, trash, rubbish, or other debris either inside or outside a building and visible from the public right-of-way for extended periods (see also CMC 4124);

(n) Accumulation of rubbish, litter or debris in vestibules, doorways, or on the adjoining sidewalk(s) of commercial or industrial buildings (see also CMC 4124);

(o) Trash, garbage or recycling containers stored in front or side yards and visible from the public right-of-way, except when placed in areas of collection at the time permitted (see also CMC 4124);

(p) Lack of adequate landscaping or ground cover sufficient to prevent blowing dust and erosion;

(q) Any device, decoration, design, graffiti, fence, structure, clothesline, or vegetation which is unsightly by reason of its condition or its inappropriate location (see also CMC 4124);

(r) Outside storage of building materials, machinery, or other material or equipment used in a business on any lot in any residential zone, except during associated or related construction on the lot (see also CMC 4124);

(s) Signs and/or sign structures, other than lawfully erected outdoor advertising signs, maintained on vacant premises, which advertise, promote or refer to a business, profession, product or service which is not conducted or offered at the premises (see also CMC 9167.3);

(t) Maintenance of any structure in a state of substantial deterioration, such as peeling paint on a facade, broken windows, roofs in disrepair, damaged porches, broken steps or other such deterioration or disrepair not otherwise constituting a violation, and which is visible from the public right-of-way (see also CMC 4124);

(u) Substantial lack of maintenance of grounds on which structures exist, where the grounds are visible from a public right-of-way, where such condition would have a tendency to depreciate the aesthetic and property values of surrounding properties (see also CMC 4124).

(v) Maintenance of Property.

A. Properties which are abandoned or vacant shall be, in comparison to the neighborhood standard, maintained by the beneficiary and kept free of weeds, dry brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, notices, except those required by Federal, State or local law, discarded personal items including but not limited to furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, printed material or any other items that give the appearance that the property is abandoned. The beneficiary shall maintain such property free of graffiti, tagging or similar markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches the color of the exterior of the structure. In general, the maintenance of abandoned or vacant property by the beneficiary shall comply with the standards set forth in Section 7.040 and HUD Mortgagee Letter 2007-03, dated January 25, 2007, or such other standard as may hereafter be ordered in writing addressed to the beneficiary by the Chief Building Official. Adherence to the maintenance and monitoring standard set forth in this Section does not relieve the beneficiary/trustee or property owner of any obligations set forth in any covenants, conditions and restrictions and/or homeowners’ association rules and regulations which may apply to the property.

B. Each property which is acquired by a beneficiary following the recordation of a notice of default, whether acquired by such beneficiary by foreclosure, deed in lieu of foreclosure or judgment of foreclosure, shall be maintained by the beneficiary so as not to constitute a public nuisance under this Chapter and other applicable laws, for so long a period of time as the beneficiary may own such property. (Ord. 96-1098, § 1; Ord. 13-1510, § 6)

5703 Declaration of Public Nuisance.
All property maintained in violation of CMC 5702 is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be abated by rehabilitation, demolition, removal or repair pursuant to the procedures set forth in this Chapter. The procedures for abatement set forth in this Chapter shall not be exclusive, and shall not in any manner limit or restrict the City from enforcing other City ordinances or abating public nuisances in any other manner as provided by law. (Ord. 96-1098, § 1)

5704 Violation – Penalty.
Notwithstanding any other remedy provided by this Chapter, any violation of the provisions of CMC 5702 is declared to be a misdemeanor punishable in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 2 of Article I of this Code and the penalties provided therein. Any person who is found guilty of an infraction under this Chapter shall be guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this Chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such a person and shall be punishable accordingly. (Ord. 96-1098, § 1)

Part 2. Enforcement Procedure

5705 Manner of Giving Notice.
Service of all notices under this Chapter shall be upon the person owning the premises as such person’s name and address appears on the last equalized assessment roll or latest supplemental roll, and upon any person in charge or possession of the premises. Notices shall be posted on the premises and shall be given either by personal delivery or by depositing a copy of the notice, enclosed in a sealed envelope with the postage thereon fully prepaid, in the United States Postal Service to be delivered by certified mail, return receipt requested. If there is no such address, the notice may be mailed to the owner in care of the property address. Service by mail is complete at the time of deposit in the United States Postal Service. Failure of any person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings hereunder. (Ord. 96-1098, § 1)

5706 Notification of Nuisance.
Whenever the Director finds that any premises in the City is being maintained contrary to one or more provisions of CMC 5702, the Director shall send a written notice and order to abate in accordance with CMC 5705. The notice and order to abate shall set forth the existing unlawful condition(s) which constitute(s) a violation of CMC 5702, general instructions regarding the method(s) of abating such condition(s), and a reasonable time limit for correcting the violation(s). (Ord. 96-1098, § 1)

5707 Public Hearing Before Director of Public Safety.
(a) Any person holding record title or having any interest in the premises may appeal the notice and order to abate the unlawful conditions on such premises within ten (10) calendar days after the date of service of such notice and order. The form and content of an appeal shall include:

(1) The street address, if there is one, otherwise the legal description and location of the premises included in the action.

(2) The specific matter being appealed.

(3) A statement of the grounds for appeal or how there is error in the decision of the matter being appealed.

(4) Any fees as may be required by resolution of the City Council for such an appeal.

If the appeal is found to be deficient, the City Clerk shall deliver or mail the appellant, by certified mail, a notice specifying how the appeal is deficient. If such deficiency has not been corrected by the appellant within seven (7) calendar days after mailing of such notice by filing with the City Clerk a sufficient amendment to the appeal, the appeal shall be deemed to be withdrawn and the appeal shall be returned to the appellant.

(b) In the event that any person holding record title or having any interest in the premises files a timely appeal of the notice and order, the Director shall hold a public hearing to determine whether the City shall proceed in accordance with the notice and order to abate the public nuisance on such premises. Notice of the public hearing shall be given in accordance with CMC 5705 and to any individuals who have requested to be notified of such a hearing. Such hearing may be scheduled not less than five (5) days from the date of the notice.

(c) At the hearing, the Director shall hear and consider all relevant evidence including, but not limited to, testimony from owners, City personnel, witnesses and other interested parties, and may consider staff reports and other written evidence relative to the matter. The hearing may be continued from time to time. The hearing may be informally conducted, and the rules of evidence need not apply.

(d) Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the Director shall by resolution, based on the evidence presented, determine whether the City shall proceed in accordance with the notice and order as given, or as modified by the Director, or not at all.

(e) If the Director determines that the City shall proceed with the abatement of the nuisance on the premises, a copy of the resolution making such determination shall be served upon any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of the premises in accordance with CMC 5705.

(f) The determination of the Director shall be final and effective fifteen (15) calendar days after the service of the determination unless by 6:00 p.m. of the last City business day (Monday through Thursday) before the fifteenth day any person, including any member of the City Council or the City Manager, has filed a written appeal of the determination with the City Clerk. (Ord. 96-1098, § 1)

5708 Appeal to City Council.
(a) Any person, including any member of the City Council or the City Manager, may appeal the determination of the Director within fifteen (15) calendar days after the date of service of such determination. The form and content of the appeal shall be as set forth in CMC 5707(a). If the appeal is found to be deficient, the City Clerk shall deliver or mail the appellant, by certified mail, a notice specifying how the appeal is deficient. If such deficiency has not been corrected by the appellant within seven (7) calendar days after mailing of such notice by filing with the City Clerk a sufficient amendment to the appeal, the appeal shall be deemed to be withdrawn and the appeal shall be returned to the appellant.

(b) In the event that any person files a timely appeal of the Director’s determination, the City Council shall hold a public hearing to determine whether the City shall proceed in accordance with the notice and order to abate the public nuisance on such premises. Notice of the public hearing shall be given in accordance with CMC 5705 and to any individuals who have requested to be notified of such a hearing. Such hearing may be scheduled not less than five (5) days from the date of the notice.

(c) At the hearing, the City Council shall hear and consider all relevant evidence including, but not limited to, testimony from owners, City personnel, witnesses and other interested parties, and may consider staff reports and other written evidence relative to the matter. The hearing may be continued from time to time. The hearing may be informally conducted, and the rules of evidence need not apply.

(d) Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall by resolution, based on the evidence presented, determine whether the City shall proceed in accordance with the notice and order as given, or as modified by the Director, or as modified by the City Council, or not at all.

(e) If the City Council determines that the City shall proceed with the abatement of the nuisance on the premises, a copy of the resolution making such determination shall be served upon any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of the premises in accordance with CMC 5705. The determination of the City Council shall be final. (Ord. 96-1098, § 1)

5709 Abatement by Owner.
The property owner shall have the right to abate the nuisance, provided such abatement is completed prior to the expiration of the period of time set forth in the notice and order to abate as given or as modified by the Director or the City Council. The time set for abatement by the owner, upon good cause shown, may be extended by the Director or the City Council. (Ord. 96-1098, § 1)

5710 Abatement by City.
If abatement of the nuisance is not completed prior to the expiration of the period of time set forth in the notice and order to abate as given, or as modified by the Director or City Council, the Director may cause the nuisance to be abated by City forces or by private contractor. In no event shall the Director cause the nuisance to be abated by City forces or private contractor prior to:

(a) Expiration of the period allotted in the notice and order as given, or as modified by the Director, if such order was not timely appealed to the City Council; or

(b) Ninety-one (91) calendar days following the date upon which the City Council’s resolution is served in accordance with CMC 5705, if the notice and order to abate was timely appealed to the City Council.

Entry upon the property for the purpose of abating the public nuisance existing thereon is hereby expressly authorized. Prior to causing the abatement of the public nuisance, the Director shall obtain a warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction authorizing such action. (Ord. 96-1098, § 1)

5711 Summary Abatement of Imminently Dangerous Public Nuisance.
Whenever the Director determines that an unlawful condition on any premises in the City is so imminently dangerous to life or adjacent property that such condition must be immediately abated, the Director shall attempt to make contact in person or by telephone with the owner of the property and any person in charge or possession of the premises. In the event such contact is made, the Director shall notify such person, or persons, of the danger involved and require that such condition be abated immediately as to preclude harm to any person or property. In the event no contact is made, or in the event that the condition is not abated immediately, the Director may take all actions deemed necessary to abate such condition with the use of City forces or a private contractor. The costs of such abatement may be recovered by the City in the same manner that other abatement costs are recovered pursuant to this Chapter. (Ord. 96-1098, § 1)

5712 Record of Cost of Abatement.
The Director shall keep an accounting of the cost, including incidental expenses, of abatement of the public nuisance for each separate lot or parcel of land where the work has been done, and shall render an itemized report in writing to the City Council showing the cost of abatement, including the salvage value, if applicable; provided, that before the report is submitted to the City Council for approval, a copy of the same shall be posted for at least five (5) days upon the premises of property upon which said buildings, structures or nuisance were situated, together with a notice of the time when said report shall be submitted to the City Council for confirmation. A copy of said report shall be served upon the owner of the property in accordance with the provision of CMC 5705, at least five (5) days prior to submitting the same to the City Council. Proof of such posting and service shall be made by affidavit and filed with the City Clerk. The term “incidental expenses” shall include, but not be limited to, the actual expenses and costs of the City in the preparation of notices, specifications and contracts, inspecting the work, and the costs of printing and mailings required under this Chapter. (Ord. 96-1098, § 1)

5713 Report – Hearing and Procedures.
At the time and place fixed for receiving and considering the report, the City Council shall hear and pass upon the evidence submitted by the Director, together with any objections or protests raised by any of the persons liable to the assessed for the cost of abating the nuisance. Thereupon the City Council may make such revision, correction or modification to the report as it may deem just, after which, the report as it is submitted, or as revised, corrected, or modified, shall be confirmed. The hearing may be continued from time to time. (Ord. 96-1098, § 1)

5714 Assessment of Cost.
(a) Except as provided in subdivision (b) of this Section, the confirmed cost of abatement of a nuisance upon any lot or parcel of land shall constitute a special assessment against the respective lot or parcel of land to which it relates. A copy of the confirmed report shall be transmitted to the Assessor and Tax Collector of the City, whereupon it shall be the duty of said Assessor and Tax Collector to add the amount of such assessment, or assessments, to the next regular bills of taxes levied against said respective lots and parcels of land for municipal purposes, and thereafter said amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency in the manner and means provided by law. Upon recordation of a notice of lien in the office of the County Recorder, the special assessment shall constitute a lien on the property in the amount of the assessment. Such notice of lien shall be in a form substantially as set forth in subsection (b) of this Section.

(b) As an alternative to the procedure set forth in subsection (a) of this Section, the Director may elect to record a nuisance abatement lien in the office of the County Recorder, which lien shall have, from the date of recording, the force, effect and priority of a judgment lien. Prior to the recordation of the lien, notice shall be served upon the owner of the lot or parcel, based on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current, in accordance with Section 38773.1 of the California Government Code. The notice of lien shall be in a form substantially as follows:

NOTICE OF LIEN

(Claim of the City of Carson)

NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that pursuant to the authority vested by the provision of Article V, Chapter 7 of the Carson Municipal Code, the Director of Public Safety of the City of Carson did on or about the ___ day of ______, cause certain work to be performed upon the property hereinafter described for the purpose of abating a public nuisance on said property; that the City Council of the City of Carson did on the ___ day of ______, confirm the cost of such abatement; that neither the cost of such abatement, nor any part thereof, has been paid to the City; that the City of Carson does hereby claim a lien for the cost of such abatement in the amount of $ ____; and that the same shall be a lien upon said real property until it has been paid in full and discharged of record.

The real property upon which a lien is claimed is that certain parcel of land located in the City of Carson, County of Los Angeles, State of California, known as (street address), and more particularly described as follows:

(Legal description, including Assessor’s parcel number)

The owner of record of the above-described real property at the time of recordation of the lien is:

(Name and address of property owner)

Dated this day of ___ day of ______, ____.

City of Carson

______________________________
Director of Public Safety

(Ord. 96-1098, § 1)

5715 Summary Abatement of Mosquito Breeding Sources.
(a) Any standing water on private property which has become a breeding source for mosquitos is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and an immediate threat to the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Carson.

(b) When the City Manager, or officers under his direction, acting under any authority vested in him or her finds any standing water on private property which has become a breeding source for mosquitos, said officer may issue a written order to abate the standing water or other condition within the City of Carson that endangers the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Carson. The owner or other persons or person responsible for the private property where the breeding source was found shall have seventy-two (72) hours to abate or eliminate the condition which created the breeding source for mosquitos. Any owner or responsible person who fails to comply with a seventy-two (72) hour nuisance abatement order issued pursuant to this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor pursuant to CMC 5704.

(c) If any officer as described in this code who is lawfully on private property finds a nuisance as described above and is unable to contact the owner or other person or persons responsible for the private property in question within twenty-four (24) hours, said officer may summarily abate the nuisance at no cost to the owner or responsible person. If a nuisance has been abated without the knowledge or permission of the owner or other responsible person, the abating officer shall post a notice on the property in a prominent place that explains exactly where and what steps were taken to abate the nuisance.

(d) If an owner or responsible person who has been cited to abate a nuisance within seventy-two (72) hours fails to do so, any officer described herein may then summarily abate the nuisance. All costs incurred to abate the nuisance pursuant to this Section shall be a personal obligation against the owner or person or persons responsible for the creation or maintenance of the nuisance. In the event said costs exceed $100.00, they shall be recovered in accordance with the procedures set forth in CMC 5712, 5713 and 5714. (Ord. 05-1337, § 1)

CHAPTER 8
STORM WATER AND URBAN RUNOFF POLLUTION CONTROL
Sections:

§ 5800    Short Title.

§ 5801    Findings.

§ 5802    Purpose and Intent.

§ 5803    Definitions.

§ 5804    Construction and Application.

§ 5805    Prohibited Activities.

§ 5806    Exempted Discharges, Conditionally Exempted Discharges or Designated Discharges.

§ 5807    Good Housekeeping Provisions.

§ 5808    Requirements for Industrial/ Commercial and Construction Activities.

§ 5809    Storm Water Pollution Control Measures for New Development and Redevelopment Projects.

§ 5810    Enforcement.

§ 5811    No Taking.

5800 Short Title.
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Storm Water Management and Discharge Control Ordinance. (Ord. 96-1101, § 1)

5801 Findings.
(a) The Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.(c) § 1251, et seq.,) provides for the regulation and reduction of pollutants discharged into the waters of the United States by extending National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (“NPDES”) requirements to storm water and urban runoff discharge into municipal storm drain systems.

(b) Storm water and urban runoff flows from individual properties onto streets, then through storm drains passing through the City.

(c) The City of Carson is a co-permittee under the “Waste Discharge Requirements for Municipal Storm Water and Urban Runoff Discharges within the County of Los Angeles,” issued by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board – Los Angeles Region, (Order No. 96-054), dated July 15, 1996, which also serves as an NPDES Permit under the Federal Clean Water Act (NPDES No. CAS614001), as well as Waste Discharge Requirements under California law (the “Municipal NPDES Permit”), and, as a co-permittee under the Municipal NPDES Permit, the City is required to adopt ordinances and implement procedures with respect to the entry of Nonstorm Water Discharges into the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System.

(d) Part 1, Section I of the Municipal NPDES Permit requires the City to effectively prohibit Nonstorm Water Discharges from within its boundaries, into that portion of the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) which it owns or operates and into watercourses, except where such discharges are:

(1) In compliance with a separate individual or general NPDES Permit; or

(2) Identified and in compliance with Part 2.11.C (Non-Storm Water Discharges) of the Municipal NPDES Permit; or

(3) Discharges originating from Federal, State or other facilities which the City is preempted from regulating, and further provides that compliance with the terms of the Municipal NPDES Permit through the development and implementation of the programs described in the Municipal NPDES Permit will constitute compliance with the Discharge Prohibition therein.

(e) Part 2, Section 1.E of the Municipal NPDES Permit requires the City to demonstrate by November 28, 1996, that it possesses the legal authority necessary to control discharges to and from those portions of the MS4 over which it has jurisdiction, so as to comply with the Municipal NPDES Permit and to specifically prohibit certain discharges identified in the Municipal NPDES Permit.

(f) The Municipal NPDES Permit contemplates the development of a Countywide Storm Water Management Plan (“CSWMP”) and then a Watershed Management Area Plan (“WMAP”), in which the City will participate, which will in turn require the development and the implementation of programs for, among other things, the elimination of illicit connections and illicit discharges, development planning, development construction, and public information and education requirements, and which may require the later adoption of additional legal authority to implement such programs as they are developed by the Permittees and approved by the Regional Board.

(g) In order to control, in a cost-effective manner, the quantity and quality of storm water and urban runoff to the maximum extent practicable, the adoption of reasonable regulations, as set forth herein, is essential. (Ord. 96-1101, § 1)

5802 Purpose and Intent.
(a) The purpose of this Chapter is to ensure the future health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the City and the water quality of the receiving waters of the County of Los Angeles and surrounding coastal areas by:

(1) Reducing pollutants in storm water discharges to the maximum extent practicable;

(2) Regulating illicit connections and illicit discharges and thereby reducing the level of contamination of storm water and urban runoff into the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System; and

(3) Regulating Nonstorm Water Discharges to the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System.

(b) The intent of this Chapter is to protect and enhance the quality of watercourses, water bodies, and wetlands within the City in a manner consistent with the Federal Clean Water Act, the California Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act and the Municipal NPDES Permit.

(c) This Chapter is also intended to provide the City with the legal authority necessary to control discharges to and from those portions of the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System over which it has jurisdiction as required by the Municipal NPDES Permit, and thereby fully and timely comply with the terms of the Municipal NPDES Permit while the CSWMP and the WMAP are being developed by the Permittees under the Municipal NPDES Permit, and in contemplation of the subsequent amendment of this Chapter or adoption by the City of additional provisions of this Chapter to implement the subsequently adopted CSWMP and WMAP, or other programs developed under the Municipal NPDES Permit.

(d) This Chapter also sets forth requirements for the construction and operation of certain “commercial development,” “new development” and “redevelopment” and other projects (as further defined herein) which are intended to ensure compliance with the storm water mitigation measures prescribed in the current version of the Standard Urban Storm Water Mitigation Plan (SUSMP) approved by the Regional Water Quality Control Board-Los Angeles Region, and on file in the office of the City Clerk of this City. This Chapter authorizes the authorized enforcement officer to define and adopt applicable Best Management Practices and other storm water pollution control measures, to grant waivers from SUSMP requirements, as provided herein, to cite infractions and to impose fines pursuant to this Chapter. Except as otherwise provided herein, the authorized enforcement officer shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this Section. (Ord. 96-1101, § 1; Ord. 01-1221U, § 1)

5803 Definitions.
Except as specifically provided herein, any term used in this Chapter shall be defined as that term is defined in the current Municipal NPDES Permit, or in the current version of the Standard Urban Storm Water Mitigation Plan (SUSMP) approved by the Regional Water Quality Control Board-Los Angeles Region, or if it is not specifically defined in either the Municipal NPDES Permit or the SUSMP, then as such term is defined in the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended, and/or the regulations promulgated thereunder. If the definition of any term contained in this Section conflicts with the definition of the same term in the current Municipal NPDES Permit or the current version of the SUSMP, then the definition contained in the Municipal NPDES Permit shall govern, and if not set forth in the Municipal NPDES Permit, the definition contained in the SUSMP shall govern. The following words and phrases shall have the following meanings when used in this Chapter:

(a) “Area susceptible to runoff” shall mean any surface directly exposed to precipitation or in the path of runoff caused by precipitation which path leads off the parcel on which the surface is located.

(b) “Authorized enforcement officer” shall mean the City Manager or his or her designee.

(c) “Automotive service facility” means a facility that is categorized in any one (1) of the following Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) codes: 5013, 5014, 5541, 7532 – 7534, or 7536 – 7539 (as amended).

(d) “Best Management Practices (BMPs)” means activities, practices, facilities, and/or procedures that when implemented to their maximum efficiency will prevent or reduce pollutants in discharges and any program, technology, process, siting criteria, operational methods or measures, or engineered systems, which when implemented prevent, control, remove or reduce pollution. Examples of BMPs may include public education and outreach, proper planning of development projects, proper cleaning of catch basin inlets, and proper sludge- or waste-handling and disposal, among others.

(e) “City” shall mean the City of Carson.

(f) “Commercial development” means any development on private land that is not heavy industrial or residential. The category includes, but is not limited to: hospitals, laboratories and other medical facilities, educational institutions, recreational facilities, plant nurseries, car wash facilities, mini-malls and other business complexes, shopping malls, hotels, office buildings, public warehouses and other light industrial complexes.

(g) “Construction” means constructing, clearing, grading, or excavation that results in soil disturbance. Construction includes structure teardown. It does not include routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of facility; emergency construction activities required to immediately protect public health and safety; interior remodeling with no outside exposure of construction material or construction waste to storm water; mechanical permit work; or sign permit work.

(h) “Control” means to minimize, reduce, eliminate, or prohibit by technological, legal, contractual or other means, the discharge of pollutants from an activity or activities.

(i) “Development” means any construction, rehabilitation, redevelopment or reconstruction of any public or private residential project (whether single-family, multi-unit or planned unit development); industrial, commercial, retail and other nonresidential projects, including public agency projects; or mass grading for future construction. It does not include routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of facility, nor does it include emergency construction activities required to immediately protect public health and safety.

(j) “Directly adjacent” means situated within two hundred (200) feet of the contiguous zone required for the continued maintenance, function, and structural stability of the environmentally sensitive area.

(k) “Discharge” means when used without qualification the “discharge of a pollutant.”

(l) “Discharging directly” means outflow from a drainage conveyance system that is composed entirely or predominantly of flows from the subject property, development, subdivision, or industrial facility, and not commingled with the flows from adjacent lands.

(m) “Discharge of a pollutant” means any addition of any “pollutant” or combination of pollutants to “waters of the United States” from any “point source,” or any addition of any pollutant or combination of pollutants to the waters of the “contiguous zone” or the ocean from any point source other than a vessel or other floating craft which is being used as a means of transportation. The term discharge includes additions of pollutants into waters of the United States from surface runoff which is collected or channeled by man; discharges through pipes, sewers, or other conveyances owned by a state, municipality, or other person which do not lead to a treatment works; and discharges through pipes, sewers, or other conveyances, leading into privately owned treatment works.

(n) “Discretionary project” is defined in the same manner as Section 15357 of the Guidelines for Implementation of the California Environmental Quality Act contained in Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations, as amended, and means a project which requires the exercise of judgment or deliberation when the City decides to approve or disapprove a particular activity, as distinguished from situations where the City merely has to determine whether there has been conformity with applicable statutes, ordinances, or regulations.

(o) “Disturbed area” means an area that is altered as a result of clearing, grading, and/or excavation.

(p) “Environmentally sensitive area (ESA)” means an area in which plant or animal life or their habitats are either rare or especially valuable because of their special nature or role in an ecosystem and which would be easily disturbed or degraded by human activities and developments (California Public Resources Code § 30107.5). Areas subject to storm water mitigation requirements are areas designated as Significant Ecological Areas by the County of Los Angeles (Los Angeles County Significant Areas Study, Los Angeles County Department of Regional Planning (1976) and amendments); an area designated as a Significant Natural Area by the California Department of Fish and Game’s Significant Natural Areas Program; provided, that area has been field verified by the Department of Fish and Game; an area listed in the Basin Plan as supporting the Rare, Threatened, or Endangered Species (RARE) beneficial use; and an area identified by the City as environmentally sensitive.

(q) “Good housekeeping practices” shall mean common practices related to the storage, use, or cleanup of materials, performed in a manner that minimizes the discharge of pollutants. Examples include, but are not limited to, purchasing only the quantity of materials to be used at a given time, use of alternative and less environmentally harmful products, cleaning up spills and leaks, and storing materials in a manner that will contain any leaks or spills.

(r) “Greater than nine (9) unit home subdivision” means any subdivision being developed for ten (10) or more single-family or multifamily dwelling units.

(s) “Hillside” means property located in an area with known erosive soil conditions, where the development contemplates grading on any natural slope that is twenty-five (25) percent or greater and where grading contemplates cut or fill slopes.

(t) “Illicit connection” shall mean any human-made conveyance that is connected to the storm drain system without a permit, excluding gutters, roof-drains and other similar connections. Examples include channels, pipelines, conduits, inlets, or outlets that are connected directly to the storm drain system.

(u) “Illicit discharge” shall mean any discharge to the storm drain system that is prohibited under local, State or Federal statutes, ordinances, codes or regulations. This includes all Nonstorm Water Discharges except discharges pursuant to a separate NPDES permit and discharges that are exempted or conditionally exempted in accordance with Section II of the Municipal NPDES Permit.

(v) “Infiltration” means the downward entry of water into the surface of the soil.

(w) “Material” shall mean any substance including, but not limited to: garbage and debris; lawn clippings, leaves, and other vegetation; biological and fecal waste; sediment and sludge; oil and grease; gasoline; paints, solvents, cleaners, and any fluid or solid containing chemicals.

(x) “Municipal NPDES Permit” shall mean the “Waste Discharge Requirements for Municipal Storm Water and Urban Runoff Discharges Within the County of Los Angeles, and the Incorporated Cities Therein, Except the City of Long Beach” (Order No. 01-182, NPDES Permit No. CAS00401), dated December 13, 2001, issued by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board-Los Angeles Region, and any successor permit to that permit.

(y) “Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System or MS4” shall mean streets, gutters, conduits, natural or artificial drains, channels and watercourses, or other facilities that are owned, operated, maintained or controlled by the City and used for the purpose of collecting, storing, transporting, or disposing of storm water.

(z) “New development” means land disturbing activities; structural development, including construction or installation of a building or structure; creation of impervious surfaces; and land subdivision.

(aa) “Nonstorm water discharge” shall mean any discharge to a Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System that is not composed entirely of storm water.

(bb) “NPDES Permit” shall mean any waste discharge requirements issued by the Regional Board or the State Water Resources Control Board as an NPDES permit pursuant to Water Code Section 13370 (other than the Municipal NPDES Permit).

(cc) “One hundred thousand (100,000) square foot commercial development” means any commercial development that creates at least one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of impermeable area, including parking areas.

(dd) “Parking lot” means land area or a facility for the parking or storage of motor vehicles used for business, commerce, industry or personal use with a lot size of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of surface area, or with twenty-five (25) or more parking spaces.

(ee) “Planning priority projects” means those projects that are required to incorporate appropriate storm water mitigation measures into the design plan for their respective project, including:

(1) Ten (10) or more unit homes (includes single-family homes, multifamily homes, condominiums, and apartments);

(2) One hundred thousand (100,000) or more square feet of impervious surface area industrial/commercial development;

(3) Automotive service facilities;

(4) Retail gasoline outlets;

(5) Restaurants;

(6) Parking lots five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of surface area or with twenty-five (25) or more parking spaces;

(7) Redevelopment projects in subject categories that meet redevelopment thresholds;

(8) Projects located in or directly adjacent to or discharging directly to an ESA, which meet the thresholds described herein; and

(9) Those projects that require the implementation of a site-specific plan to mitigate post-development storm water for new development not requiring a SUSMP but which may potentially have adverse impacts on post-development storm water quality, and where the following project characteristics exist:

(i) Vehicle or equipment fueling areas;

(ii) Vehicle or equipment maintenance areas, including washing and repair;

(iii) Commercial or industrial waste handling or storage;

(iv) Outdoor handling or storage of hazardous materials;

(v) Outdoor manufacturing areas;

(vi) Outdoor food handling or processing;

(vii) Outdoor animal care, confinement, or slaughter; or

(viii) Outdoor horticulture activities.

(ff) “Pollutant” shall mean those “pollutants” defined in Section 502(6) of the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.(c) § 1362(6)), or incorporated into California Water Code Section 13373. Examples of pollutants include, but are not limited to the following:

(1) Commercial and industrial waste (such as fuels, solvents, detergents, plastic pellets, hazardous substances, fertilizers, pesticides, slag, ash, and sludge);

(2) Metals such as cadmium, lead, zinc, copper, silver, nickel, chromium; and nonmetals such as phosphorus and arsenic;

(3) Petroleum hydrocarbons (such as fuels, lubricants, surfactants, waste oils, solvents, coolants and grease);

(4) Excessive eroded soils, sediment and particulate materials in amounts which may adversely affect the beneficial use of the receiving waters, flora or fauna of the State;

(5) Animal wastes (such as discharge from confinement facilities, kennels, pens, recreational facilities, stables, and show facilities); and

(6) Substances having characteristics such as pH less than six (6) or greater than nine (9), or unusual coloration or turbidity, or excessive levels of fecal coliform, or fecal streptococcus, or enterococcus.

The term “pollutant” shall not include uncontaminated storm water, potable water or reclaimed water generated by a lawfully permitted water treatment facility.

The term “pollutant” also shall not include any substance identified in this definition, if through compliance with the Best Management Practices available, the discharge of such substance has been reduced or eliminated to the maximum extent practicable. In an enforcement action, the burden shall be on the person who is the subject of such action to establish the reduction or elimination of the discharge to the maximum extent practicable through compliance with the Best Management Practices available.

(gg) “Project” means all development, redevelopment, and land disturbing activities.

(hh) “Redevelopment” means land-disturbing activity that results in the creation, addition or replacement of at least five thousand (5,000) square feet of impervious surface area on an already developed site. Redevelopment includes, but is not limited to, the following activities that meet the minimum standards set forth in this definition: (1) the expansion of a building footprint; (2) addition or replacement of a structure; (3) replacement of impervious surface that is not part of a routine maintenance activity; and (4) land disturbing activities related to structural or impervious surfaces. Redevelopment does not include routine maintenance activities that are conducted to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, original purpose of facility or emergency redevelopment activity required to protect public health and safety. Existing single-family structures are exempt from the redevelopment requirements set forth in this Chapter.

(ii) “Regional Board” shall mean the California Regional Water Quality Control Board-Los Angeles Region.

(jj) “Restaurant” means a facility that sells prepared foods and drinks for consumption, including stationary lunch counters and refreshment stands selling prepared foods and drinks for immediate consumption. (SIC Code 5812).

(kk) “Retail gasoline outlet” means any facility engaged in selling gasoline and lubricating oils.

(ll) “Runoff’ means any runoff including storm water and dry weather flows from a drainage area that reaches a receiving water body or subsurface. During dry weather it is typically comprised of base flow either contaminated with pollutants or uncontaminated, and nuisance flows.

(mm) “Significant redevelopment” means land-disturbing activity that results in the creation or addition or replacement of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of impervious surface area on an already developed site.

(nn) “Site” means the land or water area where any “facility or activity” is physically located or conducted, including adjacent land used in connection with the facility or activity.

(oo) “Source control BMP” means any schedule of activities, prohibition of practices, maintenance procedures, managerial practices or operational practices that aim to prevent storm water pollution by reducing the potential for contamination at the source of pollution.

(pp) “Standard Urban Storm Water Mitigation Plan” or “SUSMP” means the current version of the Standard Urban Storm Water Mitigation Plan approved by the Regional Board, and on file in the office of the City Clerk of this City, and the NPDES Permit models that have been approved by the Executive Officer of the Regional Board for implementation to control storm water pollution from new development and redevelopment or any project specifically identified in CMC 5809(a).

(qq) “Storm water runoff” shall mean that part of precipitation (rainfall or snowmelt) which travels via flow across a surface to the MS4 or receiving waters from impervious, semi-pervious or pervious surfaces. When all other factors are equal, runoff increases as the perviousness of a surface decreases.

(rr) “Structural BMP” means any structural facility designed and constructed to mitigate the adverse impacts of storm water and urban runoff pollution (e.g., canopy, structural enclosure). Structural BMPs may include both treatment control BMPs and source control BMPs.

(ss) “Treatment” means the application of engineered systems that use physical, chemical, or biological processes to remove pollutants. Such processes include, but are not limited to, filtration, gravity settling, media adsorption, biodegradation, biological uptake, chemical oxidation and UV radiation.

(tt) “Treatment control BMP” means any engineered system designed to remove pollutants by simple gravity settling of particulate pollutants, filtration, biological uptake, media adsorption or any other physical, biological, or chemical process.

(uu) “Urban runoff” shall mean surface water flow produced by nonstorm water resulting from residential, commercial, and industrial activities involving the use of potable and nonpotable water. (Ord. 96-1101, § 1; Ord. 01-1221U, §§ 2, 3, 4; Ord. 02-1257, §§ 1 – 4; Ord. 02-1258U, §§ 1 – 4)

5804 Construction and Application.
This Chapter shall be construed to assure consistency with the requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act and acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto, applicable implementing regulations, and the Municipal NPDES Permit, and any amendment, revision or reissuance thereof. (Ord. 96-1101, § 1)

5805 Prohibited Activities.
(a) Illicit Discharges and Connections. It is prohibited to commence, establish, use, maintain, or continue any Illicit Connections to the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System or any Illicit Discharges to the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System. This prohibition against Illicit Connections applies to the use, maintenance, or continuation of any illicit connection, whether that connection was established prior to, or after the effective date of this Chapter.

(b) Littering. It is prohibited to throw, deposit, place, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown, deposited, placed, left, or maintained or kept, any refuse, rubbish, garbage, or any other discarded or abandoned objects, articles or accumulations, in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain, inlet, catch basin conduit or drainage structure, business place, or upon any private plot of land in the City, so that the same might be or become a pollutant. No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream, or other body of water within the City. This subsection shall not apply to refuse, rubbish or garbage deposited in containers, bags or other appropriate receptacles which are placed in designated locations for regular solid waste pick up and disposal.

(c) Disposal of Landscape Debris. It is prohibited to dispose of leaves, dirt, or other landscape debris into the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System.

(d) Nonstorm Water Discharges. The following Nonstorm Water Discharges into the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System are prohibited unless in compliance with a separate NPDES Permit or pursuant to a discharge exemption by the Regional Board, the Regional Board’s Executive Officer, or the State Water Resources Control Board:

(1) The discharge of untreated wash waters to the MS4 when gas stations, auto repair garages, or other type of automotive service facilities are cleaned;

(2) The discharge of untreated wastewater to the MS4 from mobile auto washing, steam cleaning, mobile carpet cleaning, and other such mobile commercial and industrial operations;

(3) To the maximum extent practicable, discharges to the MS4 from areas where repair of machinery and equipment, including motor vehicles, which are visibly leaking oil, fluid or antifreeze, is undertaken;

(4) Discharges of untreated runoff to the MS4 from storage areas of materials containing grease, oil, or other hazardous substances, and uncovered receptacles containing hazardous materials;

(5) Discharges of commercial/municipal swimming pool filter backwash to the MS4;

(6) Discharges of untreated runoff from the washing of toxic materials from paved or unpaved areas to the MS4; provided, however, that nonindustrial and noncommercial activities which incidentally generate urban runoff, such as the hosing of sidewalks, and the noncommercial handwashing of cars, shall be excluded from this prohibition;

(7) To the maximum extent practicable, discharges to the MS4 from washing impervious surfaces in industrial/commercial areas which results in a discharge of untreated runoff to the MS4, unless specifically required by State’s, or the City’s, or Los Angeles County’s health and safety codes, or permitted under a separate NPDES permit;

(8) Discharges from the washing out of concrete trucks into the MS4;

(9) Discharges to the MS4 of any pesticide, fungicide, or herbicide, banned by the USEPA or the California Department of Pesticide Regulation; or

(10) The disposal of hazardous wastes into trash containers used for municipal trash disposal where such disposal causes or threatens to cause a direct or indirect discharge to the MS4.

(e) Discharges in Violation of the Municipal NPDES Permit. Any discharge that would result in or contribute to a violation of the Municipal NPDES Permit, either separately or in combination with other discharges, is prohibited. Liability for any such discharge shall be the responsibility of the person(s) causing or responsible for the discharge, and such person(s) shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City from all losses, liabilities, claims, or causes of actions in any administrative or judicial action relating to such discharge. (Ord. 96-1101, § 1)

5806 Exempted Discharges, Conditionally Exempted Discharges or Designated Discharges.
Discharges from those activities specifically identified in, or pursuant to, Part 2, Section II.C of the Municipal NPDES Permit as being Exempted Discharges, Conditionally Exempted Discharges, or Designated Discharges shall not be considered a violation of this Chapter; provided, that any applicable BMP’s developed pursuant to the Municipal NPDES Permit are implemented to minimize any adverse impacts from such identified sources. (Ord. 96-1101, § 1)

5807 Good Housekeeping Provisions.
Owners and occupants of property within the City shall comply with the following requirements:

(a) Septic Waste. No person shall leave, deposit, discharge, dump, or otherwise expose any chemical or septic waste to precipitation in an area where a discharge to City streets or MS4 may or does occur.

(b) Use of Water. Runoff of water used for irrigation purposes shall be minimized to the maximum extent practicable. Runoff of water from the permitted washing down of paved areas shall be minimized to the maximum extent practicable.

(c) Storage of Materials, Machinery, and Equipment. Machinery or equipment that is to be repaired or maintained in areas susceptible to or exposed to storm water, shall be placed in a manner so that leaks, spills and other maintenance-related pollutants are not discharged to the MS4.

(d) Removal and Disposal of Debris from Industrial/Commercial Motor Vehicle Parking Lots. Industrial/commercial motor vehicle parking lots with more than twenty-five (25) parking spaces that are located in areas potentially exposed to storm water shall be swept regularly or other equally effective measures shall be utilized to remove debris from such parking lots.

(e) Food Wastes. Food wastes generated by nonresidential food service and food distribution sources shall be properly disposed of and in a manner so such wastes are not discharged to the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System.

(f) Best Management Practices. Best Management Practices shall be used in areas exposed to storm water for the removal and lawful disposal of all fuels, chemicals, fuel and chemical wastes, animal wastes, garbage, batteries, or other materials which have potential adverse impacts on water quality. (Ord. 96-1101, § 1)

5808 Requirements for Industrial/ Commercial and Construction Activities.
Each industrial discharger, discharger associated with construction activity, or other discharger described in any general storm water permit addressing such discharges, as may be issued by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the State Water Resources Control Board, or the Regional Board shall comply with all requirements of such permit. Each discharger identified in an individual NPDES permit shall comply with and undertake all activities required by such permit. Proof of compliance with any such permit may be required in a form acceptable to the City Manager or designated representative, prior to the issuance of any grading, building or occupancy permits, or any other type of permit or license issued by the City. (Ord. 96-1101, § 1)

5809 Storm Water Pollution Control Measures for New Development and Redevelopment Projects.
(a) Low Impact Development. The Planning and Land Development Program is a compliance component under Municipal NPDES Permit. Subject new development and redevelopment projects are required to comply with the following conditions: (1) low impact development (LID) structural and nonstructural best management practices (BMPs); (2) source control BMPs; and (3) structural and nonstructural BMPs for specific types of uses. LID controls effectively a reduced area of impervious area for a project site and promotes the use of infiltration and other controls that reduce runoff. Source control BMPs prevent runoff contact with pollutant materials that would otherwise be discharged to the MS4. Specific controls are also required to address pollutant discharges from certain uses including but not limited to housing developments, retail gasoline outlets, automotive-related facilities, restaurants, and industrial and commercial facilities where pollutant materials are disposed, stored, or handled.

(b) Storm Water Management/Watershed Management Program. The City’s storm water management program (SWMP) or watershed management program (WMP), whichever is in effect at the time of review, is hereby incorporated by reference and shall contain specific conditions and procedures for meeting Planning and Land Development Program. The program plans shall reference guidance documents to facilitate compliance, including, but not limited to, an updated Los Angeles County BMP guidebook, Los Angeles County Low Impact Development manual, and USEPA’s Green Street guidance manual. These guidebooks and manuals shall be made available for review by the public in the Public Works Department office.

(c) Applicability. The following development and redevelopment projects, termed “planning priority projects,” shall comply with the requirements of this Section and the Municipal NPDES Permit:

(1) All development projects equal to one (1) acre or greater of disturbed area and adding more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of impervious surface area;

(2) Industrial parks ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more of impervious surface area;

(3) Commercial malls ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more of impervious surface area;

(4) Retail gasoline outlets five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of impervious surface area;

(5) Restaurants (Standard Industrial Classification (“SIC”) 5812) five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of impervious surface area;

(6) Parking lots five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of impervious surface area, or with twenty-five (25) or more parking spaces;

(7) Street and road construction of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more of impervious surface area;

(8) Automotive service facilities (SIC 5013, 5014, 5511, 5541, 7532 through 7534 and 7536 through 7539) five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of surface area;

(9) Redevelopment projects in subject categories that meet redevelopment thresholds identified in subsection (d) of this Section;

(10) Projects located in or directly adjacent to, or discharging directly to a significant ecological area (SEA), where the development will:

(i) Discharge storm water runoff that is likely to impact a sensitive biological species or habitat; and

(ii) Create two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet or more of impervious surface area;

(11) Single-family hillside homes;

(12) Redevelopment projects:

(i) Land-disturbing activity that results in the creation or addition or replacement of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of impervious surface area on an already developed site on planning priority project categories.

(ii) Where redevelopment results in an alteration to more than fifty (50) percent of impervious surfaces of a previously existing development, and the existing development was not subject to post-construction storm water quality control requirements, the entire project must be mitigated.

(iii) Where redevelopment results in an alteration of less than fifty (50) percent of impervious surfaces of a previously existing development, and the existing development was not subject to post-construction storm water quality control requirements, only the alteration must be mitigated, and not the entire development.

(iv) Redevelopment does not include routine maintenance activities that are conducted to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, original purpose of facility or emergency redevelopment activity required to protect public health and safety. Impervious surface replacement, such as the reconstruction of parking lots and roadways which does not disturb additional area and maintains the original grade and alignment, is considered a routine maintenance activity. Redevelopment does not include the repaving of existing roads to maintain original line and grade.

(v) Existing single-family dwelling and accessory structures are exempt from the redevelopment requirements unless such projects create, add, or replace ten thousand (10,000) square feet of impervious surface area.

(13) Any other project as deemed appropriate by the City.

(d) Storm Water Pollution Control Requirements. The site for every planning priority project shall be designed to control pollutants, pollutant loads, and runoff volume to the maximum extent feasible by minimizing impervious surface area and controlling runoff from impervious surfaces through infiltration, evapotranspiration, bioretention and/or rainfall harvest and use.

(1) A new single-family hillside home development shall include mitigation measures to:

(i) Conserve natural areas;

(ii) Protect slopes and channels;

(iii) Provide storm drain system stenciling and signage;

(iv) Divert roof runoff to vegetated areas before discharge unless the diversion would result in slope instability; and

(v) Direct surface flow to vegetated areas before discharge, unless the diversion would result in slope instability.

(2) Street and road construction of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more of impervious surface shall follow USEPA guidance regarding Managing Wet Weather with Green Infrastructure: Green Streets (December 2008 EPA-833-F-08-009) to the maximum extent practicable.

(3) The remainder of planning priority projects shall prepare a LID plan subject to City review and approval to comply with the following:

(i) Retain storm water runoff on site for the Storm Water Quality Design Volume (SWQDv) defined as the runoff from:

(A) The eighty-fifth percentile twenty-four (24) hour runoff event as determined from the Los Angeles County eighty-fifth percentile precipitation isohyetal map; or

(B) The volume of runoff produced from a three-quarter (0.75) inch, twenty-four (24) hour rain event, whichever is greater.

(ii) Minimize hydromodification impacts to natural drainage systems as defined in the Municipal NPDES Permit. Hydromodification requirements are further specified in the Low Impact Development design manual.

(iii) When, as determined by the City, one hundred (100) percent on-site retention of the SWQDv is technically infeasible, partially or fully, the infeasibility shall be demonstrated in the submitted LID plan. The technical infeasibility may result from conditions that may include, but are not limited to:

(A) The infiltration rate of saturated in-situ soils is less than three-tenths (0.3) inch per hour and it is not technically feasible to amend the in-situ soils to attain an infiltration rate necessary to achieve reliable performance of infiltration or bioretention BMPs in retaining the SWQDv on site;

(B) Locations where seasonal high groundwater is within five (5) to ten (10) feet of surface grade;

(C) Locations within one hundred (100) feet of a groundwater well used for drinking water;

(D) Brownfield development sites or other locations where pollutant mobilization is a documented concern;

(E) Locations with potential geotechnical hazards;

(F) Smart growth and infill or redevelopment locations where the density and/or nature of the project would create significant difficulty for compliance with the on-site volume retention requirement.

(iv) If partial or complete on-site retention is technically infeasible, the project site may biofiltrate one and one-half (1.5) times the portion of the remaining SWQDv that is not reliably retained on site. Biofiltration BMPs must adhere to the design specifications provided in the Municipal NPDES Permit.

(A) Additional alternative compliance options such as off-site infiltration may be available to the project site. The project site should contact the City to determine eligibility. Alternative compliance options are further specified in the LID impact design manual.

(v) The remaining SWQDv that cannot be retained or biofiltered on site must be treated on site to reduce pollutant loading. BMPs must be selected and designed to meet pollutant-specific benchmarks as required per the Municipal NPDES Permit. Flow-through BMPs may be used to treat the remaining SWQDv and must be sized based on a rainfall intensity of:

(A) Two-tenths (0.2) inches per hour; or

(B) The one (1) year, one (1) hour rainfall intensity as determined from the most recent Los Angeles County isohyetal map, whichever is greater.

(vi) A “multi-phased project” may comply with the standards and requirements of this Section for all of its phases by: (a) designing a system acceptable to the City to satisfy these standards and requirements for the entire site during the first phase, and (b) implementing these standards and requirements for each phase of development or redevelopment of the site during the first phase or prior to commencement of construction of a later phase, to the extent necessary to treat the storm water from such later phase. For purposes of this Section, “multi-phased project” shall mean any planning priority project implemented over more than one (1) phase and the site of a multi-phased project shall include any land and water area designed and used to store, treat or manage storm water runoff in connection with the development or redevelopment, including any tracts, lots, or parcels of real property, whether developed or not, associated with, functionally connected to, or under common ownership or control with such development or redevelopment.

(e) Issuance of Discretionary Permits. No discretionary permit may be issued for any new development or redevelopment project identified in subsection (c) of this Section until the authorized enforcement officer confirms that either project plans must comply with the applicable LID requirements.

(f) Issuance of Certificates of Occupancy. As a condition for issuing a Certificate of Occupancy for a new development or redevelopment project identified in subsection (c) of this Section, the authorized enforcement officer shall require facility operators and/or owners to build all the storm water pollution control Best Management Practices and structural or treatment control BMPs that are shown on the approved project plans and to submit a signed certification statement stating that the site and all structural or treatment control BMPs will be maintained in compliance with the LID and other applicable regulatory requirements.

(g) Transfer of Properties Subject to Requirement for Maintenance of Structural and Treatment Control BMPs.

(1) The transfer or lease of a property subject to a requirement for maintenance of structural and treatment control BMPs shall include conditions requiring the transferee and its successors and assigns to either (i) assume responsibility for maintenance of any existing structural or treatment control BMP, or (ii) to replace existing structural or treatment control BMPs with new control measures or BMPs meeting the then current standards of the City. Such requirement shall be included in any sale or lease agreement or deed for such property. The condition of transfer shall include a provision that the successor property owner or lessee conduct maintenance inspections of all structural or treatment control BMPs at least once a year and retain proof of inspection.

(2) For residential properties where the structural or treatment control BMPs are located within a common area which will be maintained by a homeowner’s association, language regarding the responsibility for maintenance shall be included in the project’s conditions, covenants and restrictions (CC&Rs). Printed educational material will be required to accompany the first deed transfer to highlight the existence of the requirement and to provide information on what storm water management facilities are present, signs that maintenance is needed, and how the necessary maintenance can be performed. The transfer of this information shall also be required with any subsequent sale of the property.

(3) If structural or treatment control BMPs are located within an area proposed for dedication to a public agency, they will be the responsibility of the developer until the dedication is accepted.

(i) CEQA. Provisions of this Section shall be complementary to, and shall not replace, any applicable requirements for storm water mitigation required under the California Environmental Quality Act. (Ord. 14-1537, § 1)

5810 Enforcement.
(a) Violations Deemed a Public Nuisance.

(1) Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of:

(i) Any of the provisions of this Chapter; or

(ii) Any failure to comply with any applicable requirement of either the SUSMP or an approved Storm Water Mitigation Plan with respect to a property; or

(iii) Any false certification or verification, or any failure to comply with a certification or verification provided by a project applicant or the applicant’s successor in interest; or

(iv)  Any failure to properly operate and maintain any structural or treatment control BMP on a property in accordance with an approved Storm Water Mitigation Plan or the SUSMP;

is hereby determined to be a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, is declared and deemed a public nuisance, and may be abated or restored by any authorized enforcement officer, and a civil or criminal action to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be brought by the City Prosecutor.

(2) The cost of such abatement and restoration shall be borne by the owner of the property and the cost thereof shall be invoiced to the owner of the property, as provided by law or ordinance for the recovery of nuisance abatement costs.

(3) If any violation of this Chapter constitutes a seasonal and recurrent nuisance, the City Manager shall so declare. The failure of any person to take appropriate annual precautions to prevent storm water pollution after written notice of a determination under this paragraph shall constitute a public nuisance and a violation of this Chapter.

(b) Concealment. Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any provision of this Chapter shall constitute a violation of such provision.

(c) Civil Actions. In addition to any other remedies provided in this Section, any violation of this Section may be enforced by civil action brought by the City. In any such action, the City may seek, as appropriate, any or all of the following remedies:

(1) A temporary and/or permanent injunction.

(2) Assessment of the violator for the costs of any investigation, inspection, or monitoring survey which led to the establishment of the violation, and for the reasonable costs of preparing and bringing legal action under this subsection.

(3) Costs incurred in removing, correcting, or terminating the adverse effects resulting from violation.

(4) Compensatory damages for loss or destruction to water quality, wildlife, fish and aquatic life.

(d) Administrative Enforcement Powers. In addition to the other enforcement powers and remedies established by this Chapter, any authorized enforcement officer has the authority to utilize the following administrative remedies:

(1) Cease and Desist Orders. When an authorized enforcement officer finds that a discharge has taken place or is likely to take place in violation of this Chapter, the officer may issue an order to cease and desist such discharge, or practice, or operation likely to cause such discharge and direct that those persons not complying shall: (a) comply with the requirement, (b) comply with a time schedule for compliance, and (c) take appropriate remedial or preventive action to prevent the violation from recurring.

(2) Notice to Clean. Whenever an authorized enforcement officer finds any oil, earth, debris, grass, weeds, dead trees, tin cans, rubbish, refuse, waste or any other material of any kind, in or upon the sidewalk abutting or adjoining any parcel of land, or upon any parcel of land or grounds, which may result in pollutants entering the Municipal Storm Drain System or a nonstorm water discharge to the MS4, he or she may give notice to the owner or occupant of the adjacent property to remove such oil, earth, debris, grass, weeds, dead trees, tin cans, rubbish, refuse, waste or other material, in any manner that he or she may reasonably provide. The recipient of such notice shall undertake the activities as described in the notice.

(e) Penalties. Violation of this Chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor as provided in CMC 1200(a). Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.

(f) Permit Revocation. To the extent the City makes a provision of this Chapter or any identified BMP a condition of approval to the issuance of a permit or license, any person in violation of such condition is subject to the permit revocation procedures set forth in this Code.

(g) Remedies. Remedies under this Chapter are in addition to and do not supersede or limit any and all other remedies, civil or criminal. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. (Ord. 96-1101, § 1; Ord. 01-1221U, §§ 5, 6. Formerly 5809)

5811 No Taking.
The provisions of this Chapter shall not be construed or operate to deprive any property owner of substantially all of the market value of such owner’s property or otherwise constitute an unconstitutional taking without compensation. (Ord. 96-1101, § 1; Ord. 01-1221U, § 5. Formerly 5810)

CHAPTER 9
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY REPORT
Sections:

§ 5900    Short Title.

§ 5901    Definitions.

§ 5902    Required.

§ 5903    Proof of Delivery.

§ 5904    Application.

§ 5905    Issuance.

§ 5906    Scope of Inspection.

§ 5907    Contents.

§ 5908    Duration.

§ 5909    Remediation of Property.

§ 5910    Refunds, Fees and Penalties.

§ 5911    Validity of Transactions.

§ 5912    City Immunity.

§ 5913    Exemptions.

5900 Short Title.
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Residential Property Report Ordinance. (Ord. 99-1155, § 2)

5901 Definitions.
As used in this Chapter, unless the context otherwise clearly indicates, the following words and phrases are defined as set forth below:

(a) “Residential care facility” shall have the same meaning as the term is used in California Health and Safety Code Section 1520.5.

(b) “Director” shall mean the Community Development Director or the designee thereof.

(c) “Owner” shall mean any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, association, joint stock company, corporation or combination thereof having legal or equitable title in residential real property.

(d) “Residential property report” shall mean a document issued by the City pursuant to this Chapter.

(e) “Residential real property” shall mean improved or unimproved real property zoned or used for dwelling purposes and shall include any structures or buildings located on such property.

(f) “Agreement” shall mean any agreement providing for the transfer of title or conveyance of ownership in residential real property.

(g) “Beneficiary” means a lender under a promissory note to pay money secured by a deed of trust on property. The word “beneficiary” as used in this Chapter means and includes any assignee or successor to such beneficiary, whether such assignee or successor acquires its interest in the beneficiary’s promissory note either before a note of default is recorded. In the event that a property may provide security for the loan or obligation of more than one (1) beneficiary, the beneficiary who causes its notice of default to be recorded shall be responsible for registering the property as set forth in this Chapter. (Ord. 99-1155, § 2; Ord. 99-1173U, § 3; Ord. 13-1510, § 7)

5902 Required.
(a) No owner of residential real property shall transfer title and/or convey ownership of a residential care facility without first providing the prospective buyer with a copy of a valid residential property report for the property.

(b) No person shall commence operation of a residential care facility on residential real property without first obtaining a residential property report for such property.

(c) No person shall renew a business license for an existing residential care facility operating on residential real property without first obtaining a residential property report for such property; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to any residential care facility that has previously obtained a residential property report for such property.

(d) Foreclosed Vacant Residential Property.

A. The beneficiary or its agent shall register the property with the Chief Building Official, on forms provided by the City, within ten (10) days from the earlier of the following dates: (i) the date a notice of default is recorded on a property; or (ii) the date of a default inspection which indicates that the property is vacant or abandoned. The provisions of subsection (d)(A)(i) of this Section shall apply to each property for which a notice of default is recorded on or after July 31, 2010.

B. Property which is acquired by a beneficiary following the recordation of a notice of default, whether acquired by such beneficiary by foreclosure, deed in lieu of foreclosure or judgment of foreclosure, shall also be subject to compliance with the provisions of this Section, upon the sale, exchange, transfer or other conveyance of such property by the beneficiary to a third person.

C. Property which is vacant or abandoned at the time of acquisition by a beneficiary, whether acquired by such beneficiary by foreclosure, deed in lieu of foreclosure or judgment of foreclosure, shall also be subject to compliance with the provisions of this Section, prior to the earlier date of either: (i) re-occupancy of such property by any tenant of the beneficiary; or (ii) sale, exchange, transfer or other conveyance of such property by the beneficiary to a third person.

a. Property which is occupied by either the trustor or a tenant of the trustor at the time of acquisition by a beneficiary, whether acquired by such beneficiary by foreclosure, deed in lieu of foreclosure or judgment of foreclosure, shall also be subject to compliance with the provisions of this Section prior to the earlier date of either: (i) the re-occupancy of such property by any successor tenant to the trustor or such other successor tenant to the tenant in possession of the property at the time of the beneficiary’s acquisition of the property; or (ii) sale, exchange, transfer or other conveyance of such property by the beneficiary to a third person.

(e) Re-Registration of Property Subject to This Chapter.

A. The beneficiary or its agent shall annually renew a registration of each property which the beneficiary has previously registered with the City under this Chapter, and in which such beneficiary retains either an equitable or legal interest as of the first anniversary of the registration of such property with the City. The beneficiary or its agent shall re-register the property on forms provided by the City.

B. The provisions of this subsection (e) of this Section shall apply to each property for which a notice of default was recorded on or after October 1, 2009.

(f) Special Provisions Where Property Is Encumbered with the Security Interests of Multiple Beneficiaries.

A. In the event that a property is encumbered by the security interests of more than one beneficiary at the time when a notice of default is recorded, the beneficiary who causes a notice of default for its security interest to be recorded shall be responsible for registering the property with the City as provided in this Section and CMC 5910.

B. Upon the recordation of a notice of default on a property by any beneficiary, regardless of the security lien interest priority of such beneficiary in the property in relation to the priority of the security interests of the other beneficiaries in the same property, the City in its discretion may elect to enforce the provisions of this Chapter against one (1) or more beneficiaries who have not separately recorded a notice of default against the property.

(g) Notice by Beneficiary to City of Disposition of Registered Property.

A. Within ten (10) days following the release of a notice of default and the reinstatement of the loan of the trustor, the beneficiary or its agent shall give the City written notice of such release and reinstatement.

B. Within ten (10) days following the sale, transfer or their conveyance to a third person of a property registered with the City under this Chapter, the beneficiary or its agent shall give the City written notice of such sale, transfer or other conveyance together with current contact information for such bona fide purchaser/successor in interest to the beneficiary in such property. (Ord. 99-1155, § 2; Ord. 99-1173U, § 4; Ord. 13-1510, §§ 8 – 10, 14; Ord. 19-1933, § 4)

5903 Proof of Delivery.
Within ten (10) City business days after transfer of title or conveyance of ownership for residential real property, the owner(s) of such property shall file with the Community Development Department written proof that a copy of a valid residential property report for such property has been provided to the buyer. This Section may be satisfied by either (i) personal delivery; (ii) facsimile and deposit in the U.S. mail so as to be postmarked within the ten (10) day filing period; or (iii) deposit in the U.S. mail so as to be postmarked within the ten (10) day filing period. Such written proof shall be signed and dated by the buyer and shall contain the substance of the following statement: “I hereby acknowledge under penalty of perjury that I have received a copy of the City of Carson’s residential property report for the property located at _____________ (address). I also acknowledge that the issuance of the report is not a representation by the City of Carson that this property is in compliance with all applicable laws.” (Ord. 99-1155, § 2; Ord. 99-1173U, § 7)

5904 Application.
Applications for a residential property report shall be filed with the Community Development Department on a form provided by the Director. Each application shall indicate whether or not the owner (i) consents to an inspection of the residential real property by City personnel, and (ii) has made appropriate arrangements with any affected tenants. No application shall be accepted unless accompanied by an application fee in an amount established by City Council resolution. (Ord. 99-1155, § 2; Ord. 99-1173U, § 5)

5905 Issuance.
Upon receipt of a complete application, the Director shall prepare a residential property report based on available City records and an inspection of the residential real property. Residential property reports shall be issued within ten (10) City business days following inspection of the subject property. (Ord. 99-1155, § 2; Ord. 99-1173U, § 6)

5906 Scope of Inspection.
Except as specified in this Section, inspections conducted in conjunction with the preparation of a residential property report shall be limited to the exterior areas of the subject property and to the interior areas of attached garages and/or accessory buildings such as detached garages, laundry rooms and storage sheds. If the Director has reasonable cause to believe that a main dwelling unit has been illegally subdivided, then an interior inspection of such building shall be conducted. Interior inspections also shall be conducted as necessary to determine whether portions of the building were constructed with the proper permits and whether window security bars are equipped with a proper release mechanism. If the applicant refuses to consent to an inspection, or frustrates an inspection for which consent was given, then the inspection shall be conducted pursuant to an inspection warrant as required by law. (Ord. 99-1155, § 2)

5907 Contents.
To the extent such information is available, residential property reports issued by the Director shall indicate all of the following:

(a) Street address, assessor number, zone classification and permitted occupancy.

(b) Description of existing structures and buildings.

(c) Applicable entitlements (e.g., variance, conditional use permit).

(d) Applicable special restrictions.

(e) Existing code violations.

(f) Building permits required for existing structures and buildings.

The Director may include any additional information on a residential property report as deemed appropriate. (Ord. 99-1155, § 2)

5908 Duration.
Residential property reports shall be null and void six (6) months after the date of issuance unless previously extended by the Director. The Director may extend the validity of a residential property report, free of charge, for a period of four (4) months upon a showing of good cause. (Ord. 99-1155, § 2)

5909 Remediation of Property.
(a) All code violations identified on a residential property report shall be corrected in accordance with the following schedule, unless otherwise authorized by the Director: (i) prior to the transfer of title or conveyance of ownership for such property; (ii) prior to the commencement of a residential care facility on such property; or (iii) for existing residential care facilities renewing a business license, within forty-five (45) days from the issuance of such report.

(b) The Director may authorize an extension of the time periods prescribed by this Section upon a showing of good cause; provided, however, that in no event shall code violations identified on a residential property report be permitted to remain uncorrected more than one (1) calendar year from the issuance of such report.

(c) The buyer of a residential real property may assume responsibility for correcting code violations identified on a residential property report upon a showing to the satisfaction of City staff that such buyer: (i) is capable, financially and otherwise, of making the corrections; (ii) has consented in writing to a compliance schedule; and (iii) has entered into such security agreement or undertaking, if any, as may be required by City staff to ensure that the violations will be correct within the time permitted by the compliance schedule. (Ord. 99-1155, § 2; Ord. 99-1173U, § 8)

5910 Refunds, Fees and Penalties.
(a) By resolution, the City Council may establish such fees as necessary or appropriate for the implementation of this Chapter.

(b) The City shall refund seventy-five (75) percent of the residential property report application fee if (i) an application is withdrawn prior to the close of the City business day following its submission; and (ii) City staff have not conducted any inspection or research in connection with the application. No refunds shall be awarded after the close of the City business day following submission of a residential property report application.

(c) Any owner who submits a residential property report application after the transfer of title or conveyance of ownership for the subject property shall pay, in addition to the application fee, a late penalty fee in an amount established by City Council resolution.

(d) Any residential property report applicant who fails to appear for a scheduled inspection, or who cancels a scheduled inspection less than twenty-four (24) hours prior to commencement, shall pay an inspection cancellation fee in an amount established by City Council resolution.

(e) Fees and charges for the administration of the regulatory program established by this Chapter shall be set by resolution of the City Council including without limitation the fee for registering with the City a property for which a notice of default has been recorded, and the separate fee for registering with the City a property which either the beneficiary or the City has found to be vacant or abandoned.

(f) Fine for Failure to Timely Register a Property with the City.

A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter or Chapter 1 or 7 of Article V to the contrary, the City may impose a fine on a beneficiary for its failure to timely register a property with the City under this Chapter in the following amounts:

(i) Two hundred and fifty dollars for the first violation in the twelve (12) months preceding the date of such violation;

(ii) Five hundred dollars for the second violation in the twelve (12) months preceding the date of such violation;

(iii) One thousand dollars for the third and each subsequent violation in the twelve (12) months preceding the date of such violation.

B. The special fine amount provisions of this Section shall be applicable to citations issued on or after March 1, 2013, by the City under Chapter 7 of Article V to a beneficiary for a violation of this Chapter. (Ord. 99-1155, § 2; Ord. 99-1173U, § 9; Ord. 13-1510, §§ 11, 13)

5911 Validity of Transactions.
No sale or transfer of title of residential real property or lease of residential real property for a residential care facility shall be invalidated solely because of a failure to comply with this Chapter. (Ord. 99-1155, § 2; Ord. 99-1173U, § 10)

5912 City Immunity.
The City shall not be liable for any injury or damage caused by the preparation and delivery of a residential property report, or as a result of an error in or omission of such a report. Nor shall the City bear any liability not otherwise imposed by law. (Ord. 99-1155, § 2)

5913 Exemptions.
The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to the following:

(a) The first sale of a residential building or condominium located in a subdivision whose final map has been approved and recorded in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act within two (2) years of such sale.

(b) Mobilehomes in mobilehome parks, trailers and apartment units on a month-to-month rental or annual lease agreement where land sales are not involved and the use is in compliance with this Code.

(c) Transfers in which the City is a party to the transaction.

(d) Transfers pursuant to court order.

(e) Repealed by Ord. 13-1510.

(f) Transfers by a fiduciary in the course of the administration of a guardianship, conservatorship or trust.

(g) Transfers between co-owners.

(h) Transfers between spouses resulting from a marriage dissolution decree, a legal separation decree or from a property settlement incidental to such decree.

(i) Transfers by the State Controller in the course of administering the unclaimed property law.

(j) Transfers to a governmental entity.

(k) Transactions solely for the purpose of refinancing existing debt secured by the residential real property.

(l) Transfers into a family trust or living trust where the owner is the beneficiary or trustee of the trust. (Ord. 99-1155, § 2; Ord. 99-1173U, §§ 11, 12; Ord. 13-1510, § 12)

CHAPTER 10
WATER CONSERVATION AND SUSTAINABILITY MEASURE
Sections:

§ 51000    Title.

§ 51001    Findings.

§ 51002    Declaration of Purpose and Intent.

§ 51003    Definitions.

§ 51004    Application.

§ 51005    Permanent Water Conservation Measures – Preventing Waste.

51000 Title.
This Chapter will be known as the City of Carson water conservation and sustainability measure. (Ord. 09-1433, § 1)

51001 Findings.
(a) A reliable minimum and sustainable supply of potable water is essential to the public health, safety and welfare of the people and economy of the City of Carson and the Southern California region.

(b) Southern California is a semi-arid region and is largely dependent upon imported water supplies. A growing population, climate change, environmental concerns, and other factors in other parts of the State and western United States make the region highly susceptible to water supply reliability issues.

(c) Careful water management that includes active water conservation measures not only in times of drought, but at all times, is essential to ensure a reliable minimum supply of water to meet current and future water supply needs.

(d) Chapter XI, Section 7 of the California Constitution declares that a city or county may make and enforce within its limits all local, police, sanitary and other ordinances and regulations not in conflict with general laws.

(e) Chapter X, Section 2 of the California Constitution declares that the general welfare requires that water resources be put to beneficial use, waste or unreasonable use or unreasonable method of use of water be prevented, and conservation of water be fully exercised with a view to the reasonable and beneficial use thereof.

(f) The adoption of water conservation and sustainability measures is necessary to reduce the supply of potable water in the short and long term and to avoid or minimize the effects of drought and shortage within the City. Such program is essential to ensure a reliable and sustainable minimum supply of water for the public health, safety and welfare for current and future generations. (Ord. 09-1433, § 1)

51002 Declaration of Purpose and Intent.
(a) The purpose of this Chapter is to establish a water conservation and sustainability program that provides guidelines and standards for the reduction of water consumption within the City through conservation, assure reasonable and beneficial use of water, prevent waste of water, and maximize the efficient use of water within the City to avoid and minimize the effect and hardship of a water shortage to the greatest extent possible.

(b) This Chapter establishes permanent water conservation standards intended to alter behavior related to water use efficiency. (Ord. 09-1433, § 1)

51003 Definitions.
The following words and phrases whenever used in this Chapter have the meaning defined in this Section:

(a) “Allocation” means a form of water rationing that uses penalty pricing to achieve target reductions in water use.

(b) “City” means the City of Carson.

(c) “Conservation” means the practice of protecting against the loss or waste of natural resources.

(d) “User” means a person or business that uses potable water through a metered service connection.

(e) “Landscape irrigation system” means an irrigation system with pipes, hoses, spray heads, or sprinkling devices that are operated by hand or through an automated system.

(f) “Large landscape areas” means a lawn, landscape, or other vegetated area, or combination thereof, equal to more than one (1) acre of irrigable land.

(g) “Person” means any natural person or persons, corporation, public or private entity, governmental agency or institution, or any other user of water within the City.

(h) “Potable water” means water which is suitable for drinking.

(i) “Recycled water” means the reclamation and reuse of nonpotable water for beneficial use.

(j) “Single pass cooling systems” means equipment where water is circulated only once to cool equipment before being disposed.

(k) “Sustainability” means a decision-making concept describing water use that meets present needs without compromising the ability to meet future requirements. (Ord. 09-1433, § 1)

51004 Application.
(a) The provisions of this Chapter apply to any users in the use of any potable water in the City.

(b) The provisions of this Chapter do not apply to users of water necessary to protect public health and safety or for essential government services, such as police, fire, or other similar emergency services.

(c) The provisions of this Chapter do not apply to the use of recycled water.

(d) The provisions of this Chapter do not apply to the use of water by commercial nurseries and commercial growers to sustain plants, trees, shrubs, crops or other vegetation intended for commercial sale.

(e) This Chapter is intended solely to further the conservation of water. It is not intended to implement any provision of Federal, State, or local statutes, ordinances, or regulations relating to protection of water quality or control of drainage or runoff. (Ord. 09-1433, § 1)

51005 Permanent Water Conservation Measures – Preventing Waste.
(a) Recirculating Water Required for Water Fountains and Decorative Water Features. Operating a water fountain or other decorative water feature that does not use recirculated water is prohibited.

(b) Commercial Car Wash Systems. Effective on January 1, 2012, all commercial conveyor car wash systems must have installed and operational recirculating water systems, or must have secured a waiver of this requirement from the City.

(c) Large Landscape Areas – Rain Sensors. It is recommended that effective January 1, 2012, large landscape areas, such as parks, cemeteries, golf courses, school grounds, and playing fields, that use landscape irrigation systems to water or irrigate, use landscape irrigation systems with rain sensors that automatically shut off such systems during periods of rain or irrigation timers which automatically use information such as evapotranspiration sensors to set an efficient water use schedule.

(d) Construction Purposes. Recycled or other approved nonpotable water must be used for construction purposes when available.

(e) Single Pass Cooling Systems. Installation of single pass cooling systems is prohibited in buildings requesting new water service.

(f) Nonrecirculating Water System in Commercial Car Wash and Laundry Systems. Installation of nonrecirculating water systems is prohibited in new commercial conveyor car wash and new commercial laundry systems. (Ord. 09-1433, § 1)

 

ARTICLE VI
TAXES AND LICENSES
Chapters:

1    Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance

2    Uniform Real Property Transfer Tax Ordinance

3    Business, Professions and Trades

3.5    Oil Industry Business License Tax

4    Transient Occupancy Tax

4.5    Repealed

5    Taxicab Regulation

6    Video Service Franchises

7    Bingo for Charitable Purposes

8    Pipeline Franchises

9    Spur Track Franchises

11    Utility Users Tax

13    Cannabis Tax

15    Commercial Cannabis Operations Regulatory Program

17    Personal Cannabis Cultivation

CHAPTER 1
UNIFORM LOCAL SALES AND USE TAX ORDINANCE
Sections:

§ 6100    Short Title.

§ 6101    Rate.

§ 6102    Operative Date.

§ 6103    Purpose.

§ 6104    Contract with State.

§ 6105    Sales Tax.

§ 6106    Place of Sale.

§ 6107    Use Tax.

§ 6108    Adoption of Provisions of State Law.

§ 6109    Limitations on Adoption of State Law.

§ 6110    Permit Not Required.

§ 6111A    Exclusions and Exemptions.

§ 6111B    Exclusions and Exemptions.

§ 6112    Amendments.

§ 6113    Enjoining Collection Forbidden.

§ 6114    Penalties.

§ 6115    Severability.

§ 6116    Repeals.

§ 6117    Repealed.

6100 Short Title.
This Chapter shall be known as the Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance. (Ord. 2, § 6100; Ord. 8, § 1; Ord. 73-272, § 1)

6101 Rate.
The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this Chapter shall be one (1) percent. (Ord. 2, § 6101; Ord. 8, § 1; Ord. 73-272, § 1)

6102 Operative Date.
This Chapter shall be operative on January 1, 1974. (Ord. 2, § 6102; Ord. 8, § 1; Ord. 73-272, § 1)

6103 Purpose.
The City Council hereby declares that this Chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

(a) To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

(b) To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

(c) To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes;

(d) To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting City sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 2, § 6103; Ord. 8, § 1; Ord. 73-272, § 1)

6104 Contract with State.
Prior to the operative date, this City shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax ordinance; provided, that if this City shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this Chapter. (Ord. 2, § 6104; Ord. 8, § 1; Ord. 73-272, § 1)

6105 Sales Tax.
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the City at the rate stated in CMC 6101 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this City on and after the operative date. (Ord. 2, § 6105; Ord. 8, § 1; Ord. 73-272, § 1)

6106 Place of Sale.
For the purposes of this Chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the State sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the State or has more than one (1) place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (Ord. 2, § 6106; Ord. 8, § 1; Ord. 73-272, § 1)

6107 Use Tax.
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the City of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this City at the rate stated in CMC 6101 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to State sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 2, § 6107; Ord. 8, § 1; Ord. 73-272, § 1)

6108 Adoption of Provisions of State Law.
Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this Chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 8, § 1; Ord. 73-272, § 1)

6109 Limitations on Adoption of State Law.
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this City shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word “State” is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the City, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this Chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the State under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the State under the said provisions of that Code; the substitution shall not be made in Section 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797, or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word “State” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this State” in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Ord. 2, § 6108; Ord. 8, § 1; Ord. 73-272, § 1)

6110 Permit Not Required.
If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required by this Chapter. (Ord. 2, § 6110; Ord. 8, § 1; Ord. 73-272, § 1)

6111A Exclusions and Exemptions.*
(a) The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the State of California upon a retailer or consumer.

(b) The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city, in this State shall be exempt from the tax due under this Chapter.

(c) There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the City in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government.

(d) In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. (Ord. 2, § 6111; Ord. 8, § 1; Ord. 73-272, § 1; Ord. 83-674U, § 1)

*Editor’s Note: Section 3 of Ordinance No. 83-674U provides that this Section shall be operative January 1, 1984.

6111B Exclusions and Exemptions.**
(a) The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the State of California upon a retailer or consumer.

(b) The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city, in this State shall be exempt from the tax due under this Chapter.

(c) There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the City in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes.

(d) The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax.

(e) There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the City in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government.

(f) In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. (Ord. 73-272, § 1; Ord. 83-674U, § 2)

**Editor’s Note: Section 4 of Ordinance No. 83-674U provides that this Section shall be operative on the operative date of any act of the Legislature of the State of California which amends Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code or which repeals and reenacts Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code to provide an exemption from city sales and use taxes for operators of waterborne vessels in the same, or substantially the same, language as that existing in subdivisions (i) (7) and (i) (8) of Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code as those subdivisions read on October 1, 1983.

6112 Amendments.
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this Chapter. (Ord. 2, § 6112; Ord. 8, § 1; Ord. 73-272, § 1; Ord. 83-674U, § 1)

6113 Enjoining Collection Forbidden.
No injunction of writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the State or this City, or against any officer of the State or this City, to prevent to enjoin the collection under this Chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 73-272, § 1; Ord. 83-674U, § 1)

6114 Penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment for a period not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 73-272, § 1; Ord. 83-674U, § 1)

6115 Severability.
If any provision of this Chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the ordinance and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 73-272, § 1; Ord. 83-674U, § 1)

6116 Repeals.
Present Chapter 1 of Article VI of the Carson Municipal Code entitled “Uniform Sales and Use Tax Ordinance” is hereby repealed; provided, however, that said Chapter shall remain applicable for the purposes of the administration of said Chapter and the imposition of and the collection of tax with respect to the sale of, and the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property prior to January 1, 1974, the making of refunds, effecting credits, the disposition of monies collected, and for the commencement or continuance of any action or proceeding under said Chapter. (Ord. 73-272, § 1; Ord. 83-674U, § 1)

6117 Credit for Taxes Due to the Carson Redevelopment Agency.
Repealed by Ord. 12-1483U. (Ord. 93-1025, § 1)

CHAPTER 2
UNIFORM REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX ORDINANCE
Sections:

§ 6200    Title.

§ 6201    Imposition of Tax.

§ 6202    Payment.

§ 6203    Exception – Security.

§ 6204    Exception – Governmental Agencies.

§ 6205    Exception – Miscellaneous Proceedings.

§ 6206    Exception – Securities and Exchange Commission.

§ 6207    Partnerships.

§ 6208    Administration by County Recorder.

§ 6209    Claims for Refund.

6200 Title.
This Chapter shall be known as the “Uniform Real Property Transfer Tax Ordinance of the City of Carson.” It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California. (Ord. 4, § 1)

6201 Imposition of Tax.
There is hereby imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the City of Carson shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds $100.00, a tax at the rate of $0.275 for each $500.00 or fractional part thereof. (Ord. 4, § 1)

6202 Payment.
Any tax imposed pursuant to CMC 6201 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any documents or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. (Ord. 4, § 1)

6203 Exception – Security.
Any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. (Ord. 4, § 1)

6204 Exception – Governmental Agencies.
The United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, or the District of Columbia shall not be liable for any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter with respect to any deed, instrument, or writing to which it is a party, but the tax may be collected by assessment from any other party liable thereof. (Ord. 4, § 1)

6205 Exception – Miscellaneous Proceedings.
Any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan or reorganization or adjustment:

(a) Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;

(b) Approved in any equity receivership proceedings in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title II of the United States Code, as amended;

(c) Approved in an equity receivership proceedings in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title II of the United States Code, as amended; or

(d) Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected.

Subdivisions (a) to (d), inclusive of this Section shall only apply if the making, delivering or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occur within five (5) years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change. (Ord. 4, § 1)

6206 Exception – Securities and Exchange Commission.
Any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if:

(a) The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyances is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utilities Holding Company Act of 1935;

(b) Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed;

(c) Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. (Ord. 4, § 1)

6207 Partnerships.
(a) In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this Chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if:

(1) Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and

(2) Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.

(b) If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this Chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination.

(c) Not more than one (1) tax shall be imposed pursuant to this Chapter by reason of a termination described in subdivision (b), and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. (Ord. 4, § 1)

6208 Administration by County Recorder.
The County Recorder shall administer this Chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 4, § 1)

6209 Claims for Refund.
Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California. (Ord. 4, § 1)

CHAPTER 3
BUSINESS, PROFESSIONS AND TRADES
Sections:

Part 1. General Provisions and Definitions

§ 6300    Short Title.

§ 6301    Effect of Chapter on Past Actions and Obligations.

§ 6302    Effect of Chapter on Other Ordinance and Laws.

§ 6303    Definitions.

Part 2. Licenses – Provisions Governing

§ 6310    License Required.

§ 6311    Contents of License.

§ 6312    Unlawful Business.

§ 6313    Substitute for Other Provisions.

§ 6314    License Fee Collector.

§ 6315    No License Issued Where Applicant Is Indebted to City.

§ 6316    License Not Transferable.

§ 6317    Duplicate License Fees.

§ 6318    License Fee a Debt.

§ 6319    License Fee Payable in Advance.

§ 6320    Investigations and Inspections.

§ 6321    Preparation and Issuance of Licenses.

§ 6322    Errors in Issuance of Licenses.

§ 6323    Licenses for More than One (1) Business.

§ 6324    Branch Business Establishments – Multiple Licenses.

§ 6325    License Fees – Due Dates.

§ 6326    Delinquency and Penalties – License Fees.

§ 6327    Repealed.

§ 6328    Posting and Keeping License.

§ 6329    Denial of License.

§ 6330    Enforcement Duty.

§ 6331    Enforcement – Inspection – Complaints.

§ 6332    Enforcement Accountant.

§ 6333    Enforcement Remedies.

§ 6334    Deputy License Collectors.

§ 6335    Terms of Licenses.

§ 6336    Application.

§ 6337    Renewal License Application.

§ 6338    License or Renewal License.

§ 6339    General Exemptions.

§ 6340    Limited Exemptions.

§ 6341    Certain Exemptions Under Federal, State or Local Law or Ordinance.

§ 6342    Exempt Licenses to be Endorsed.

§ 6343    Adoption of Regulations by Finance Director.

§ 6344    Statements and Records.

§ 6345    Information Confidential.

§ 6346    Failure to File Statement or Corrected Statement.

§ 6347    Appeal.

§ 6348    Evidence of Doing Business.

§ 6349    Refunds of Overpayment.

§ 6350    Permit Prerequisite.

§ 6351    Additional Powers of the City Manager.

§ 6352    Revenue Measure.

Part 3. License Fees

§ 6360    License Fees – Adoption.

§ 6361    Vending Machines – Fee Collection.

§ 6362    Vending Machines – Identification.

§ 6363    Amusement and Entertainment Machines – Identification.

Part 4. Permit Procedure

§ 6370    Permit Required for Certain Businesses.

§ 6371    Permit Required for Certain Businesses – Separate.

§ 6372    Other Businesses Not Enumerated.

§ 6373    Unlawful Businesses.

§ 6374    Application.

§ 6375    Permit Fee.

§ 6376    Granting or Refusal of Permit.

§ 6377    Real Party in Interest.

§ 6378    Change of Interest.

§ 6379    Change of Advertised Name.

§ 6380    Change in Directors.

§ 6381    Same – Conditions.

§ 6382    Investigation.

§ 6383    Revocation – Suspension – Grounds.

§ 6384    Suspension or Revocation – Capping.

§ 6385    Appeal – Initiation – Contents of Notice of Appeal.

§ 6385.1    Notice of Deficiency.

§ 6385.2    Transmission of Factual Data.

§ 6385.3    Hearing on Appeal – Notice.

§ 6385.4    Hearing.

§ 6385.5    Hearing – Decision.

§ 6385.6    Notice of Decision.

§ 6386    Proof of Notice.

§ 6387    No License to Be Issued.

§ 6388    New License Required.

§ 6389    False Statements.

§ 6390    Posting.

§ 6391    Annual Renewal.

§ 6392    Nontransferability.

§ 6393    Nonprofit Organizations.

§ 6394    Permit Fees – Due Dates.

§ 6395    Delinquencies and Penalties – Permit Fees.

§ 6396    Additional Powers of the City Manager.

Part 5. Businesses, Professions, Trades and Occupations Requiring a Permit

§ 63100    Permit Required.

§ 63101    Advertising – Search Lights.

§ 63102    Advertising – Sound Trucks.

§ 63103    Ambulance Operator.

§ 63103.1    Same – Inspection.

§ 63103.2    Same – Attendant Required.

§ 63103.3    Same – Inspection of Equipment.

§ 63103.4    Same – Return of License Plate.

§ 63103.5    Same – Regulations.

§ 63103.6    Same – Rates.

§ 63103.7    Same – Rebates.

§ 63104    Ambulance Attendant.

§ 63105    Ambulance Driver.

§ 63106    Amusement Center or Arcade.

§ 63107    Amusement and Game Machines.

§ 63107.1    Same – Regulations.

§ 63107.2    Same – Transfer Fee.

§ 63107.3    Same – Penalties.

§ 63108    Auctioneers – Applications.

§ 63108.1    Auctioneers – Bond.

§ 63108.2    Auctioneer – Exceptions.

§ 63109    Auction House – Applications.

§ 63109.1    Auction House – Bond.

§ 63110    Auction – Private Residences.

§ 63111    Auction – Goods of One (1) Person.

§ 63112    Auto Body and Fender Shop.

§ 63113    Repealed.

§ 63114    Auto Painting.

§ 63115    Auto Repair Shop.

§ 63115.1    Auto Repair Shop – Inspection of Records.

§ 63115.2    Same – Itemized Statement.

§ 63115.3    Same – Secondhand Parts.

§ 63115.4    Same – Signs.

§ 63115.5    Same – Revocation of Permit.

§ 63115.6    Auto Repairs – Service Station.

§ 63116    Bath Parlors.

§ 63117    Billiard and Pool Halls.

§ 63117.1    Billiard and Pool Halls – Disorderly Persons.

§ 63117.2    Billiard and Pool Halls – Minors.

§ 63117.3    Billiard and Pool Halls – Obstruction of Entrance.

§ 63117.4    Billiard and Pool Halls – Exceptions.

§ 63117.5    Billiard and Pool Halls – Rules and Regulations.

§ 63118    Bookstores, Including Mail Order Bookstores.

§ 63119    Carnival – Application.

§ 63119.1    Same – Conditions of Permit.

§ 63120    Circuses – Similar Operations.

§ 63121    Dance – Application.

§ 63121.1    Same – Application for Special Dance.

§ 63121.2    Same – Application for Youth Dance.

§ 63121.3    Same – General Regulations.

§ 63121.4    Same – Private Club.

§ 63121.5    Same – Exceptions.

§ 63121.6    Same – Youth Dance Permits.

§ 63121.7    Same – Intoxicated Persons.

§ 63121.8    Same – Refusal to Leave.

§ 63125    Entertainment.

§ 63125.1    Same – Hours.

§ 63125.2    Same – Minors.

§ 63125.3    Same – Free Entrances.

§ 63125.4    Same – Entertainment Class II.

§ 63125.5    Same – Entertainer Permit.

§ 63125.6    Same – Fashion Shows.

§ 63125.7    Same – Standards.

§ 63125.8    Same – Special Conditions or Requirements.

§ 63125.9    Same – Regulations for Nude or Semi-Nude (Class II) Entertainment.

§ 63125.10    Same – Permit Prohibited.

§ 63125.11    Same – Permit Required for Nude or Semi-Nude Entertainer.

§ 63125.12    Same – Regulations – Penalties.

§ 63126    Exhibitions – Shows.

§ 63127    Explosives.

§ 63127.5    Filming.

§ 63127.6    Filming – Definitions.

§ 63127.7    Filming – Permit Required.

§ 63127.8    Filming – Permit Application.

§ 63127.9    Filming – Permit Rider.

§ 63127.10    General Requirements for Filming Permits.

§ 63127.11    Filming – Traffic Control.

§ 63127.12    Filming – Insurance.

§ 63127.13    Police, Fire and Other City Personnel.

§ 63127.14    Nonprofit and Student Filming.

§ 63127.15    Filming – Permit Denial or Revocation.

§ 63127.16    Filming – Notification and Appeals.

§ 63128    Fireworks – Retail.

§ 63129    Fireworks – Wholesale – Storage.

§ 63129.2    Fortune-Telling and Similar Practices.

§ 63129.5    Gun Dealer.

§ 63130    House and Street Numbering.

§ 63130.10    Hypnotism.

§ 63131    Junk Collector – Junk Dealer.

§ 63132    Laundries and Dry Cleaners – Self Service.

§ 63133    Locksmith.

§ 63134    Massage Parlors.

§ 63134.1    Same – Eligibility.

§ 63134.2    Same – Design Standards.

§ 63134.3    Same – Performance Standards.

§ 63134.4    Same – Exception.

§ 63134.5    Repealed.

§ 63134.6    Repealed.

§ 63134.7    Repealed.

§ 63134.8    Repealed.

§ 63134.9    Repealed.

§ 63135    Massage Technicians.

§ 63135.1    Same – Application.

§ 63135.2    Same – Qualifications.

§ 63135.3    Same – Definition.

§ 63135.4    Same – Exception.

§ 63136    Mobile Home Parks.

§ 63137    Motion Picture Theater.

§ 63138    Motor Vehicle Rental.

§ 63139    Patrol System.

§ 63139.1    Same – Application.

§ 63139.2    Repealed.

§ 63139.3    Same – Investigation by Chief of Police.

§ 63139.4    Same – Terms of Permit.

§ 63139.5    Same – Application to Modify.

§ 63139.6    Same – Personnel.

§ 63139.7    Same – Permit Not to Be Sold.

§ 63140    Repealed.

§ 63140.1    Same – Application.

§ 63140.2    Same – Badge – Change of Employer.

§ 63140.3    Same – Illegal Activities.

§ 63140.4    Same – Equipment and Uniform.

§ 63140.5    Same – Identification Regulations.

§ 63140.6    Same – Reports.

§ 63141    Pawnbroker, Junk Dealer, Salvage Dealer, Secondhand Dealer, Swap Meet Operator, and Certain Auctioneers – Regulations.

§ 63142    Mobile Food Vendors.

§ 63143    Peddlers – Sidewalk Vendors.

§ 63143.1    Same – Exceptions.

§ 63143.10    Pony Rides, Kiddie and Amusement Rides.

§ 63144    Photograph Solicitors.

§ 63145    Rebound Tumbling Center – Operation Requirements.

§ 63145.1    Same – Rules and Regulations.

§ 63145.2    Same – Supervision.

§ 63145.3    Same – Qualifications of Supervisors.

§ 63145.4    Same – Handling and Reporting Accidents.

§ 63145.5    Same – Facilities and Equipment.

§ 63145.6    Same – Restoration of Premises and Bond.

§ 63146    Salvage or Junk Dealer.

§ 63147    Second Hand Dealers.

§ 63147.5    Skateboard Center or Skating Rink.

§ 63148    Solicitor.

§ 63148.1    Same – Application.

§ 63148.2    Same – Investigation.

§ 63148.3    Same – Permit.

§ 63148.4    Same – Principal Permit.

§ 63148.5    Same – Unlawful Activity.

§ 63148.6    Same – Definitions.

§ 63148.7    Charitable Solicitations – Permit Required.

§ 63148.8    Same – Exemptions.

§ 63148.9    Same – Application for Permit.

§ 63148.10    Same – Investigation.

§ 63148.11    Same – Issuance of Permit.

§ 63148.12    Same – Renewal of Permit by the Director of Finance.

§ 63148.13    Same – Form of Permit.

§ 63148.14    Same – Term of Permits.

§ 63148.15    Same – Permit Nontransferable.

§ 63148.16    Same – Identification Card.

§ 63148.17    Same – Denial of Permits.

§ 63148.18    Same – Revocation of Permits.

§ 63148.19    Same – Appeals from Action of the Director of Finance.

§ 63148.20    Same – Notice of Suspension or Revocation.

§ 63148.21    Same – Books and Records.

§ 63148.22    Same – Report Required for Permit Holder.

§ 63148.23    Same – Manner of Solicitation.

§ 63148.24    Same – Time of Solicitation.

§ 63148.25    Same – Written Receipts Required.

§ 63148.26    Same – Fraudulent Misrepresentation.

§ 63148.27    Same – Authority of the Director of Finance.

§ 63148.28    Same – Penalties.

§ 63149    Sound Vehicles.

§ 63149.1    Same – Permit.

§ 63149.2    Same – Registration Statement.

§ 63149.3    Same – Possession of Copy of Registration Statement.

§ 63149.4    Same – Regulation of Use.

§ 63150    Street Vendors.

§ 63150.5    Tobacco and Electronic Cigarette Permit – Purpose.

§ 63150.5.1    Definitions.

§ 63150.5.2    Requirements for Tobacco and Electronic Cigarette Permit.

§ 63150.5.3    Application Procedure.

§ 63150.5.4    Issuance and Renewal of Permit.

§ 63150.5.5    Permits Not Transferable.

§ 63150.5.6    Display of Permit.

§ 63150.5.7    Permit Fee.

§ 63150.5.8    Permit Violation – Compliance Monitoring.

§ 63150.5.9    Permit Compliance Incentives.

§ 63150.5.10    Suspension or Revocation of Permit.

§ 63150.5.11    Notification and Appeals.

§ 63151    Tow Truck.

§ 63152    Trash, Solid Waste, Recyclable Materials – Collection.

§ 63152.1    Same – Exclusions.

§ 63153    Waste Disposal Sites – Permit Required.

§ 63153.1    Same – Requisites for Permit.

§ 63153.2    Same – Bond.

§ 63153.3    Same – Amount of Bond.

Part 1. General Provisions and Definitions

6300 Short Title.
Chapter 3 of Article VI of the Carson Municipal Code may be cited as the “Business License Ordinance” of the City of Carson. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

6301 Effect of Chapter on Past Actions and Obligations.
Neither the adoption of this Chapter nor the repeal hereby of any ordinance or provision of the Carson Municipal Code shall in any manner affect any prosecution for any violation of ordinance or code committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license or penalty due and unpaid on the effective date hereof, or of any remedy for enforcement thereof and all rights and obligations pertaining thereto shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

6302 Effect of Chapter on Other Ordinance and Laws.
This Chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with any ordinance or provision of the Carson Municipal Code except as herein specifically provided. Where this Chapter imposes a greater restriction upon persons, premises or property than is imposed or required by another ordinance, other provisions of this Code, or law, the provisions of the Business License Ordinance shall apply or control to the full extent permitted by law. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

6303 Definitions.
For the purpose of the Business License Ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivation shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word “shall” is mandatory and not merely directory. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Ambulance Driver” shall mean any person who drives an ambulance in which is transported any person needing medical attention which person entered or was placed in such ambulance at a location within the City of Carson. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Ambulance Operator” shall mean any person who for any monetary or other consideration, or as an incident to any other occupation, transports persons in one (1) or more ambulances from any location in the City of Carson to any hospital or other place giving first aid or medical treatment, regardless of the location of such hospital or other place. A person who maintains an ambulance or ambulances in connection with the operation by such person of a hospital or first aid station solely for the use of his own employees is not considered to be an ambulance operator. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

 “Apartment House” shall mean any building or portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied, or which is occupied as a home or residence of three (3) or more families living independently of each other and doing their own cooking in the said building, and shall include flats and apartments. (Ord. 77-401, § 1)

“Auction House” shall mean and include a fixed place of business where any personal property or any real property or interest therein, is sold or offered for sale by public outcry or public auction. An Auction House may include sales of such merchandise and personal property as an incidental part of such public auction business. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Auctioneer” shall mean and include any person selling or offering for sale any real or personal property at public auction or by public outcry. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Automobile Dismantling” shall mean the disassembling, dismantling or wrecking of motor vehicles, as defined in Section 415 of the California Vehicle Code, or the buying, selling or dealing in any such motor vehicles for the purpose of, or to be used for, such disassembling, dismantling or wrecking, or the storage of any such motor vehicles for such purpose or use, whether for the purpose of dealing in the parts thereof, or using such parts for reconditioning or repair of other vehicles, or for selling or otherwise dealing in such vehicles, or any parts or materials thereof. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Automobile Repair Shop” shall mean any place where motor vehicles, as defined by Section 415 of the California Vehicle Code, are repaired for a charge, or, any place where the work of repairing motor vehicles is carried on as an incident to the business of selling new or used motor vehicles, or new or used motor vehicles parts, or as an incident to any other traffic in motor vehicles or their parts or equipment. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Average Number of Persons Employed,” when the annual license fee is based upon the average number of persons employed, shall mean the average number of employees, as defined herein, employed daily in the business of the applicant or licensee, and shall be determined as provided in CMC 6363. (Ord. 71-161)

“Bankrupt Sales” means the business of owning, opening, establishing, managing, operating, maintaining or having charge of any temporary location or place of business of any kind for the selling of any insolvent, bankrupt, fire damaged or other similar goods, wares, or merchandise, and/or any temporary place where itinerant or transient merchants sell or offer to sell any insolvent, bankrupt, fire damaged or other similar goods, wares or merchandise. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Bath Parlor” shall mean a place where water, mud, steam Turkish, Russian, Swedish, or other baths are given to or administered to human beings. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Builder” shall mean a person constructing, reconstructing or erecting a building, dwelling, or structure not intended for his own occupancy. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Billiard Room” includes “pool room” and means any place open to the public where billiards, bagatelle, or pool table is kept and persons are permitted to play thereon, whether any compensation or reward is charged for the use of such table. “Billiard Room” does not include a place having not more than one (1) standard size pool or billiard table or three (3) three and one-half (3-1/2) foot by seven (7) foot or less pool or billiard tables which are maintained as an incidental activity to some other type of business or activity. (Ord. 71-161, § 2; Ord. 72-241, § 1)

“Business, Professions and Trades” as used herein includes all kinds of vocations, occupations, professions, enterprises, establishments, and all other kinds of activities and matters, together with all devices, machines, vehicles and appurtenances used therein, any of which are conducted for object of gain, benefit or advantage, whether direct or indirect, to the taxpayer or to another or others whether or not a profit or livelihood is actually earned thereby. Business, professions and trades shall include, but shall not be limited to, trades and occupations of all and every kind of calling carried on within the City of Carson, salesmen, brokers, retailers, manufacturers, processors, wholesalers, vendors, suppliers, peddlers, professions, the renting or supplying of living quarters, or rooms, or board, or both for three (3) or more guests, tenants, or occupiers and any other types of endeavor entered into within the City of Carson for object of gain, benefit or advantage, whether direct or indirect to the taxpayer or to another or others, or profit in whole or in part whether paid for in money, goods, labor, or otherwise and whether or not said business, profession or trade has a fixed place of business in the City.

Unless exempted by provisions of this Chapter, a person shall be deemed to be conducting a business, profession or trade within the City if he, or his agents, or employees offer, solicit, sell, contract, construct, make, deliver, repair, or perform other acts or services within the City in respect to such business, trade or profession.

The term “business, profession or trades” shall not apply to any person engaged in a business, profession or trade solely as an employee of any other person conducting, managing or carrying on any such business, trade or profession in the City and where such other person is subject to the terms and provisions of this Chapter.

Additionally, in any dispute between a city, city and county or county and a taxpayer, the manner in which a taxpayer reports or reported income to the Franchise Tax Board or Internal Revenue Service shall create a presumption regarding whether the taxpayer performed services for an employer as an employee, or operated as a business entity.

The term “engaged in business” shall mean the conducting, operating, managing or carrying on of a business, whether done as owner, or by means of an officer, agent, manager or employee. A person shall be deemed engaged in business with the City if:

(1) Such person or his employee maintains a fixed place of business within the City for the benefit or partial benefit of such person; or

(2) Such person or his employee owns or leases real property within the City for business purposes; or

(3) Such person or his employee regularly maintains a stock of tangible personal property in the City for sale in the ordinary course of business; or

(4) Such person or his employee regularly conducts solicitation of business within the City; or

(5) Such person or his employee performs work or renders services on a regular and continuous basis involving not less than seven (7) working days per year for all such employees; or

(6) Such person or his employee utilizes the streets within the City in connection with the operation of motor vehicles for business purposes.

The foregoing specified activities shall not be a limitation on the meaning of “engaged in business.” (Ord. 06-1342, § 2)

“Certified Farmer” shall mean any person or entity possessing certification by the California Department of Food and Agriculture to operate as a certified farmer and is engaged in the business of selling fruits, vegetables, plants and other agricultural items produced by them, on a seasonal, temporary or intermittent basis, at any City authorized and permitted Farmers’ Market. (Ord. 10-1458, § 2)

“Circus” shall mean and include any tent or canvas enclosure wherein are exhibited acts or feats of horsemanship, trained animals, clown, acrobatic or trapeze performances or such other forms of skill or amusements as are commonly given in rings, and combinations of such entertainments. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“City” shall mean the City of Carson unless otherwise specified. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Code” shall mean the Carson Municipal Code unless otherwise specified. (Ord. 71-161, § 6303.17)

“Commence” shall mean and include commence, begin, initiate, start, open and establish. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Commission Broker or Merchant” means and includes any person who engages in, carries on or conducts the business of buying or selling produce, foodstuffs or any food product, commodities, goods, wares or merchandise as a broker or agent for the owner or assignor thereof, for a fee or commission, whether or not the operation of such business customarily includes the actual possession, custody or control of such produce, foodstuffs or any food product, commodities, goods, wares or merchandise. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Conduct” shall mean and include commence, transact, maintain, prosecute, practice, do, operate and carry on. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Chief of Police” shall mean the Chief of Police of the City of Carson and shall include the Sheriff of the County of Los Angeles or his duly authorized officers, deputies and representatives, while performing law enforcement services under contract with the City. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Contractor” shall mean any person except a licensed architect or a registered civil engineer acting solely in his professional capacity, who in any capacity other than as the employee of another with wages or salary as his sole compensation, undertakes to, or offers to undertake, or purports to have the capacity to undertake to, or submits a bid to, or does himself or by or through others construct, alter, repair, add to, subtract from, improve, move, wreck, or demolish any building, highway, road, railroad, excavation, or other structure, project, development, improvement, or any part thereof, including the erection of scaffolding or other structures or work in connection therewith. Contractor shall include subcontractor or specialty contractor, but shall not include anyone who merely furnishes materials or supplies without fabricating them into, or consuming them in the performance of, the work of the contractor. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Dance Hall, Public,” means a place where dancing is permitted, either for profit or not for profit, and to which the public is admitted either with or without charge, or at which the public is allowed to participate in the dancing, either with or without charge. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Dance, Public,” means a gathering of persons in or upon any premises where dancing is permitted either as the main purpose for such gathering or as an incident to some other purpose. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Dance, Private,” means a gathering of persons in or upon any premises where dancing is permitted either as the main purpose for such gathering or as an incident to some other purpose, and to which premises only members, pupils, or bona fide guests of a particular club, organization, dancing club, or dancing school are admitted; provided however, that dancing by the occupants of, and guests at, a private residence shall not constitute a private dance as defined herein. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Dance, Special,” means an individual public dance or private dance conducted by any person, dancing club, dancing school, or association of persons, dancing clubs or dancing schools, which dance, if authorized, will result in not more than three (3) such dances being held by such persons or group in any three (3) month period. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Dance, Youth,” means a public dance or a private dance to which persons under the age of twenty-one (21) years are admitted as participants. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Dancing Club” means any club or association of persons which conducts dances, other than public dances, for its members or bona fide guests. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Dancing School” means any school, class or classes wherein dancing is the principal subject taught. (Ord. 71-161, § 6303.33)

“Employee” shall mean all persons engaged in the operation or conduct of any business in the City of Carson, whether as owner, any member of the owner’s family, partner, agent, manager, solicitor, apprentices, trainees, and any and all other person employed or working in said business. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Entertainment” means any act, play, review, pantomime, fashion or style show, exhibition dancing scene, song, dance act, song and dance act, or exhibition of motion pictures conducted or participated in or upon any premises to which the public is admitted. Entertainment as used does not include:

(1) Mechanical music alone;

(2) Instrumental music alone;

(3) Dancing participated in only by customers;

(4) Fashion or style shows conducted by a bona fide nonprofit club or organization for charitable purposes. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Entertainment Class I” means entertainment not otherwise classified in this Chapter. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Entertainment Class II” means entertainment which includes nude or semi-nude persons. “Nude” means completely without clothing or covering. “Semi-nude” means with partial clothing or covering but with any pubic area exposed or with the perineum or any portion of the crease of the buttocks exposed, or with the breast or breasts exposed by a female so that the nipple or nipples or that portion of the breast which has a different pigmentation than the main portion of the breast is or are exposed. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Entertainment Class III” means any entertainment as defined under “Entertainment” (other than Class II) conducted or participated in only by any nonprofessional person or persons. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Established Business” shall mean and include a business intended to be operated or conducted permanently or indefinitely, or a business the nature or mode of operation of which indicates that the business operation will continue permanently or indefinitely. In all cases where the nature or mode of operation of a business does not indicate that such business will continue permanently or indefinitely, the person operating or conducting such business may be required by the City Administrator to present evidence reasonably necessary to demonstrate that such business is intended to be operated or conducted permanently or indefinitely. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Exhibition” or “Show” means and includes moving picture exhibitions, theatrical performances, carnivals, circuses, races, and other similar activities conducted in the open or at places of public assemblage as to which a fee is charged for entry or viewing, excluding therefrom entertainment as defined under “Entertainment,” “Entertainment Class I,” “Entertainment Class II,” and “Entertainment Class III,” animal menageries or exhibitions as defined in Sections 219 and 220 of the Animal Control Ordinance adopted by CMC 3300, and events conducted by schools or churches using their own equipment. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Farmer” shall mean any person selling farm products produced by them. (Ord. 10-1458, § 2)

“Farmers’ Market” as used in this Section is any temporary, intermittent or seasonal place of business approved by the City of Carson and properly permitted and licensed within the City of Carson to host certified farmers offering agricultural items for sale on a seasonal, temporary or intermittent basis. (Ord. 10-1458, § 2)

“Fire Chief” shall mean the Chief of the Los Angeles Consolidated Fire District and his authorized assistants, deputies, inspectors and representatives, while designated by the City Council of the City as the Fire Chief of the City. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Food” shall mean and include all articles and substances used for food, drink, confectionary or condiment by man, whether simple, mixed or compound. (Ord. 71-161, 52)

“Fortune-Telling” shall mean and include the business or art of telling fortunes, forecasting of future events, or furnishing of any information not otherwise obtainable by the ordinary process of knowledge, by means of any occult or psychic power, faculty or force, including, but not limited to clairvoyance, clairaudience, cartomancy, psychology, psychometry, phrenology, spirits, tea leaves or other such readings, mediumship, seership, prophecy, augury, astrology, palmistry, necromancy, mind-reading, telepathy, or other craft, art, science, cards, talisman, charm, potion, magnetism, magnetized article or substance, crystal gazing, oriental mysteries or magic, of any kind or nature, for any form of compensation. (Ord. 86-754, § 2)

  “Gardener” or “Gardening Service” shall mean any person or firm engaged in the business of landscape or garden maintenance and upkeep, such as cutting lawns, tending flower beds, putting in trees and shrubs, and other similar activities. This definition shall not include a landscape contractor licensed pursuant to the State Business and Professions Code to handle landscape contracting. (Ord. 76-377, § 1)

“Gun Dealer” is any person, firm, or corporation who sells or otherwise transfers to the public, any pistol, revolver or other firearm, new or used, capable of being concealed upon the person. “Gun Dealer” includes any person, firm or corporation who purchases, takes in trade, or accepts on consignment from the public, any firearm of any type, including, but not limited to, pistols, revolvers, rifles and shotguns. (Ord. 78-437)

“Hotel” is any building containing three (3) or more guest rooms intended or designed to be used, or which are used, rented or hired out to be occupied, or which are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests. (Ord. 77-401, § 1)

“Hypnotist” shall mean any person, except licensed psychologists, physicians, family, child and marriage counselors and qualified persons acting at the request of police agencies in the investigation of crimes, engaged in the art or practice of hypnosis or in the teaching of self-hypnosis for persons undergoing a course or program of avocational or vocational self-improvement, acting pursuant to and subject to the limitations and purposes of Section 2908 of the California Business and Professions Code, as amended. (Ord. 79-484, § 2)

“Itinerant Street Vendor” shall mean any person engaged in the business of vending, selling, or offering for sale, any confections, food, fruits, vegetables, flowers, notions, magazines, mechanical devices or appliances, or any other goods, wares, or merchandise from any stand, doorway or location on or adjacent to any street, alley, or other public place, or on or adjacent to any unenclosed vacant lot or parcel of land. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Junk Collector” or “Salvage Collector” shall mean any person having no fixed place of business in the City, carrying on the business of collecting, buying or selling from house to house, or from place to place, any old rags, sacks, bottles, cans, paper, metal or other articles commonly known as junk or salvage. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Junk Dealer” or “Salvage Dealer” shall mean any person not an automobile dismantler or operator or an oil tool exchange, having a fixed place of business in the City and carrying on the business of buying, selling or otherwise dealing in, either at wholesale or retail, any old rags, sacks, bottles, cans, paper, metal (except gold, silver, platinum or mercury), or other articles commonly known as junk or salvage, or conducting, managing or maintaining any place where such articles are gathered together, stored or kept for shipment, sale or transfer. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“License” shall mean the certificate issued by the Finance Director of the City after payment of the license fee provided for in Part 3 of this Chapter. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“License Supervisor” shall mean the License Supervisor of the City of Carson. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Locksmith” means any person engaging in the business, trade, or occupation of making or fashioning keys for locks or similar devices, or constructing, reconstructing or repairing or adjusting locks, or opening or closing locks for others by mechanical means other than the regular keys furnished for that purpose with the locks by the manufacturer of the locks. A person who only duplicates keys is not a locksmith. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Pawnbroker” means any person engaged in any one (1) or more of the following businesses:

(a) Pawnbroking;

(b) Lending money for himself or any other person upon personal property, pawns or pledges, in or taken into the possession of the lender;

(c) Purchasing articles of personal property and reselling or agreeing to resell such articles to the vendors or assignors at prices agreed upon at or before the time of such purchase. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Peddling” means and includes peddling, selling or offering to sell goods, wares or merchandise of any kind from place to place, other than from a fixed place of business, in or upon any private premises, including any dwelling, house, building, or other structure designed or used, either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, including any yard, ground, walk, driveway, porch, steps or vestibule of and to any such dwelling, house, building or other structure. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Permit” means that certificate granted by the City Council as a prerequisite to the issuance of a license, where required by the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

The term “Person” shall mean any individual, receiver, administrator, executor, assignee, trustee in bankruptcy, trust, estate, firm, partnership, joint venture, club, company, joint stock company, business trust, domestic or foreign corporation, association, syndicate, society or any group of individuals acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit or otherwise. (Ord. 06-1342, § 3)

“Public Eating Place” means and includes every restaurant, lunch room, tea room, coffee shop, soda fountain, public boarding house, hotel, club, beer parlor, cocktail lounge and every other public place where food or drinks are prepared or served, or both, to be consumed by the public either on or off the premises. “Public Eating Place” includes all places where sandwiches, lunches, or similar food are prepared for sale or gift to the public. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Purport to Commence” and/or “Purport to Conduct” shall mean and include such maintenance of the appearance of premises or such conduct or acts of the owner, occupant or manager thereof or the agents, servants, or employees of such person, as to be in a position to conduct or to create the appearance of conducting any business in the City. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

  “Real Estate Solicitor” means any person who in the course of, or as an incident to or part of such person’s business, occupation, trade or employment goes to any house or place or from house to house or from place to place in the City offering to buy, sell, exchange, take or give an option on, lease, rent or list, or soliciting the purchase, sale, exchange, lease, rental or listing of or an option on real property, irrespective of whether such person shall be a real estate broker, real estate salesman or an unlicensed person engaged in such business, occupation, trade or employment. A person performing one (1) such act in the course of or as an incident to or part of a person’s business, occupation, trade or employment shall be deemed to be a Real Estate Solicitor for the purposes of this Chapter. (Ord. 72-240; Ord. 72-249, § 1)

“Rifle Range” means any site where a rifle, pistol, revolver or shotgun is fired at clay pigeons and/or other targets. (Ord. 71-161, § 6303.58)

“Salvage Collector” is defined under “Junk Collector”. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Salvage Dealer” is defined under “Junk Dealer”. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Secondhand Dealer” is a person engaged in conducting, managing or carrying on the business of buying, selling or otherwise dealing in secondhand goods, wares, or merchandise, (including gold, silver, platinum or mercury, but excluding secondhand automobiles and books and such secondhand goods, wares or merchandise as are received as payment or part payment for a new article or articles sold by such person.) (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Skateboard Center” shall mean any establishment where persons pay for the privilege of skateboarding. (Ord. 78-444)

“Skating Rink” shall mean any establishment where persons pay for the privilege of ice skating or roller skating. (Ord. 78-444)

“Show” is defined under “Exhibition.” (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Soft Drinks” means beverages for human consumption containing less than 3.2 percent of alcohol by volume. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Solicitor” or “Canvasser” means any person who goes from house to house or from place to place in the City selling or taking orders for, or offering to sell or take orders for any goods, wares, merchandise, or any article for future delivery, or for any service to be furnished or performed in the future, or for the making, manufacturing, treating, or repairing of any article or thing whatsoever for future delivery. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Sound Amplifying Equipment” means any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music, or any other sound. “Sound Amplifying Equipment” shall not be construed as including standard automobile radios when used and heard only by occupants of the vehicle in which installed or warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles or horns or other warning devices on other vehicles used only for traffic safety purposes. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Subject to Special Application Procedure” means that the applicant for any license to which such words are made applicable shall, before receiving the license applied for, follow the procedure set forth in Part 4 of this Chapter. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Subject to Special Permit from the Council to Be First Obtained” shall mean that the Finance Director is not to issue any license to which such words relate or to which the same may be made applicable unless the City Council shall have first authorized either by motion or resolution, the issuance of such license. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Sworn Statement” shall mean an affidavit sworn to before a person authorized to take oaths, or a declaration or certification made under penalty of perjury. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Tax Collector” shall mean the Director of Finance of the City of Carson. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Tank Vehicle” shall mean any vehicle used to collect and transport or deliver flammable liquids or liquefied petroleum gases in connection with or as part of any business and for which operation a certificate of public convenience and necessity has been issued by the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Theatre” includes a building, playhouse, room, hall or other place having a permanent stage upon which movable scenery may be located and theatrical or vaudeville or similar performances are given, having permanently affixed seats so arranged that a body of spectators can have an unobstructed view of the stage, the primary function of which is to present such performances, and in which any serving of food or beverage is clearly incidental to such performances. This definition is not intended to detract from or supersede the provisions of Section 318.5 or 318.6 of the Penal Code of the State. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Trailer Parks” means and includes mobile home parks as defined in Part 2 of Division 13 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Vehicle” means every apparatus or device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, excepting boxes, trays or receptacles carried by hand and also excepting any apparatus or device used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, but including bicycles. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

“Vending Machine” shall mean any coin operated machine which dispenses goods, wares, merchandise, or other tangible property, and shall include weighing machines and devices for the playing of phonograph records. Vending machines shall not include pin ball machines, video, or electronic games or any other coin operated machine of skill. (Ord. 82-620, § 1)

“Wheeled Vehicles” shall mean and include every vehicle with wheels run, used, driven or operated for hire or otherwise, in the business of hauling, distributing, selling, receiving or delivering, within the City for resale or otherwise, personal property of any kind, nature or description; provided, however, that “wheeled vehicles,” unless otherwise provided, shall not include or apply to any person having a fixed place of business within the City which has been licensed under this Chapter and who in the usual course of such business uses a wheeled vehicle or vehicles for the delivery of personal property which has been sold from said fixed place of business. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

Part 2. Licenses – Provisions Governing

6310 License Required.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to commence or conduct, or purport to commence or conduct, either directly or indirectly, any business, profession, trade or occupation as defined in this Chapter within the City of Carson, whether or not said person has a fixed place of business within the City or elsewhere, without first having procured a license and paid the license fees required by the provisions of this Chapter, and without otherwise complying with all the terms and provisions of this Chapter. The commencement or carrying on of any such business, profession, trade or occupation without having first procured and maintained in good standing a business license, as well as a permit where required under this Chapter, or without first complying with any and all provisions and regulations pertaining to said business as provided in this Chapter, shall constitute a separate violation of this Code for each and every day said business, profession, trade or occupation is so carried on.

(b) It shall further be unlawful for any person to commence any business within a building in the City without first having obtained a Certificate of Occupancy from the City Building Department.

(c) Notwithstanding any provisions of this Chapter, no person holding a license issued by the State to carry on any trade, calling, profession, business or occupation shall be required to perform any act as a condition of the issuance of a license by the City under this Chapter except the payment of the City license fee and the preparation and filing of any papers or reports incidental to the administration and enforcement of this Chapter with respect to such payments. (Ord. 71-161, § 2; Ord. 82-620, § 2)

6311 Contents of License.
Every person required to have a license under the provisions of this Chapter shall make application for the same as hereinafter prescribed to the Finance Director of the City, and upon the payment of the prescribed license fee the Finance Director shall issue to such person a license which shall contain the following information:

(1) The name of the person to whom the license is issued;

(2) The business licensed;

(3) The place where such business is to be transacted and carried on;

(4) The date of expiration of such license; and

(5) Such other information as may be necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter.

Whenever the license fee imposed upon any one (1) business, trade, occupation or profession under the provisions of this Chapter is measured by the number of vehicles, devices, machines, or other pieces of equipment used, or whenever the license fee is measured by the average number of persons employed in the operation of or in relation to such items, the Finance Director shall issue only one (1) license therefor; provided, that he may issue for each license period for which the license fee has been paid one (1) identification sticker, tag, plate, or symbol for each item included in the measure of the fee or used in a business where the fee is measured by the average number of employees. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

6312 Unlawful Business.
No license issued under the provisions of this Chapter and no provision of this Chapter shall be construed as authorizing the conduct of or continuance of any illegal or unlawful business. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

6313 Substitute for Other Provisions.
Any person required by this Chapter to pay a license fee shall not be relieved from the payment of any license fee or permit fee required by any other provisions of this Code and shall not be relieved from any regulations required by other provisions of this Code. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

6314 License Fee Collector.
The Director of Finance or his authorized deputy shall serve as Tax Collector and Administrator of the Business License Ordinance. He shall formulate in writing all necessary rules and regulations to carry out the provisions of this Chapter, and in general shall do all things necessary and proper to carry out the spirit and intent of this Chapter. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

6315 No License Issued Where Applicant Is Indebted to City.
No business license shall knowingly be issued or renewed when, at the time of making application for any license or renewal thereof, the applicant is indebted to the City for any unpaid license fees, permit fees, transient occupancy taxes, service charges or unpaid invoices for any rates, fees or charges imposed pursuant to this Municipal Code. The Director of Finance may enter into an agreement with any person so indebted to the City to establish a schedule for the payment of such indebtedness and any delinquencies and interest thereon. In such agreement, the debtor shall acknowledge such debt to the City and shall agree that if any default occurs in the payment of any installment agreed to be paid thereunder, the entire amount to be paid shall become immediately due and payable, and that, if suit is brought to enforce collection of the amount agreed to be paid under such agreement, the debtor shall pay all costs of suit incurred by the City, including reasonable attorneys’ fees. If such an agreement is executed, and all other provisions of this Chapter are complied with, a license for the applicable license period may be issued to such person upon payment of the license fee prescribed for such license period, together with any penalties thereon. (Ord. 71-161, § 2; Ord. 93-1018, § 3)

6316 License Not Transferable.
No license issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be transferable; provided, that where a license is issued authorizing a person to conduct business at a particular location, such licensee may upon application therefor and payment of a fee in the amount established by resolution of the City Council have the license previously issued amended so as to authorize the conduct of such business from another location in lieu of such prior location, except as may otherwise be provided in this Chapter. (Ord. 71-161, § 2; Ord. 82-620, § 2)

6317 Duplicate License Fees.
A duplicate license may be issued by the Director of Finance to replace any license previously issued which has been lost or destroyed, upon application therefor and filing an affidavit or declaration attesting to such fact and payment to the Director of Finance of a fee in the amount established by resolution of the City Council therefor. (Ord. 71-161, § 2; Ord. 82-620, § 2)

6318 License Fee a Debt.
The amount of any license fee imposed by this Chapter, and of any penalty thereon, shall be deemed a debt to the City. Any person commencing or conducting any business without having a license to do so shall be liable in an action by the City in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of the license fee imposed by this Chapter with respect to such business. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

6319 License Fee Payable in Advance.
All license fees shall be paid in advance at the Office of the City Treasurer in lawful money of the United States of America or by check drawn on a bank in the United States. Any license issued upon payment by check shall be void if such check shall fail to clear the bank. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

6320 Investigations and Inspections.
The City Administrator shall, by Administrative Order, from time to time, designate the investigations and inspections required for particular businesses substantially in accordance with the following general guides:

(a) The Department of Community Development shall be required to review all applications, other than renewal applications, for compliance with the Zoning, Subdivision and other provisions of this Code within the responsibilities of said Department.

(b) The Division of Building and Safety shall review applications in circumstances involving a change of occupancy of any portion of a building, and in such other circumstances as may involve questions of compliance with City building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and other construction codes.

(c) The Fire Department shall review applications which involve businesses or premises which may constitute substantial fire risks, or any risks of serious danger to human life or property. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

(d) The Law Enforcement Agency shall review applications for businesses which affect public morals, involve substantial danger of fraud or deception, pose unusual police problems, may involve possible handling or receiving of stolen goods, tend to affect traffic control, involve public assembly, include police-type functions, or of a kind which tend to attract or involve undesirable persons, or otherwise substantially affect public safety.

(e) The Health Department shall review applications for businesses involving the preparation, storage or sale of food or drink, except in sealed containers

(f) Other departments, agencies or officers shall review applications when the proposed business poses special problems dealt with by such department, agency or officer.

The City Administrator may, by written directive, grant exceptions from the requirements of such Administrative Order, when, in his opinion, its literal application is not required to accomplish the objectives of such requirement and of this Chapter. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

6321 Preparation and Issuance of Licenses.
It shall be the duty of the Finance Director to prepare and issue licenses for every person liable to pay a license fee subject to and in accordance with all provisions of this Chapter. Each such license shall be issued upon such form as the Director of Finance may from time to time provide for such purpose. When the required license fee has been paid and all other provisions of the Code have been complied with, the Finance Director shall deliver the original license to the licensee named in such license and shall retain a copy of such license on file in his office. Each license shall show the amount of the fee therefor, the period of time covered thereby, the name of the person to whom issued, the business licensed, and if a fixed or established place of business, the location or place where such business is to be commenced or conducted. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

6322 Errors in Issuance of Licenses.
No error or mistake on the part of the person issuing a license or in the determination or statement of the amount of any license fee shall prevent or prejudice the collection by or for the City of the amount actually due from anyone commencing or conducting any business subject to such license. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

6323 Licenses for More than One (1) Business.
When any person is engaged at one (1) location or place in more than one (1) business for which a license tax is imposed by this Chapter, a separate license shall be issued for each such business, but the license tax due for each business other than the business for which the highest tax is imposed shall be reduced by one-half. No license for which such a reduced tax is paid shall be transferable to any other location unless the amount of the reduction first allowed is paid to the City. This Section is not applicable to amusement devices, games of skill, or vending machines. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

6324 Branch Business Establishments – Multiple Licenses.
Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, a separate license shall be obtained and a separate fee paid for each branch establishment or separate place of business in which any business is commenced or conducted. Each license shall authorize the licensee named therein to commence and conduct only that business described in such license and only at the location or place of business indicated therein. Any person who operates a separately owned department or concession in a department store or a building structure or enclosure in which separate departments or concessions are operated shall pay a license fee in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter for the department or concession so operated by him. Two (2) or more persons shall not jointly apply for or be issued one (1) business license to cover two (2) or more businesses separately owned. No business or activity requiring a special permit from the Council may be conducted with or as a part of any other business without first obtaining a special permit therefor. The Finance Director shall not issue any license to a business for which a permit is required until such special permit shall be obtained and the permit fee shall be paid with respect thereto.

For purposes of this Section, a branch establishment or separate place of business is defined to be a different and separate location, or a separate department in any one (1) location, or in the case of vehicles, a different and separate vehicle, from that mentioned in any other license held by the same licensee, in or from which any business, profession or trade may be conducted at the same time. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

6325 License Fees – Due Dates.
(a) Unless otherwise provided in this Chapter 3, the license fees required herein shall be due and payable to the City, in advance, as follows:

(1) Daily license: on each day in advance,

(2) Weekly license: on Monday of each week in advance;

(3) Monthly license: on the first day of each and every calendar month in advance;

(4) Original annual license issued after January 1, 1989: on or before the date business commences, and with regard to any subsequent renewal thereof, on the first day of the twelfth calendar month following the month in which the business commenced (“anniversary date”). Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subdivision, the due date for renewal of multiple licenses (one (1) or more additional licenses issued to a licensee at one (1) location not designated as the primary license by the Finance Director under CMC 6325(a)(6)) shall be the due date of the primary license. Except for the initial term of a multiple license, the license fee for any annual license issued after January 1, 1989 shall be the full annual fee, which fee shall not be prorated to adjust for the initial term being less than one (1) full year;

(5) Renewals of annual licenses expiring December 31, 1988, on or before January 1, 1989, or such later date as may be established by the Finance Director pursuant to CMC 6351; provided, however, that all such renewals shall be subject to the terms and provisions of subsection (b) hereof; and

(6) Multiple licenses: Where more than one (1) license is issued to a licensee at one (1) location, the Finance Director shall designate one (1) of such licenses as the primary license and the fees on the additional license or licenses shall be due and payable at the same time as the fees are due and payable on the primary license.

(b) The Finance Director shall determine the total number of existing licensees whose annual licenses will terminate on December 31, 1988 and who will be required to renew such licenses as of January 1, 1989. The total number of existing licensees shall be divided into twelve (12) groups, substantially equal in number. For internal administrative purposes, these groups shall be identified as Groups 1 through 12. All licenses issued to a licensee at one (1) location shall be placed in the same group as the primary license. The Finance Director shall, prior to December 31, 1988, give written notice to each licensee in each of Groups 2 to 12, inclusive, that a new anniversary date has been designated for said licensee. Such designations shall be made substantially as follows:

Designated Licensees in Group – Number

Anniversary Date for 1989 and for Each Succeeding Year

2

February 1

3

March 1

4

April 1

5

May 1

6

June 1

7

July 1

8

August 1

9

September 1

10

October 1

11

November 1

12

December 1

(c) At the time the Finance Director gives the existing licensee written notice of the anniversary dates provided for in subsection (b) of this Section, the Finance Director shall further notify each licensee of the following, to the extent applicable:

(1) With regard to any licensee in Group 1: that, upon payment of the specified fee for renewal of the annual license, the term of such renewal shall be for a full twelve (12) month period which shall commence January 1st and shall terminate on December 31st of the same calendar year.

(2) With regard to any licensee in Groups 2 through 12: that upon payment of the specified fee for renewal of the annual license, the term of such renewal shall end on the last day of the calendar month immediately preceding the designated anniversary date.

(3) The license fee for any license in Group 1 shall be the annual fee. The license fee for any license in Groups 2 through 12 shall be a prorated fee to be paid by January 1, 1989 for the period from January 1, 1989 to the termination date specified in subdivision (2) of this subsection (c). Thereafter upon renewals, the licensee shall then pay a renewal fee on or before the designated anniversary date for a full one-year period commencing on the designated anniversary date and ending on the date immediately preceding the anniversary date in the succeeding year. Except for the initial term of a multiple license, the license fee for any annual license issued after January 1, 1989 shall be the full annual fee, which fee shall not be prorated to adjust for the initial term being less than one (1) full year. (Ord. 71-161, § 2; Ord. 82-620, § 2; Ord. 88-840, § 1; Ord. 88-852, § 1; Ord. 89-861, § 1)

6326 Delinquency and Penalties – License Fees.
(a) Delinquency defined: Any license fee required by this Chapter, whether daily, weekly, monthly or annual, is delinquent if not paid by 5:00 p.m. on the day that such license fee becomes due and payable. If the day the license fee becomes due and payable falls on a Saturday, Sunday, National or State Holiday or any other day the City’s offices are closed, such license fee is delinquent if not paid by 5:00 p.m. on the next working day.

(b) (1) Any daily, weekly or monthly license fee that remains unpaid after 5:00 p.m. on the seventh calendar day succeeding the day that the fee becomes due and payable shall be assessed a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the original amount of the license fee, which penalty shall be added to the license fee. If the fee remains unpaid after 5:00 p.m. on the fifteenth calendar day after the day the fee becomes due and payable, an additional penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the original license fee for a total penalty of fifty (50) percent shall be assessed and added to the license fee. When the day that the penalty is to be imposed falls on a Saturday, Sunday, National or State Holiday, or on any other day the City’s offices are closed, the penalty shall be imposed if the fee is not paid by 5:00 p.m. on the next working day.

(2) Any annual license fee that remains unpaid after 5:00 p.m. on the second business day of the second calendar month immediately succeeding the month in which the fee becomes due and payable shall be assessed a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the original amount of the license fee, which penalty shall be added to the license fee. If the fees remain unpaid after 5:00 p.m. of the second business day of the third calendar month immediately succeeding the month in which the fee becomes due and payable, an additional penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the original license fee for a total penalty of fifty (50) percent shall be assessed and added to the license fee. (Ord. 71-161, § 2; Ord. 72-248, § 2; Ord. 83-638, § 1; Ord. 88-850, § 1; Ord. 89-861, § 2)

6327 Repealed.
Repealed by Ord. 88-850.

6328 Posting and Keeping License.
Except as may otherwise be provided in this Chapter, all licenses must be kept and posted in the following manner:

(a) Any licensee engaged in business at a fixed place of business shall keep the license for such business posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such business is conducted.

(b) Any person engaged in business in the City, but not operating from a fixed place of business shall keep the license issued to him upon his person at all times while engaged in such business.

(c) Each person driving, operating, or having control of any wagon, cart, or other vehicle, or using or controlling any tray, basket or other receptacle, or controlling, possessing or operating any machine, device, or equipment, including vending machines, with respect to which a license is required under the provisions of this Chapter, shall affix thereto a license tag or plate or decal as issued by the Director of Finance and at the place directed by the Director of Finance, or if the Director of Finance shall so direct, shall affix a license holder thereto for the purpose of holding the City license, or shall carry upon his person a license or identification card as directed by the Director of Finance. Any license plate or tag or decal shall be placed so that it is always plainly visible. No person shall keep any license, or plate, or tag, or decal or identification card longer than thirty (30) days after the expiration of the term for which the license is issued, and no person, except the licensee or his authorized agent, shall take or remove any license, plate, tag or identification card from the person lawfully entitled to the same or from the place where posted or fixed. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

6329 Denial of License.
Any license shall be denied for the following reasons:

(a) Failure to pay the appropriate license fees;

(b) Failure to receive required permits;

(c) Failure to receive any required approvals;

(d) Filing erroneous or incomplete statements;

(e) For other good cause.

Any person denied a license shall be advised, in writing, of the grounds for such denial. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

6330 Enforcement Duty.
It shall be the duty of the City Administrator to enforce each and all of the provisions of this Chapter. He may utilize therefor the Law Enforcement Agency of the City as necessary to effectuate such enforcement. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

6331 Enforcement – Inspection – Complaints.
The City Administrator or his deputy or other agency of the City authorized by him shall examine all places of business in the City to ascertain whether or not the provisions of this Chapter have been complied with. Said City Administrator, his deputy or said enforcement agency or agencies, the City Attorney and any duly authorized employee of the City shall have the power to examine all necessary books and records of all persons doing business in the City required to be licensed by the terms of this Chapter, for the purpose of ascertaining the amount of license fee required to be paid by the provisions thereof. Said officer and each and all of his deputies and duly authorized employees shall have the power and authority to enter free of charge and at any reasonable time any place of business required to be licensed by the provisions of this Chapter and to demand an exhibition of such license, books or other matters of record. Any person to whom any such license is issued who fails to exhibit same on such demand shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. It shall be the duty of the City Administrator, his deputies, and of the law enforcement agencies of the City to cause a complaint to be filed against any and all persons found to be in violation of any provision of this Chapter. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

6332 Enforcement Accountant.
For the purpose of enforcement of this Chapter, the City Administrator may, with the prior consent of the Council, deputize a qualified accountant to examine the necessary books and records of any person doing business in the City. Any failure on the part of any person licensed or required to be licensed under this Chapter, to exhibit to and allow examination by said accountant so deputized shall constitute a violation of this Code. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

6333 Enforcement Remedies.
The conviction or imprisonment of any person for violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall not relieve such person from paying the license fee for business, nor shall the payment of any license fee prevent a criminal prosecution for the violation of the provisions of this Chapter. All remedies prescribed hereunder shall be cumulative and the use of one (1) or more remedies shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing this Chapter. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

6334 Deputy License Collectors.
Deputy License Collectors shall be directly responsible to and under the control and direction of the Director of Finance. Such Deputy License Collectors shall have the powers in their respective territories given to duly authorized deputies and City employees under the provisions of CMC 6331. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

6335 Terms of Licenses.
Unless otherwise provided in this Chapter the term of any license issued hereunder shall be as follows:

(a) The term of daily licenses shall commence at 12:01 a.m. of the licensed day and shall terminate at midnight of said day.

(b) The term of weekly licenses shall commence at 12:01 a.m. on Monday of each week and shall terminate at midnight on the following Sunday.

(c) The term of monthly licenses shall commence at 12:01 a.m. on the first day of the calendar month in which said licenses are issued and shall terminate at midnight on the last day of said calendar month.

(d) The term of original licenses issued after January 1, 1989 shall commence on the date of issuance of the license. If business commenced prior to the date of issuance of the license, the license shall be dated the date that business commenced. The term of the license shall terminate on the last day of the eleventh calendar month following the month in which the license was dated (termination date). The anniversary date shall be the first day of the calendar month following the termination date. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection (d), the term of all annual multiple licenses issued to a licensee at one (1) location shall terminate on the termination date of the primary license designated as primary by the Finance Director under CMC 6325(a)(6).

(e) The term of annual licenses which terminate December 31, 1988 and are thereafter renewed in accordance with the applicable provisions of CMC 6325(b) and 6325(c) shall commence on January 1, 1989 and shall terminate as provided for in said CMC 6325(c). (Ord. 71-161, § 2; Ord. 88-840, § 2; Ord. 89-861, § 3)

6336 Application.
Every person desiring to conduct, manage, or carry on any business, profession, trade or occupation in the City shall file with the Director of Finance a statement in writing, sworn to or made under penalty of perjury, upon a form provided by the Director of Finance setting forth the following information:

(1) The name and address of the applicant;

(2) The exact nature or kind of business for which a license is requested and including each separate and distinct type of business conducted or to be conducted on the premises under the same ownership;

(3) The address and name (if any) of the place where such business is to be carried on and if the same is not to be carried on at any permanent place of business, the places of residences of the owners of same;

(4) The name and places of residences of those owning the business if the application is made for the issuance of a license to a person doing business under a fictitious name;

(5) The names and places of residences of the principal officers or general partners if the application is made for the issuance of a license to a corporation or a partnership;

(6) (a) If the business for which a license is sought has existed for at least one (1) year immediately preceding the calendar month immediately prior to the due date of the license fee: The total number of employees each of whom performed at least eighteen hundred (1,800) hours of service during said one (1) year period, and the total aggregate number of hours of service performed by all other employees during said one (1) year period.

(b) If said business did not exist for one (1) year immediately preceding the calendar month immediately prior to the due date of the license fee: The date of commencement of said business, and the total numbers of hours of service performed by all employees during the period from the first day of the first calendar month next after commencement of said business to and including the calendar month preceding the calendar month immediately prior to the due date of the license fee;

(7) The estimated average number of employees the applicant expects to employ during the year for which the license is to be issued;

(8) Any further information which the Director of Finance may require relative to the license applied for.

The Director of Finance shall not issue a license to any person or business until the provisions of this Section have been complied with by the applicant. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

6337 Renewal License Application.
In all cases an applicant for the renewal of a license shall submit to the Director of Finance a statement sworn to or made under penalty of perjury, upon a form to be provided by the Director of Finance setting forth such information concerning the applicant’s business during the preceding year as may be required by the Director of Finance to enable him to ascertain the amount of license fee to be paid by said applicant pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. The Director of Finance shall not issue a renewal license until the provisions of this Section have been complied with by the applicant. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

6338 License or Renewal License.
Upon receipt of an application for license or renewal license, the Director of Finance shall investigate the applicant and the representations made by such applicant in the application. If in the judgment of the Director of Finance, after such investigation, the granting of the license applied for may be detrimental to the public peace, morals, health, safety, or general welfare or the applicant does not appear to be of good moral character or has been convicted of any violation of law involving moral turpitude, except as hereinafter provided, the license shall not be issued unless and until a permit therefor has been granted by the Council. In such event, the Director of Finance shall inform the applicant that he must file an application for a permit in accordance with the provisions of Part 4 of this Chapter. If such application is filed the entire matter shall be referred to the Council for proceedings under the provisions of Part 4 of this Chapter. Provided, however, State licensees referred to in CMC 6310(c) shall not be subject to the provisions of this Section 6338, except in the first sentence thereof. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

6339 General Exemptions.
Except as otherwise provided herein, no license or license fee shall be required of:

(a) The Federal Government or the State of California, or any of the political subdivisions, agencies or instrumentalities thereof;

(b) Any person engaging in any business exempt by virtue of the Constitution or laws of the State of California, or the Constitution or laws of the United States, from the payment of such taxes as are provided in said Parts 2 and 3 of this Chapter.

(c) Any religious, charitable, fraternal, educational, cultural or civic organization, and any other organization, whether incorporated or not, described in Article 1, Chapter 4, Part II of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California; provided, however, that any such organization shall be required to obtain a license and pay the appropriate license fees if and to the extent it engages in any “unrelated trade or business” as that term is used in Section 23734 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California.

(d) Any person certified as blind by the Bureau of Vocational Rehabilitation of the State of California.

(e) Any person defined as a “certified farmer” within the meaning of “Certified Farmer” in CMC 6303 and who for purposes of this section is engaged in the sale of agricultural products, produced by them, at a City permitted and authorized farmers’ market; provided, however, that any such individual or person possesses a certified farmers’ certificate which shall be maintained by the operators of the farmers’ market and available for inspection upon the request of the City. Any person or entity approved by the City of Carson and properly permitted and licensed within the City of Carson to host certified farmers at a farmers’ market shall maintain a list of certified farmers selling at the farmers’ market and provide copies of the list at least monthly to the City and upon request by the City.

(f) Any approved participant in a City affiliated event shall not be required to obtain a business license or pay business license taxes solely due to participation in the City affiliated event. The City Manager or designee shall have the power to waive any or all business license requirements for any City affiliated event. (Ord. 71-161, § 2; Ord. 82-620, § 2; Ord. 10-1458, § 4; Ord. 14-1541, § 1)

6340 Limited Exemptions.
The Finance Director, upon application being made therefor, and upon the applicant presenting evidence of his eligibility therefor, shall issue a business license endorsed as partially or wholly exempt from fees to:

(a) Minors under the age of eighteen (18) years engaged in activities requiring a license under this Chapter where such minor engages in those activities for no more than twenty (20) hours in any week.

(b) Any veteran or widow of any veteran of the Spanish-American War, World Wars I and II, the Korean or Vietnam conflicts, who is a resident of the City, shall be entitled to a credit of $25.00 against the business license fee required by this Chapter in any year in which the net income of such person from his business is (or is estimated in the case of an initial license) to be less than $10,000 per year.

(c) Any veteran described in CMC 6340(b), who is disabled as a result of activities while in military service in lieu of the credit described in CMC 6340(b), shall be entitled to the following credits against the business license fee required by this Chapter, irrespective of his net income:

One-fourth disabled

$ 50.00 credit

One-half disabled

$ 75.00 credit

Three-fourths or more disabled

$100.00 credit

(d) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (b) and (c) hereof:

(1) Every honorably discharged or honorably relieved soldier, sailor, or marine of the United States who served in any Indian war, the Spanish-American War, any Philippine insurrection, the Chinese Relief Expedition, the World War of 1914 and years following, or World War II, who is physically unable to obtain a livelihood by manual labor, and who is a voter of this State, may distribute circulars, and hawk, peddle, and vend any goods, wares or merchandise owned by him, except spirituous, malt, vinous, or other intoxicating liquor, without payment of any license tax or fee whatsoever, and the Finance Director shall issue to such soldier, sailor or marine, without cost, a license therefor.

(2) Every person who was honorably discharged or honorably relieved from the military, naval or air service of the United States who served on or after June 27, 1950, and prior to February 1, 1955, or on or after August 5, 1964, and prior to a future date to be established by the Legislature, who is physically unable to obtain a livelihood by manual labor, and who is a resident of this State, may distribute circulars, and hawk, peddle, and vend any goods, wares or merchandise owned by him, except spirituous, malt or vinous, or other intoxicating liquor, without payment of any license tax or fee whatsoever, and the Finance Director shall issue to such person, without cost, a license therefor. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

6341 Certain Exemptions Under Federal, State or Local Law or Ordinance.
Any person claiming to be exempt from the requirement to obtain a business license or pay the business license fees, in whole or in part, pursuant to CMC 6339(b), other than banks, national banking associations, insurance companies or insurance agents (but not insurance brokers), on the grounds that such requirements are in conflict with the law of the State or the Constitution or laws of the United States, or such persons claiming to be exempt from the requirement to obtain a business license or pay the business license fees, in whole or in part, pursuant to CMC 6339(e) on the grounds that such person is exempt by operation, a local law or ordinance, is required to file a claim for exemption, on forms to be supplied by the City, setting forth such information as the Finance Director may require to make a determination as to the validity of the claimed exemption, which information may include but shall not be limited to:

(a) The name, business address, general manager or responsible officer of the claimant;

(b) Sales records of claimant including records of contracts of sale, delivery tickets, bills of lading;

(c) The location of the claimant’s offices, warehouses, factories and other business operations;

(d) Copies of advertising literature of claimant;

(e) Copies of certification and listing with a Certified Farmers’ Market operator as a certified farmer, as applicable;

(f) A statement of the legal grounds, with citations to pertinent statutory and case authority tending to support the claim for exemption; and

(g) Such other information as the Finance Director may require to determine whether the claimant is exempt, or as is necessary to determine the number of employees of the claimant. (Ord. 71-161, § 2, Ord. 82-620, § 2; Ord. 10-1458, § 5)

6342 Exempt Licenses to be Endorsed.
Whenever the Director of Finance shall issue any license granting any exemption provided for in this Part, the person to whom such license is issued shall endorse thereon his signature in ink in the presence of the Director of Finance or his deputy, and no such license shall be transferable. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

6343 Adoption of Regulations by Finance Director.
The Finance Director is empowered to make such regulations and interpretive rules as are not inconsistent with this Chapter as may be necessary or desirable to aid in the enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter.

Where, by reason of the provisions of the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of California, the business license tax imposed by this Chapter cannot be enforced without there being an apportionment according to the amount of business done in the City of Carson, or in the State of California, as the case may be, the Finance Director may make such rules and regulations for the apportionment of the tax as are necessary or desirable to overcome the constitutional objections. Such rules and regulations shall be approved by the City Attorney prior to becoming effective. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

6344 Statements and Records.
No statement shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, nor shall the filing of the same preclude the City from collecting by appropriate action such sum as is actually due and payable hereunder. Such statement and each item therein contained shall be subject to audit and verification by the Finance Director, his deputies, or authorized employees of the City, who are hereby authorized to examine, audit and inspect such books and records of any licensee or applicant for license, as may be necessary in their judgment to verify or ascertain the amount of license fee due.

All persons subject to the provisions of the Business License Ordinance shall keep complete records of all persons employed in or in relation to the business conducted by such persons, including payroll records, personnel records, withholding tax records, and all records and reports as to labor, wages, or personnel made to, or required to be kept by, all regulatory agencies, for examination by the Finance Director. Such records shall be maintained for a period of at least three (3) years. No person required to keep records under this Section shall refuse to allow any authorized representative of the Finance Director to examine said records at reasonable times and places. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

6345 Information Confidential.
It shall be unlawful for the Finance Director or any person having an administrative duty under the provisions of this Chapter to make known in any manner whatever the business affairs, operations, or information obtained by an investigation of records, or equipment of any person required to obtain a license, or pay a license fee, or of any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount of payroll, source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth in any statement or application, or in any books or records containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any such person; provided, that nothing in this Section shall be construed to prevent:

(1) The disclosure to, or examination of the records or equipment by, another City official, employee, or agent for collection of taxes for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing any provisions of this Chapter, or collecting license fees imposed hereunder;

(2) The disclosure of information to, or the examination of records by, Federal or State officials, or the tax officials of another city or county, or city and county, if a reciprocal arrangement exists, or to a grand jury or court of law, upon subpoena;

(3) The disclosure of information and results of examination of records of any person or licensee to a court of law in a proceeding brought to determine the existence of amount of any license fee liability of the particular person or licensee hereunder;

(4) The disclosure after the filing of a written request to that effect, to the licensee himself, or to his successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, of information as to the computation of any paid license fee, any unpaid license fee, or amounts of license fee required to be collected and any penalties; further provided, however, that the City Attorney approves each such disclosure and that the Finance Director may refuse to make any disclosure referred to in this subsection (4) when in his opinion the public interest would suffer thereby;

(5) The disclosure of the names and addresses of persons to whom licenses have been issued, and the general type of nature of their business;

(6) The disclosure to the City Council by way of public meeting or otherwise of such information as may be necessary in order to enable the Council to be fully advised as to the facts when a licensee files a claim for refund of license fees, or submits an offer of compromise with regard to a claim asserted against him by the City for license fees, or when acting upon any other matter in the court of City business.

(7) The disclosure of general statistics regarding license fees collected or business done in the City. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

6346 Failure to File Statement or Corrected Statement.
If any person fails to file any required statement within the time prescribed, or if after demand therefor made by the Finance Director fails to file a corrected statement, or if any person subject to the license fee imposed by this Chapter fails to apply for a license, the Finance Director may determine the amount of license fee due from such persons by means of such information as he may be able to obtain. If the Finance Director is not satisfied with the information supplied in statements or applications filed, he may determine the amount of any license fee due by means of any information he may be able to obtain.

If such a determination is made the Finance Director shall give written notice of the amount of license fee so assessed by serving it on the licensee personally or by depositing such notice in a facility of the United States Post Office Department in Carson, California, postage prepaid, addressed to the person so assessed at his last known address. Such person may, within fifteen (15) days after the mailing or serving of such notice, make application in writing to the Finance Director for a hearing on the amount of the license fee. If such application is made, the Finance Director shall cause the matter to be set for hearing within fifteen (15) days before the City Council. The Finance Director shall give to such person at least ten (10) days’ written notice of the time and place of hearing in the manner prescribed above for serving notices of assessment. The Council shall consider all evidence produced at said hearing and shall make findings thereon, which shall be final and conclusive. Notice of such findings shall be served upon the applicant or licensee in the manner prescribed above for serving notices of assessment. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

6347 Appeal.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Finance Director with respect to the issuance or refusal to issue a license may appeal to the Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk. The Council shall at its next meeting after the filing of such notice of appeal fix a time and place for hearing such appeal. The City Clerk shall give written notice to such person of the time and place of hearing by serving such notice personally or by depositing it in a facility of the United States Post Office Department in Carson, California, postage prepaid, addressed to such person, at the address shown on such notice of appeal, or if none, at his last known address. The Council shall have authority to determine all questions raised on such appeal. No such determination shall conflict with any substantive provision of this Chapter. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

6348 Evidence of Doing Business.
When any person shall by use of signs, circulars, cards, telephone book or newspapers, advertise, hold out, or represent that he is in business in the City, or when any person holds an active license or permit issued by a governmental agency indicating that he is in business in the City, and such person fails to deny by a sworn statement or statement made under penalty of perjury given to the Finance Director that he is conducting business in the City, after requested to do so by the Finance Director, then these facts shall be considered prima facie evidence that such person is conducting business in the City. For the purposes of this Chapter, any person holding an employer identification number issued by the Internal Revenue Service is deemed to be representing itself to be a business. (Ord. 06-1342, § 4)

6349 Refunds of Overpayment.
No refund of an overpayment of license fees imposed by this Chapter shall be allowed in whole or in part unless a written and verified claim for refund is filed with the Finance Director within a period of three (3) years from and after the last day of the period for which the overpayment was made. All such claims for refund must specify the period and amount of the claimed overpayment, and shall be on forms furnished by the Finance Director, and shall provide all information required by him. Upon the filing of such a claim and when the Finance Director determines that an overpayment has been made, he shall cause the amount of such overpayment to be placed on the register of demands for Council approval and upon such approval the amount of overpayment shall be refunded. (Ord. 72-161, § 2)

6350 Permit Prerequisite.
The Director of Finance shall not issue any license for any business, profession, trade, commercial enterprise or occupation of which a permit from the Council is required by any provision of this Code until a permit is obtained pursuant to Part 4 of this Chapter, nor if any such permit has been revoked or has expired and has not been reinstated or renewed. Any license issued under this Chapter for any business, profession, trade, commercial enterprise or occupation for which a permit from the Council is required by any provision of this Code shall be void upon the revocation or expiration of any such permit. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

6351 Additional Powers of the City Manager.
In addition to all other powers conferred upon him or her, the City Manager or designee shall have the power, for good cause shown, to extend the time for filing any required verified statement or application for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days, and in such case to waive any penalty that would otherwise have accrued, and to compromise any dispute with respect to license fee imposed hereunder. (Ord. 71-161, § 2; Ord. 14-1541, § 2)

6352 Revenue Measure.
Parts 2 and 3 of this Chapter are enacted solely to raise revenue for municipal purposes, and are not intended for regulation. (Ord. 71-161, § 2)

Part 3. License Fees

6360 License Fees – Adoption.
Every person conducting any business, profession, trade or occupation in the City of Carson shall pay the license fees applicable to such business, profession, trade or occupation which are set by resolution of the City Council from time to time, unless otherwise provided in CMC 6339 and 6340. Such license fees are levied for the purpose of revenue and not for regulation. (Ord. 82-620, § 3)

6361 Vending Machines – Fee Collection.
It shall be unlawful for any person other than the Director of Finance to remove from the premises where any coin operated vending machine was located when sealed by the Director of Finance any machine so sealed or to break or remove any such seal. Upon receipt of proof of payment of the tax and service charge, and, where applicable, evidence of other required compliance by the owner or operator of any machine or device so sealed, the Director of Finance shall break and remove seals from such machines. (Ord. 82-620, § 3)

6362 Vending Machines – Identification.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, maintain, or use within the City of Carson any vending machine which does not have conspicuously stamped upon it or affixed thereon for identification purposes a numbered ID tag provided by the Director of Finance. Such tag shall be removed by the owner or operator when the authority to use such machine is transferred to another person, whether by sale, lease, license, or otherwise. The immediately preceding sentence shall not apply to limited use activated by coin deposit in the machine. (Ord. 83-638, § 2)

6363 Amusement and Entertainment Machines – Identification.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, maintain, or use within the City of Carson any amusement or entertainment machine, device, or apparatus designed or constructed to operate by the depositing of any coin, plate, disc, slug, or key unless such machine bears a stamp, label, decal, or sign issued by the Finance Director showing thereon the number of the license issued by the City. Each amusement and entertainment machine, device or apparatus shall be registered in the office of the Finance Director, such registration indicating the serial number, the owner and the place at which each such amusement and entertainment machine, device or apparatus is to be located. (Ord. 83-638, § 2)

Part 4. Permit Procedure

6370 Permit Required for Certain Businesses.
In addition to the payment of a license fee as provided for in Parts 2 and 3 of this Chapter, certain businesses, professions, trades or occupations set forth in Part 5 shall first obtain, as provided in this Part, a permit to operate such business, profession, trade or occupation within the City of Carson. No person shall operate such a business, profession, trade or occupation without first obtaining a permit to do so as hereinafter set forth. The Director of Finance, or his authorized deputy, shall not issue a license to any person to conduct a business, profession, trade or occupation for which a permit is required as hereinafter set forth unless said person has in existence a valid and unexpired permit from the City to conduct said business, trade, and/or occupation. (Ord. 71-162, § 1; Ord. 76-389, § 1)

6371 Permit Required for Certain Businesses – Separate.
A separate permit shall be applied for and obtained for each and every business, occupation, trade or profession for which a permit is required by Part 5 or any other provision of this Code, regardless of community of ownership of such business, occupation, trade or profession with any other business, occupation, trade or profession, or whether the same have a common management or location. (Ord. 71-162, § 1; Ord. 76-389, § 1)

6372 Other Businesses Not Enumerated.
This Part provides a special permit procedure for those businesses enumerated in Part 5. The omission therefrom of other businesses or activities covered in other provisions of this Code requiring permits or franchises shall not be deemed or construed as an intention to relieve such businesses or activities from the permit procedure or franchise procedure under which they may be governed, or which may be applicable under other sections of this Code or State Law. (Ord. 71-162, § 1; Ord. 76-389, § 1)

6373 Unlawful Businesses.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Part the Finance Director shall not issue a permit to anyone to operate or participate in the operation of any business, profession, trade, occupation, service or activity which is made unlawful by this Code or by State Law. (Ord. 71-162, § 1; Ord. 76-389, § 1)

6374 Application.
The application for any permit required by Parts 4 and 5 shall be filed with the Finance Director, shall be signed and verified by the applicant, and shall set forth at least the following information:

(a) The name and address of the applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, the name shall be exactly as set forth in its articles of incorporation.

(b) The name and address of the person by whom employed, if any. If filed on behalf of a partnership, corporation or association, then the names and addresses of the partners or principal officers of the partnership, corporation or association shall be stated, and if applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of its directors and the name and address of the officer who is duly authorized to accept the service of legal process.

(c) The nature of the business for which a permit is requested.

(d) The place where such business is to be conducted.

(e) A brief description of the nature and amount of equipment to be used in the business.

(f) The personal description of the applicant, if an individual.

(g) Such evidence of the identity of the applicant as the Finance Director may require.

(h) Fingerprints and thumbprints of an individual applicant only when specifically required. (Ord. 71-162, § 1; Ord. 76-389, § 1)

6375 Permit Fee.
Unless otherwise stated in Part 5 of this Chapter, the fee for filing an application for a permit pursuant to this Part shall be $50.00 payable in advance. The application fee is nonrefundable. The license fee prescribed in Part 3 of this Chapter for the particular business, in addition to the permit fee, shall accompany the application. If a permit be denied, the license fee paid shall be refunded. (Ord. 71-162, § 1; Ord. 76-389, § 1; Ord. 06-1342, § 5)

6376 Granting or Refusal of Permit.
The Finance Director shall have sixty (60) days in which to investigate the application and background of the applicant. Except as may otherwise be provided in this Part, the Finance Director, upon an investigation of an application and of the business proposed to be conducted upon said premises, may grant or refuse to grant a permit. The Finance Director shall have the right to refuse to grant any permit if he determines that the granting of the same or the conduct of the business will be contrary to the preservation of the public peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of the City or its inhabitants. In addition, no permit shall be granted if:

(a) The business is prohibited by any local or State law, statute, rule or regulation, or prohibited in the particular location by any law, statute or rule.

(b) The granting of the permit would result in the establishment of use or occupancy of land in violation of the Zoning Ordinance or Zoning Map of the City.

(c) The granting of the permit would result in an occupancy or use in violation of any other provision or regulation of this Code.

(d) The granting of the permit or occupancy or use pursuant thereto would result in the creation or maintenance of a public nuisance.

(e) The granting of the permit, by reason of special or unusual circumstance, would be detrimental to the public interest or endanger the public health, safety, morals or welfare.

(f) The applicant is unfit to be trusted with the privileges granted by such permit or has a bad moral character, intemperate habits or a bad reputation for truth, honesty or integrity.

(g) The applicant has knowingly made a false statement on a material matter in the application and it is, therefore, in the public interest that such permit not be granted.

Having completed the aforementioned investigation, the Finance Director shall, within fifteen (15) working days, either grant the permit or mail written notification of the reasons for denial thereof. If neither above action is taken, the permit shall be deemed issued. (Ord. 71-162, § 1; Ord. 76-389, § 1; Ord. 09-1431, § 1)

6377 Real Party in Interest.
The Finance Director, Chief of Police, or other appropriate officer may examine under oath any applicant to determine who is the real party in interest in the business, profession, trade or occupation for which a permit is sought. If the Finance Director or other official having jurisdiction is satisfied that the person in whose name the application is made is not the real party in interest, he may deny the permit.

If the Finance Director or such other official finds that the real party in interest as to the application is one whose permit has been revoked or who has been refused a permit, he may treat the application as though made by the real party in interest for all purposes of this Chapter. (Ord. 71-162, § 1; Ord. 76-389, § 1)

6378 Change of Interest.
Every person having a permit issued pursuant to this Chapter shall within five (5) days after any change of ownership or any of the information or facts required to be stated in the application for permit, notify the Director of Finance in writing of any such change. (Ord. 71-162, § 1; Ord. 76-389, § 1)

6379 Change of Advertised Name.
If any permittee adopts a name or designation not specified in its application for a permit, or changes such name or designation, such permittee shall, within five (5) days thereafter, notify the Finance Director in writing of such change. (Ord. 71-162, § 1; Ord. 76-389, § 1)

6380 Change in Directors.
Within thirty (30) days after any change of directors of a corporate permittee, the permittee shall notify the Finance Director in writing of such change and shall file an application for approval of the change of directors, and pay a fee of $15.00. If such permittee shall fail to comply with the provisions of this Section, or if the Finance Director shall deny the approval of the change of directors, the permit theretofore issued to such corporation shall become null and void upon such change of directors without the Finance Director’s approval or upon such denial. (Ord. 71-162, § 1; Ord. 76-389, § 1)

6381 Same – Conditions.
In granting any permit, the Finance Director may, in the application of the standards stated in CMC 6376 in order to protect the public peace, health, safety, morals or welfare, impose reasonable conditions or regulations pertaining to the conduct of such business or the occupancy or use of any land or building in connection therewith, in addition to, but not limited by those regulations contained in this Part. (Ord. 71-162, § 1; Ord. 76-389, § 1)

6382 Investigation.
Upon receipt of an application for a permit under this Part, the same shall be referred to the appropriate agencies for investigation and report pertaining to relevant zoning, building, health, safety, fire and law enforcement. (Ord. 71-162, § 1; Ord. 76-389, § 1)

6383 Revocation – Suspension – Grounds.
Any permit issued under the terms of this Part may be revoked or suspended at any time thereafter by the Finance Director in the following instances:

(a) Where the permittee has violated any terms or provisions of said permit, any provisions of the Carson Municipal Code, or any other ordinance or statute relating to the permitted activity;

(b) Where the permittee has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a permit, or in any report or record required to be filed with any governmental agency;

(c) Where the permittee has been convicted of a felony or any crime involving theft, embezzlement or moral turpitude;

(d) Where the permittee has committed any act constituting dishonesty or fraud;

(e) Where the permittee has demonstrated a bad moral character, intemperate habits, or a bad reputation for truth, honesty or integrity;

(f) Where the permittee has committed any unlawful, false, fraudulent deception or dangerous act while conducting a licensed business;

(g) Where the permittee has published, uttered or disseminated any false, deceptive or misleading statements or advertisements in connection with the operation of a licensed business;

(h) Where the permittee has violated any rule or regulation adopted by any governmental agency related to the licensee’s business;

(i) Where the permittee willfully fails to comply with the terms of any contract made as a part of the exercise of the licensed business;

(j) Where the permittee has conducted the licensed business in a manner contrary to the peace, health, safety and the general welfare of the public;

(k) Where the permittee has demonstrated that he is unfit to be trusted with the privileges granted by the permit and license. (Ord. 71-162; Ord. 76-389, § 1)

6384 Suspension or Revocation – Capping.
In addition to the grounds stated in any other section of this Chapter, the Finance Director shall suspend for a period of not less than ten (10) days nor more than sixty (60) days an ambulance operator license granted pursuant to CMC 63100 and 63103 or a tow truck operator license granted pursuant to CMC 63100 and 63151 if he finds that any such licensee, his agent or employee, general manager, or person who is exercising managerial authority of or on behalf of the licensee has acted as a runner or capper as prohibited by Sections 6151 and 6152 of the California Business and Professions Code.

In addition to the grounds stated in any other section of this Chapter, the Finance Director shall revoke an ambulance operator license granted pursuant to CMC 63100 and 63103 or a tow truck operator license granted pursuant to CMC 63100 and 63151 if he finds that any such licensee, his agent or employee, general manager, or person who is exercising managerial authority of or on behalf of the licensee or any combination of such persons has acted as a runner or capper as prohibited by Sections 6151 and 6152 of the California Business and Professions Code more than once in any twelve (12) month period. (Ord. 74-322, § 1; Ord. 76-389, § 1)

6385 Appeal – Initiation – Contents of Notice of Appeal.
Any person may, within fifteen (15) days after notice thereof is received, file an appeal with the City Clerk from any decision of the Finance Director or any condition or regulations imposed by the Finance Director. Any such appeal shall be in writing and shall specify:

(a) The name and address of appellant;

(b) The matter being appealed;

(c) A statement of the grounds of appeal. (Ord. 71-162, § 6388; Ord. 76-389, § 1; Ord. 09-1431, § 2)

6385.1 Notice of Deficiency.
If a Notice of Appeal filed with the City Clerk is found by the City Clerk to be deficient, the City Clerk shall forthwith deliver or mail or cause to be mailed to the appellant by certified mail addressed to the appellant at the address of the appellant accompanying said Notice of Appeal, a Notice of Deficiency specifying the particulars in which the Notice of Appeal is deficient. If such deficiency has not been corrected by the appellant within seven (7) days after such mailing of such Notice of Deficiency by filing with the City Clerk a sufficient amendment to said Notice of Appeal, the Notice of Appeal shall be deemed to be withdrawn. (Ord. 76-389, § 1)

6385.2 Transmission of Factual Data.
Upon the filing of a Notice of Appeal, the City Clerk shall notify the Finance Director, who shall thereupon transmit to the City Clerk a copy of the factual data in the file of the Finance Director. Upon receipt of the factual data, the matter shall be placed on the agenda of the City Council for hearing. (Ord. 76-389, § 1)

6385.3 Hearing on Appeal – Notice.
Whenever a hearing is required by this Part, notice of the hearing is to be given to the appellant not less than five (5) days before such hearing either by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the appellant or other interested person at the address stated in the notice of appeal or as filed with or known to the City Clerk, or in the manner required for the service of summons in civil actions. (Ord. 71-162, § 1; Ord. 76-389, § 1)

6385.4 Hearing.
At the time of the hearing, the Council shall hear and consider any relevant and material evidence and reports. In such hearing, the appellant shall be given an opportunity to appear either personally or by counsel and to be heard and to call witnesses on his behalf. The Council may place any witness, including the appellant, under oath. The hearing may be continued from time to time as determined necessary by the Council or upon the request of the appellant upon good cause being shown therefor, in the sound discretion of the City Council. (Ord. 76-389, § 1)

6385.5 Hearing – Decision.
At the close of the hearing or at any time within thirty (30) days thereafter, the City Council shall determine from the facts produced at the hearing and from any other facts in its possession and presented at such hearing, whether to grant or deny the appeal. The Council may make its order conditional upon the appellant doing or not doing any act, either personally or through his servants or agents, which the Council deems for the public good. (Ord. 71-162; Ord. 76-389)

6385.6 Notice of Decision.
Unless the Council publicly announces its decision at the close of the hearing, it shall, within thirty (30) days thereafter, cause notice of its decision to be given. Such notice shall be given either by personal delivery thereof to the appellant or to any employee of such appellant at the address set forth in the notice of appeal, providing said permittee is absent from said place of business, or by depositing such notice in the United States Mail in a sealed envelope, first class registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the appellant at said address or to such other address of the appellant as may be filed with or known to the City Clerk. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of the deposit in a facility of the United States Post Office Department in the City. (Ord. 71-162, § 1; Ord. 76-389, § 1)

6386 Proof of Notice.
Proof of giving any notice herein required may be made by the certificate of any officer or employee of this City, or by affidavit or declaration under penalty of perjury of any person over the age of eighteen (18) years, which shows service in conformity with this Part. (Ord. 71-162, § 1; Ord. 76-389, § 1)

6387 No License to Be Issued.
After revocation or suspension of any permit by the Finance Director, no license shall thereafter be issued by the Finance Director to the licensee or permittee to carry on any business or do any act for which said permit was granted until a new permit and license shall have been granted therefor by the City Council following a public hearing pursuant to the procedure provided in CMC 6385.3, 6385.4, and 6385.5. (Ord. 71-162, § 1; Ord. 76-389, § 1)

6388 New License Required.
No person whose license or permit has been suspended or revoked pursuant to this Part shall engage in or carry on any business or do any act permitted to be done pursuant to such license or permit during the period of suspension or after revocation thereof, until a new license or permit shall have been granted and both such permit and license shall be in full force and effect. (Ord. 76-389, § 1)

6389 False Statements.
No person shall make any false, misleading or fraudulent statement, or misrepresentation of any fact in any application for a license or permit required to be filed with the Finance Director or any authorized officer or employee of this City. In addition to any other penalties provided in any Chapter of this Code, such conduct shall be grounds for suspending or revoking any license or permit issued to such person. (Ord. 71-162, § 1; Ord. 76-386, § 1)

6390 Posting.
Permits shall be posted or kept in like manner as provided with respect to licenses in CMC 6328. (Ord. 71-162, § 1; Ord. 76-386, § 1)

6391 Annual Renewal.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, permits issued hereunder shall be renewed annually by the Director of Finance provided he has received favorable reports with respect thereto from all investigating agencies concerned. The purpose of the annual renewal herein contained is to determine compliance with the provisions of this Code and with any terms or conditions of permit issued under this Chapter. (Ord. 71-162, § 1; Ord. 76-386, § 1)

6392 Nontransferability.
No permit issued under this Part shall be transferable except by the consent of the Finance Director. (Ord. 71-162, § 1; Ord. 76-386, § 1)

6393 Nonprofit Organizations.
Upon written request and for good cause, the Council may, by motion adopted by four-fifths (4/5) of its members, waive any of the requirements of this Chapter as to application, hearing and permit fees with respect to any institution or organization which is conducted, managed or carried on wholly for the benefit of charitable, religious, educational, recreational, or scientific purposes and from which profit is not derived either directly or indirectly by any individual, firm or corporation. (Ord. 71-162, § 1; Ord. 76-389, § 1)

6394 Permit Fees – Due Dates.
(a) All permit fees required by Parts 4 and 5 of this Chapter shall be due and payable to the City in advance, whether such fees shall be for an original permit or a renewal permit. All annual permits originally issued prior to January 1, 1989, and thereafter renewed and in effect, shall upon expiration of the current term be renewed for terms as follows:

(1) If the permit is not held by a person required to have a business license, the term shall be determined in accordance with rules, regulations and procedures formulated by the Director of Finance, and if the term shall be less than one (1) year, the permit fee shall be a pro rata portion of the annual permit fee.

(2) If the permit is held by a person holding a business license for such activity or business, the term of the permit shall be established by the Director of Finance pursuant to subsection (c) of this Section, and if the term shall be less than one (1) year, the permit fee shall be a pro rata portion of the annual permit fee.

(3) If there is any other circumstance not covered in paragraphs (1) or (2) above, the Director of Finance shall formulate rules, regulations and procedures to establish the term of the permit and if such term be less than one (1) year, to assign a pro rata portion of the annual fee thereto. In such case, the Director of Finance shall also formulate rules, regulations and procedures to coordinate the term of such permit and the term of any license where appropriate.

(b) The term of original annual permits issued after January 1, 1989, shall run from commencement of the business or activity for which a permit is required to the last day of the eleventh calendar month following the month in which the business or activity commenced (termination date). The anniversary date shall be the first day of the calendar month following the termination date. Permit fees are payable on or before the anniversary date. All existing permits which will terminate on December 31, 1988, are required to be renewed January 1, 1989, or such later date as may be established by the Finance Director pursuant to CMC 6351. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection (b), all permit fees for permits issued to a permittee at one (1) location shall be payable on the same anniversary date as the business license for the business at such location pursuant to the provisions of CMC 6325, and the terms of such permits shall be the same as the terms of the business licenses for the business at such location pursuant to CMC 6335.

(c) Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary contained in this Chapter 3, the Finance Director is hereby authorized and directed, pursuant to CMC 6314 and 6343, to formulate such rules, regulations and procedures as may be necessary and desirable to co-ordinate the time of payment of fees for an original permit or a renewal permit with the time of payment provided for in CMC 6325 relating to license fees, so as to facilitate the administration of this Chapter. (Ord. 76-162, § 1; Ord. 76-389, § 1; Ord. 88-840, § 4; Ord. 89-860U, § 1; Ord. 89-860, § 1; Ord. 89-895U, § 2)

6395 Delinquencies and Penalties – Permit Fees.
(a) Delinquency defined: Any permit fee required by this Chapter is delinquent if not paid by 6:00 p.m. on the day that such permit fee becomes due and payable. Original permit fees are due prior to the commencement of any business requiring such permit fee. If the day the permit fee becomes due and payable falls on a Friday, Saturday, Sunday, National or State Holiday or any other day the City’s offices are closed, such permit fee is delinquent if not paid by 6:00 p.m. on the next business day.

(b) Any daily, weekly or monthly permit fee required by this Chapter that remains unpaid after 6:00 p.m. on the day that the fee becomes due and payable shall be assessed a penalty of fifty (50) percent of the amount of the permit fee, which penalty shall be added to the fee. When the day that the penalty is to be imposed falls on a Friday, Saturday, Sunday, National or State Holiday, or on any other day the City’s offices are closed, the penalty shall be imposed if the fee is not paid by 6:00 p.m. on the next business day.

(c) Any annual permit fee required by this Chapter that is not paid by 6:00 p.m. on the second business day of the second calendar month immediately succeeding the month in which the fee becomes due and payable shall be assessed a penalty of fifty (50) percent of the amount of the permit fee, which penalty shall be added to the fee. (Ord. 06-1342, § 6)

6396 Additional Powers of the City Manager.
The City Manager or designee shall have the power, for good cause shown, to extend the time for filing any application for a permit or renewal of a permit required by this Chapter and the due date for payment of the fee for such permit for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days and in such case to waive any penalty that may otherwise have accrued during such thirty (30) day period. The City Manager or designee shall have the power to compromise any dispute with respect to a permit fee imposed hereunder. (Ord. 89-895U, § 4; Ord. 14-1541, § 3)

Part 5. Businesses, Professions, Trades and Occupations Requiring a Permit

63100 Permit Required.
A separate permit shall be required for each business, occupation, trade or profession mentioned in any of the following sections of this Part. The permit fee therefor shall be $50.00 per year unless otherwise specified in connection with the particular business, occupation, trade, or profession. (Ord. 06-1342, § 7)

63101 Advertising – Search Lights.
Permit Fee $50.00. (Ord. 71-162; Ord. 06-1342, § 8)

63102 Advertising – Sound Trucks.
Permit Fee $50.00. (Ord. 71-162; Ord. 06-1342, § 9)

63103 Ambulance Operator.
The Finance Director shall not issue an ambulance operator’s permit unless the applicant has complied with the following conditions:

(a) Filed policies of insurance on such ambulances with minimum coverage of not less than the following sums:

(1) For general liability, $1,000,000 for each occurrence and $2,000,000 aggregate.

(2) For automobile liability, $1,000,000 for each accident and must include all vehicles owned or operated, by or for the named insured, in the City of Carson or pursuant to any permit or contract granted by any agency of the City of Carson.

(3) For errors and omissions, $1,000,000 per each claim and $2,000,000 aggregate.

(4) For worker’s compensation, in such amount as will fully comply with the laws of the State of California.

(b) In place of one (1) insurance policy the applicant may file not more than two (2) insurance policies, one a policy of primary insurance and the second a policy of excess insurance, if the total insurance resulting from such policies is equal to, or greater than, that required by this Section.

(c) The general and automobile liability insurance policies shall name the City of Carson as an additional insured.

(d) Each insurance policy shall contain a provision that notice will be provided to the City in the event of cancellation of such insurance policy before its expiration date. Cancellation of any such policy shall automatically revoke and terminate the ambulance operator permit issued under this Section, unless another insurance policy complying with the terms of this Section is provided and in effect at the time of such cancellation.

(e) Each insurance policy shall be approved by the City’s Director of Risk Management. (Ord. 71-162; Ord. 06-1342, § 10; Ord. 16-1586, § 2)

63103.1 Same – Inspection.
The City Council shall not approve the issuance of a permit to any ambulance operator until each ambulance owned or to be operated by such operator has been inspected and found to be in compliance with all the provisions of this Code and all safety regulations approved by the Council. (Ord. 71-162)

63103.2 Same – Attendant Required.
An ambulance operator shall not, and an ambulance driver shall not, transport any sick or injured person in any ambulance unless, in addition to the ambulance driver, there is present in such ambulance an ambulance attendant who either possesses and carries on his person a current American Red Cross Advanced First Aid Card, or is in good faith under instruction in such course. (Ord. 71-162)

63103.3 Same – Inspection of Equipment.
At least once every three (3) months, each ambulance of a licensee shall be inspected by the Chief of the Los Angeles County Mechanical Services. The Chief shall inspect all ambulances on the premises of the applicant or licensee if the applicant or licensee so requests except:

(a) If the ambulance is not available at the time and place agreed upon, the Chief, Mechanical Services, shall leave, at the premises, a written notice instructing the applicant or licensee within ten (10) days to make an appointment with the Chief, Mechanical Services, at a place designated by the Chief.

(b) If equipment is necessary to make such inspection or any part of such inspection, which equipment is not available on the premises of the applicant or licensee, or if the applicant or license does not request inspection at his premises, said Chief shall serve the same notice as required by subdivision (a) of this Section on such applicant or licensee either as provided by the law for the service of summons or by First Class Mail, Postage Prepaid. (Ord. 71-162)

63103.4 Same – Return of License Plate.
If a licensee fails or refuses to make the appointment required by a notice from the Chief of Mechanical Services, pursuant to either CMC 63103.3(a) or (b), or fails or refuses to deliver an ambulance to the place designated by said Chief at the appointed time, the Finance Director shall notify such licensee in writing, that his license does not cover such ambulance and such ambulance shall not be used as such. The Finance Director shall also pick up any plates issued for such ambulance.

A person shall not operate any ambulance at any time after receipt by him of such notice from the Finance Director pursuant to this Section. (Ord. 71-162)

63103.5 Same – Regulations.
The City Council may impose such regulations on the type of ambulance and type of equipment used as the Council finds is necessary for the preservation of the health and safety of the patients of an ambulance operator and those using the highways.

The Chief, Mechanical Services, shall not approve and the Finance Director shall not issue an ambulance license for any ambulance which at the time of application is more than eight (8) years old. (Ord. 71-162)

63103.6 Same – Rates.
An ambulance operator shall charge those rates specified in the permit for services rendered. (Ord. 71-162)

63103.7 Same – Rebates.
An ambulance operator shall not give directly or indirectly or cause to be given any rebates, commissions, reserve rebates, or any reduced rates or cash discounts to any person or persons, or groups of any nature. (Ord. 71-162)

63104 Ambulance Attendant.
Permit Fee $10.00. Except as may otherwise be provided, every ambulance attendant shall possess at the time of his application and during the period for which such ambulance attendant’s permit is issued, and shall carry on his person while in an ambulance transporting a sick or injured person, an American Red Cross First Aid Card.

Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, an applicant for an ambulance attendant permit who does not have an Advanced American Red Cross First Aid Card in his possession at the time of his application shall be issued a contingent permit upon a finding by the Finance Director that the applicant meets any of the following criteria:

(a) Has a Standard American Red Cross First Aid Card in his possession and is in good faith enrolled in a course of training which will result in the issuance of the Advanced American Red Cross First Aid Card within ninety (90) days.

(b) Is in good faith enrolled in a course of training which will result in the issuance of a Standard American Red Cross First Aid Card within fifteen (15) days and of an Advanced American Red Cross First Aid Card within ninety (90) days.

If the applicant fails to obtain the required American Red Cross First Aid Card at the above specified times, the attendant’s permit shall be revoked without notice and the Finance Director shall take into his possession such revoked permit or evidence of such revoked permit. (Ord. 71-162; Ord. 71-197, § 1; Ord. 06-1342, § 11).

63105 Ambulance Driver.
Permit Fee $10.00. Every ambulance driver shall possess at the time of his application and during the period for which such ambulance driver’s permit is issued, and shall carry on his person while transporting any sick or injured person, a valid driver’s license of the appropriate class duly issued by the State of California permitting his driving of the ambulance upon the public streets and highways and an Advanced American Red Cross First Aid Card. In the event that either such driver’s license or American Red Cross First Aid Card is suspended, revoked, restricted or shall otherwise cease to continue in full force and effect, the ambulance driver’s permit shall be revoked without notice. The Finance Director thereupon shall take into his possession such permit or evidence of such permit so revoked.

Ambulance transporting a sick or injured person, an American Red Cross First Aid Card. (Ord. 06-1342, § 12)

63106 Amusement Center or Arcade.
Permit Fee $50.00.

(a) Sales and services of alcoholic beverages may be conducted provided that a conditional use permit has been granted, pursuant to the Zoning Ordinance, permitting such sales and services.

(b) Management shall prevent loitering and obstruction of pedestrian traffic in front of the arcade or amusement center by clientele of the premises.

(c) No machine shall be played between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., except as necessary for normal maintenance work by the permittee, or the permittee’s approved employees.

(d) The office area, if any, and restrooms shall remain locked and permission to use them granted only by management. However, access to all restroom facilities shall be available during business hours.

(e) No person under eighteen (18) years of age will be allowed on the premises where the machines are located after 10:00 p.m. on any day unless accompanied by parent or guardian.

(f) The permittee shall comply with all of the provisions of CMC 63107 through 63107.3.

(g) Failure to comply with the regulations provided by this Section shall be cause for immediate suspension or revocation of the permit pursuant to CMC 6383. (Ord. 83-650, § 1; Ord. 83-664, § 1; Ord. 06-1342, § 13)

63107 Amusement and Game Machines.
Permit Fee $50.00. Each application for a permit for any coin-operated machine of skill open to the public shall describe the type of machine, the serial number, if any, the name of the manufacturer and the location where each machine is to be operated. (Ord. 71-162; Ord. 06-1342, § 14)

63107.1 Same – Regulations.
(a) Each machine shall bear the name of the permittee in plain view in letters of not less than one-fourth (1/4) inch in height.

(b) No person, either as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, shall operate, play or utilize, or permit any person or persons to operate, play or utilize any amusement machine, pinball machine, game or device for the purpose of gambling, betting, wagering or pledging in any manner whatsoever any money, thing, or consideration of value or the equivalent or memorandum thereof, upon the outcome, score or result of the playing or operation of said amusement machine, game or device, except as provided in Chapter 7 of Article VI of this Code.

(c) A floor plan, plot plan, and layout shall be supplied and approved by the Director of Finance and Administration and no changes or alterations in the plans shall occur without prior approval of the Director of Finance and Administration.

(d) Every establishment containing an amusement or game machine shall have an adult attendant on duty at all times. Any person assuming managerial control must be at least twenty-one (21) years of age and be approved by the Director of Finance and Administration.

(e) No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be permitted to play any amusement or game machine during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. on any day in which the public schools are in regular (nonsummer) session.

(f) Failure to comply with the provisions of this Section shall be cause for immediate suspension or revocation of the permit pursuant to CMC 6383. (Ord. 71-162; Ord. 83-650, § 2)

63107.2 Same – Transfer Fee.
Any such machine or device permitted under this Part may be removed from the place of operation for which it has been licensed and replaced with a like or similar machine or device at any time during the term of the permit issued therefor upon the payment to the Finance Director of a transfer fee in the amount established by resolution of the City Council and submission in writing to such officer of all the information concerning such replacement machine or device as is required in an initial application for any such machine or device. (Ord. 71-162; Ord. 83-650, § 3)

63107.3 Same – Penalties.
Each and every such machine operated at any location in the City without a permit therefor or not complying with the regulations of this Part or of any other sections of this Code, may be sealed against further operation and held by the City, at the owner’s risk, until all license and permit fees, storage charge, and other accumulated costs are paid. (Ord. 71-162; Ord. 83-650, § 2)

63108 Auctioneers – Applications.
Permit Fee $150.00. Application for a permit shall be made upon forms furnished by and shall be filed with the Finance Director. (Ord. 06-1342, § 15)

63108.1 Auctioneers – Bond.
An auctioneer’s bond shall be filed with the Finance Director prior to the issuance of a permit. The bond shall be in the amount of $2,500, and shall insure the City of Carson against any loss or damage that may result to any person, firm or corporation who is aggrieved or damaged by any act of the permittee as auctioneer or by any of his employees or by the fraud or misdealing of any kind by such auctioneer or employee. Such undertaking shall not be void upon a first recovery but may be sued upon and recovered upon from time to time by any person aggrieved until the full penalty sum is exhausted. (Ord. 71-162)

63108.2 Auctioneer – Exceptions.
No auctioneer’s permit is required for the selling of any goods at public sale belonging to the United States, or to this State, or for the sale of property by virtue of any process issued by any state or federal court.

No auctioneer’s permit is required of any person selling his own property at his own private residence. (Ord. 71-162)

63109 Auction House – Applications.
Permit Fee $250.00. Any person commencing or conducting an auction house shall first obtain a permit from the City Council. Application for such permit shall be made upon forms provided by the Finance Director. (Ord. 06-1342, § 16)

63109.1 Auction House – Bond.
No auction house permit shall be issued unless there is on file with the Finance Director a surety bond in the principal sum of $5,000 indemnifying any person against any loss through fraud or misrepresentation. Any person licensed by the State and having deposited a bond with the State shall not be required to file a bond with the Finance Director; provided, however, in such case the Finance Director shall make a record of the expiration date of the State bond and note the expiration date on the City Permit.

Any City Permit for an auction house shall be revoked automatically whenever any such bond becomes ineffective for any reason unless the principal shall file a new surety bond in compliance with the provisions of this Section prior to the date such bond may become ineffective. (Ord. 71-162)

63110 Auction – Private Residences.
A person shall not sell at public auction, at a private residence, any goods, wares, or merchandise, except goods, wares, or merchandise belonging to the resident of such home and used as, or as a part of, the furnishings of such residence. (Ord. 71-162)

63111 Auction – Goods of One (1) Person.
If either a public or private auction is advertised to be, or in any manner represented to be a sale of the property or stock of any particular person, a person shall not sell or offer for sale at such auction any goods, wares, or merchandise other than the property or stock of such person. (Ord. 71-162)

63112 Auto Body and Fender Shop.
Permit Fee $100.00. Any auto body and fender shop permit does not include or permit the painting, enameling or lacquering of motor vehicles except the parts repaired or replaced when such painting, enameling or lacquering is made necessary by such repair or replacement. (Ord. 06-1342, § 17)

63113 Auto Dismantling.
Repealed by Ord. 06-1342. (Ord. 71-162)

63114 Auto Painting.
Permit Fee $100.00. (Ord. 06-1342, § 19)

63115 Auto Repair Shop.
Permit Fee $100.00. Every repairer shall keep records upon forms prescribed by the Chief of Police of:

(a) Repairs on every motor vehicle where there is physical evidence of a wreck or collision;

(b) Repairs of a motor vehicle for which a charge of $10.00 or more is made;

(c) The name and address of every person from whom secondhand parts were obtained. Such person shall sign such records and the repairer shall require such persons to sign such records;

(d) All motor changes, frame changes, body changes and the serial and factory numbers of all radios which he installs. (Ord. 06-1342, § 20)

63115.1 Auto Repair Shop – Inspection of Records.
For a period of not less than one (1) year after the completion of the work, a repairer shall make available to inspection by the Chief of Police or by any other peace officer during business hours all records required by this Article. (Ord. 71-162)

63115.2 Same – Itemized Statement.
Upon the demand of such person, a repairer shall furnish an itemized statement of parts and labor used in repairing any motor vehicle of the charges made therefor, to:

(a) The legal owner of such motor vehicle;

(b) The registered owner of such motor vehicle;

(c) The insurer of such motor vehicle or of the legal or registered owner or operator thereof. (Ord. 71-162)

63115.3 Same – Secondhand Parts.
Whenever a repairer uses any secondhand parts in repairing or altering any motor vehicle, such repairer shall so inform the person for whom he is performing such repair or alteration, and shall also so state upon any bill rendered and upon any record required by this Part. (Ord. 71-162)

63115.4 Same – Signs.
Every repairer shall maintain upon the front of his place of business, a sign displaying the plainly legible letters of his name or any fictitious name under which he conducts his business. (Ord. 71-162)

63115.5 Same – Revocation of Permit.
In addition to any other reasons, the City Council may revoke the permit of any repairer upon any of the following grounds:

(a) The conviction of the repairer or his agent, servant, or employee of the theft or other unlawful taking of any motor vehicle or motor vehicle part;

(b) The mutilation or alteration of any engine number or serial number of any motor vehicle;

(c) The misstatement of work done, among other things, including:

(i) The installation of old parts and charging for new parts;

(ii) Charging for parts not installed. (Ord. 71-162)

63115.6 Auto Repairs – Service Station.
No automobile repair activity or business may be conducted in connection with a service station or service station business without an auto repair shop permit under this Part. Lubrication, replacement of windshield wiper blades, oil filter cartridges, tires, and like accessories, and minor adjustments or temporary repairs at a cost not to exceed $5.00 to enable a vehicle to be driven to an auto repair shop, do not constitute repair activity or business for the purpose of this Section. (Ord. 71-162)

63116 Bath Parlors.
Permit Fee $2,500. “Bath Parlor” means and includes a place where, as a business or in connection with a business, Russian, Swedish or Turkish baths are provided, or any public place which has in connection therewith a steamroom, dry or hot room plunge, swimming pool, shower bath or sleeping accommodations. (Ord. 06-1342, § 21)

63117 Billiard and Pool Halls.
Permit Fee $50.00. No owner, manager, proprietor or other person having charge of any billiard room or pool hall shall keep the same open or allow or permit the same to be kept open or allow or permit any game to be played therein from 2:00 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. of any day, or allow or permit any person except such owner, manager, proprietor or person in charge thereof, or the employees regularly employed in and about the same, to be or remain therein between the hours aforesaid. (Ord. 71-162; Ord. 06-1342, § 22)

63117.1 Billiard and Pool Halls – Disorderly Persons.
No owner, manager, proprietor or other person in charge of any billiard room or pool hall shall allow or permit any intoxicated, quarreling or disorderly person or persons to be or remain in such place. (Ord. 71-162)

63117.2 Billiard and Pool Halls – Minors.
A person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall not enter, or remain on or in any billiard room or pool hall except when such person is accompanied by a spouse of legal age, or his parent or guardian, or has the written permission of his parent or guardian. The written consent shall be in a manner and form approved by the Finance Director.

No person under the age of eighteen (18) years who is not accompanied by a parent or guardian shall be allowed to be in, remain in, enter or visit such place unless an adult supervisor employee of the permittee is present in said room at all times. A person under the age of sixteen (16) years shall not be, remain in, enter or visit any billiard room or pool hall after 10:00 p.m. unless attended by a parent or his legal guardian. (Ord. 71-162)

63117.3 Billiard and Pool Halls – Obstruction of Entrance.
A person shall not maintain any billiard room or pool hall, or similar place of business to which the public is invited, or any social billiard club, where there is placed, constructed, or maintained any screen, partition, barrier, closet, alcove, or object which may obstruct the visibility of any part of such establishment except rest rooms:

(a) From the street or sidewalk, if such establishment is located on the ground floor;

(b) From the entrance of any establishment which is located either entirely below the level of the street or sidewalk or on the second or higher floor of any building or other structure. (Ord. 71-162)

63117.4 Billiard and Pool Halls – Exceptions.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any person having charge of any billiard or pool hall may apply to the Council for a permit to keep the same open from 2:00 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. The Council may grant such a permit if the following conditions are met:

(a) The operation of the billiard or pool hall is on the same premises and in connection with another business which is normally and regularly operated between the stated hours;

(b) There is no objection to the issuance of the permit by the law enforcement agency. (Ord. 71-162)

63117.5 Billiard and Pool Halls – Rules and Regulations.
The City Council may adopt such additional rules and regulations as it finds are necessary and expedient to enforce the provisions of this Part. (Ord. 71-162)

63118 Bookstores, Including Mail Order Bookstores.
Permit Fee $100.00. In addition to the grounds for denial of a permit set forth in CMC 6376, a bookstore permit shall not be granted if the applicant, his employee, agent or any person connected or associated with the applicant as partner, director, officer, stockholder, associate or manager:

(a) Has been convicted within the last five (5) years preceding the date of application in any court of competent jurisdiction of:

(i) Any crime requiring registration under Section 290 of the Penal Code; or

(ii) Any violation of Chapter 7.6 or Chapter 8 (Section 311 to 318.6 inclusive) of Title 9, Part 1 of the Penal Code; or

(iii) Any violation of Paragraphs (a), (b) or (d) of Section 647 of the Penal Code; or

(iv) Any offense involving the use of force and violence upon the person of another;

(v) Any offense involving the maintenance of a nuisance in connection with the same or similar business operation.

(b) Has committed with said last five (5) years any offense described in subsections (a)(i), (a)(ii) or (a)(iii) of this Section.

(c) Has allowed or permitted acts of sexual misconduct to be committed within prior business operations of the applicant, or with which applicant was connected.

(d) The applicant has had a similar type of permit previously revoked for good cause within one (1) year prior to the application, or if he has, has not shown material changes in circumstances since such revocation.

In addition to the grounds for suspension or revocation of a permit set forth in CMC 6384, the City Council may suspend or revoke a bookstore permit on any of the grounds or by reason of any matter or fact set forth in Paragraphs (a), (b) or (c) of this Section 63118. (Ord. 71-162)

63119 Carnival – Application.
Permit Fee $100.00. Any person desiring to operate or conduct a carnival within the City shall file with the Director of Finance an application for a permit. Such application shall be so filed not less than twenty-one (21) days before the first day on which the applicant seeks permission to operate, and shall show the following:

a. Name and address of applicant;

b. The location on which applicant desires to conduct such carnival;

c. The names and addresses of the officers of a corporate applicant, and of the partners if the applicant is a partnership;

d. The name and address of applicant’s insurance carrier and the number of the applicant’s public liability and property damage insurance policy;

e. The applicant shall be accompanied by a plot plan showing all land uses within five hundred (500) feet of the perimeter of the property on which the carnival is proposed to be conducted;

f. If one (1) or more residences are located within said five hundred (500) feet, the application shall not be accepted for filing unless accompanied by the written consent required by CMC 63119.1(b). (Ord. 71-162; Ord. 06-1342, § 23)

63119.1 Same – Conditions of Permit.
The City Manager may grant or deny such application. If such application is granted, a permit shall be issued on the following conditions:

a. The proposed operation shall be conducted only in a C-3, C-4, or M zone, except that the City Manager may by specific action authorize permits in other zones if in accordance with the spirit of this Chapter and not detrimental to the surrounding area.

b. No carnival operation shall be conducted within five hundred (500) feet of any residence, unless the applicant for a carnival permit has first obtained the written consent of more than fifty (50) percent of the owners or tenants of any residence within a five hundred (500) foot radius of the proposed carnival site.

c. Such operation shall be conducted only between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. unless otherwise expressly ordered by the City Manager and provided in such permit.

d. Liability insurance policies shall be filed with the City Clerk providing coverage of not less than $5,000,000 for general liability and $1,000,000 for automobile liability.

e. The applicant provides to the satisfaction of the City Manager for maintenance and cleanliness of the area in which such operation is conducted, prior to, during and upon completion of such operation.

f. That the applicant pay a fee of $100.00 to the City concurrently with the issuance of such permit.

g. That the permit issued to applicant be displayed at all times on the premises where such operation is conducted, during such operation.

h. Such other terms and conditions as the City Manager may prescribe. (Ord. 71-162; Ord. 06-1342, § 24; Ord. 15-1543, § 1)

63120 Circuses – Similar Operations.
Any circus, circus parade or other operation similar to a carnival or circus may be granted a permit upon compliance with and in accordance with all of the terms and conditions of CMC 63119 and 63119.1. (Ord. 71-162)

63121 Dance – Application.
Permit Fee $50.00. Every person desiring a permit to conduct a dance or to operate a dance hall or dance school shall file an application with the Finance Director upon a form provided by the Finance Director. Such application shall specify:

(a) The address and business name of the location for which the permit is desired.

(b) Name and business address of applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation; and the applicant shall also set forth the date and place of incorporation; the names and residence addresses of each of the principal officers, directors, and each stockholder owning more than ten (10) percent of the stock of the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall set forth the name and residence address of each of the partners, including limited partners. If one (1) or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this Section pertaining to corporate applicants shall apply.

(c) The names and addresses of the persons who have authority or control over the place for which the license is requested and a brief statement of the nature and extent of such authority or control.

(d) If the applicant is leasing such premises from the owners, the application shall include the names and addresses of each of the owners of the premises upon which the activity is to be conducted.

(e) Such additional information pertinent to the operation of the proposed activity, including but not limited to information as to the management, authority, control, financial agreements, and lease arrangements as the Finance Director may require.

(f) The specific type of license for which application is being made.

(g) The address to which notice, when required, is to be sent or mailed, and the names of any individual or individuals, in addition to those set forth elsewhere in the application, who are authorized to accept service of process on behalf of the permittee.

(h) If the application is for a new license or for a renewal of an existing license.

(i) Whether or not the applicant, or officer, or director, or member of applicant, as the case may be, has ever been convicted of any crime, except misdemeanor traffic violations. In addition to the foregoing, any corporate applicant whose securities have been conditioned by the Commissioner of Corporations pursuant to Section 25141 of the Corporations Code of California, will state whether or not any stockholder owning more than ten (10) percent of the stock of such corporation has ever been convicted of any crime, except misdemeanor traffic violations. If any person mentioned in this subsection (i) has been so convicted, the place and court in which the conviction was had, the specific charge under which the conviction was obtained, and the sentence imposed as a result of such conviction. (Ord. 71-162; Ord. 06-1342, § 25)

63121.1 Same – Application for Special Dance.
An applicant for a special dance permit, in addition to the items required in CMC 63121 shall specify the number of dances held within the three (3) month period immediately preceding the date of the application. (Ord. 71-162)

63121.2 Same – Application for Youth Dance.
An applicant for a youth dance permit, in addition to the items required in CMC 63121, shall specify the minimum age of the young people who will be permitted to participate in the dancing. (Ord. 71-162)

63121.3 Same – General Regulations.
(a) Hours. No dancing may be conducted in an establishment operating under a permit issued pursuant to Parts 4 and 5 of this Chapter between the hours of 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. of the same day, except where a special permit has been issued by the Finance Director. Such special permit is good only for the one (1) day shown upon such permit.

(b) Minors. Except as may otherwise be provided, a person under eighteen (18) years of age shall not enter, be or remain on or in any public dance or club dance unless accompanied by his parent, legal guardian, or spouse over the age of twenty-one (21) years of age.

(c) Minors, Exceptions. Paragraph (b) does not apply to:

(1) Any dancing school except when such school is conducting a public or private dance for other than the regular instructions;

(2) Any youth dance or special dance where a permit has been granted pursuant to, and which is conducted in full compliance with, the provisions of this Chapter.

(d) Intoxicated Persons. No person who is in an intoxicated condition or under the influence of any drug shall appear in or be on any establishment holding a permit pursuant to this Chapter. A person who conducts or assists in conducting any such dance or establishment shall not permit any intoxicated person or persons under the influence of any drug to appear, be, or remain at such place.

(e) Minors – Alcoholic Beverages. A permittee shall not permit or allow any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to be in any public dance hall or any public dance or club dance when alcoholic beverages are sold or served in the building or the premises where such public dance or club dance is being held or in which such public dance hall is situated, except when such person is accompanied by a parent or spouse over twenty-one (21) years of age. A person under the age of twenty-one (21) shall not be in any public dance hall or any public dance or club dance when alcoholic beverages are sold or served in the building, or in the premises where such public dance is being held or in which such public dance hall is situated, except when such person is accompanied by a parent or spouse over twenty-one (21) years of age.

(f) Exits. No dancing shall be permitted in any establishment where a permit is required which does not provide unlocked doors with free and easy egress while patrons are in the establishments.

(g) Solicitation of Drinks. No dancing may be conducted in establishments where a permit is required where employees solicit or accept drinks of alcoholic beverages from customers.

(h) Gambling. No dancing may be conducted in any establishment where a permit is required in which gambling in any form is permitted or tolerated or in which there is kept any machine or machines or other device designed or commonly used for the purpose of gambling in any form.

(i) Solicitation of Trade. No dancing may be conducted in any establishment where a permit is required at which solicitation of trade is made at or near the entrance thereto, either by personal solicitation or otherwise, by means of any device whereby the voice of the person soliciting can be heard at or near such entrance.

(j) Lighting. Every dance establishment operating under a permit issued in accordance with this Chapter shall be lighted throughout to an intensity of not less than three (3) foot-candles during all hours of operation except while a floor show is in progress.

(k) Parking. Every person operating an establishment under a dance permit issued in accordance with this Chapter, who owns, operates, or controls any parking lot adjacent to such establishment and used in connection therewith, shall uniformly light such parking lot to an intensity of not less than two (2) foot-candles.

(l) Supervision. At every establishment operating under a dance permit issued pursuant to this Chapter having a capacity of not less than two hundred (200) persons, not less than one (1) adult employee or supervisor shall be constantly in attendance during the entire time that any dance is in progress, and shall devote his entire time and attention to keeping order, checking the admission of minors, and seeing to it that all provisions of this Chapter are complied with. One (1) additional employee shall be employed for each one hundred (100) persons who could be accommodated whether actually present or not. In any establishment having a capacity of not less than three hundred (300) persons, not less than one (1) of the persons herein referred to shall be a female.

(m) Police Chief, Admission and Inspection. Deputy Police shall inspect any and all establishments operating under dance permits issued pursuant to this Chapter and the Chief of Police and/or his deputies shall be permitted to enter free of charge any establishment for the purpose of inspection.

(n) Readmission to Dance. No person shall be readmitted to any public dance or public dance hall unless either:

(1) An admission charge not less than charged to patrons entering such public dance or public dance hall for the first time is again paid; or

(2) The permit specifically provides that such readmission may be allowed.

(o) Additional Rules and Regulations. The Council may adopt and/or impose such additional rules and regulations as may be proper or necessary for the maintenance of public order, the promotion of public morals, assuring comporting with public welfare, and the orderly conduct of such places for the better enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 71-162)

63121.4 Same – Private Club.
No establishment operating under a dance permit issued pursuant to this Chapter may allow the premises to be used as a private club between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. (Ord. 71-162)

63121.5 Same – Exceptions.
Notwithstanding any provisions of this Chapter to the contrary, the following are not required to have a dance permit and shall upon request be issued an exempt business license, but otherwise shall be subject to the regulatory provisions of this Chapter.

(a) Any governmental organization consisting of the State, or any subdivision thereof, the County, any City, or any recreational group, agency or organization thereof.

(b) Any nonprofit organization or group organized and existing for charitable religious, social, fraternal, patriotic or social welfare purposes where such dance or dances are not customarily carried on as a commercial enterprise or venture by such group and where such group or organization claiming exemption delivers to the Finance Director, either personally or by first class mail, a notice of the time and place of such dance at least three (3) days in advance of said dance. (Ord. 71-162)

63121.6 Same – Youth Dance Permits.
Three (3) types of youth dance permits are hereby established:

(a) Type A Youth Dance Permit may be issued to any establishment serving alcoholic beverages and qualifying as a bona fide public eating place within the definition of Section 23038 of the Business and Professions Code. A person under seventeen (17) years of age shall not enter, be, or remain on or in any premises for which a Type A Youth Dance Permit is required or has been issued pursuant to this Chapter, except when such person is accompanied by his parent, guardian or spouse over twenty-one (21) years of age. No person or persons required to have a dance permit under this Chapter shall allow any person under seventeen (17) years of age to enter, be, or remain on or in such premises unless such person is accompanied by his parent, guardian or spouse over twenty-one (21) years of age.

(b) Type B Youth Dance Permit may be issued to any establishment not serving alcoholic beverages. A person under fifteen (15) years of age shall not enter, be, or remain on or in any premises for which a Type B Youth Dance Permit is required or has been issued pursuant to this Chapter unless such person is accompanied by his parent, guardian or spouse over twenty-one (21) years of age.

(c) Type C Youth Dance Permit shall be issued for special youth dances not otherwise covered. The City Council shall determine and designate the appropriate age limitations to be imposed for each individual Type C Youth Dance and shall so designate in the permit issued therefor. The Council, in addition, may impose such additional terms and conditions as the Council, in its discretion, deems advisable. No Type C Youth Dance Permit shall be issued authorizing participation by any person under fifteen (15) years of age unless issued to an adult sponsoring group of not less than five (5) persons, each of whom have been approved by the Council, unless the Council has determined by reason of unusual circumstances and the imposition of other conditions that the public interest, safety and welfare do not require all or any of such adult sponsors. When required, adult sponsors shall be present during the conducting of all such dances. No person under the age limit specified in a Type C Youth Dance Permit shall enter, be, or remain on or in any premises for which the permit is required or has been issued except where accompanied by his parent, guardian or spouse over twenty-one (21) years of age. No person or persons required to have such a permit under this Chapter shall permit any person under the minimum age specified in said permit to enter, be, or remain on or in said premises for which such permit is required or has been issued pursuant to this Chapter except when such person is accompanied by his parent, guardian, or spouse over twenty-one (21) years of age. (Ord. 71-162)

63121.7 Same – Intoxicated Persons.
A person who conducts or assists in conducting or manages or sponsors any such dance or to whom a dance permit has been issued by this Chapter shall not permit any intoxicated person, or person in an intoxicated condition, to appear, be or remain at any such place while any such dance is in progress. (Ord. 71-162)

63121.8 Same – Refusal to Leave.
Any person remaining on the premises of any dance hall or public dance after being asked by the permittee, proprietor, manager or employee thereof to leave and refusing to do so is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 71-162)

63125 Entertainment.
Entertainment Class I Permit fee

$200.00

 

With valid dance permit

$100.00

 

 

 

Entertainment Class II Permit fee

$2,500.00

 

(If permit is granted, no additional fee is payable for Class I or Class III permits for the same location and owner)

 

 

 

 

Entertainment Class III Permit fee

$100.00

 

With valid dance permit

$50.00

No proprietor of a restaurant, hotel, cafe, coffee house, cabaret, club, barroom, beer hall, beer garden, or public dance hall, or an employee thereof, or anyone, shall conduct, permit, or assist in the conducting or permitting of any entertainment to be shown, staged, performed, exhibited or produced in any restaurant, hotel, cafe, coffee house, cabaret, club, barroom, beer hall, beer garden, or public dance hall unless a permit for Class I, Class II or Class III entertainment has been issued therefor in accordance with the terms and provisions of Parts 4 and 5 of this Chapter. (Ord. 06-1342, § 26)

63125.1 Same – Hours.
No entertainment, as defined in this Chapter shall be conducted between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless authorized by the permit to do so. (Ord. 71-162)

63125.2 Same – Minors.
A person under the age of eighteen (18) shall not enter, be, or remain on or in any premises where entertainment is being conducted as herein provided except when such person is accompanied by a spouse of legal age, or his parent or guardian or except where authorized by the permit. A permittee shall not permit or allow any such person to enter or to be in or on any premises contrary to the provisions of this Section. (Ord. 71-162)

63125.3 Same – Free Entrances.
No entertainment shall be permitted in any such establishment requiring a permit hereunder which does not provide unlocked doors for free and easy egress and ingress while patrons are in the establishment. (Ord. 71-162)

63125.4 Same – Entertainment Class II.
No person, whether a proprietor, owner, receptionist, waitress, dancing girl, model, bar maid, employee, agent or independent contractor, shall perform or engage in the act of performing nude entertainment or semi-nude entertainment as defined under “Entertainment Class II” in CMC 6303 unless said person, in addition to any other permit required by this Chapter, has a valid Entertainment Class II permit therefor issued by the Director of Finance in accordance with the terms and provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 71-162)

63125.5 Same – Entertainer Permit.
No person shall appear in the nude or semi-nude, as defined under “Entertainment Class II” in CMC 6303, in display of any customer in any establishment for which a permit is required by Parts 4 and 5 of this Chapter, unless in possession of a valid Class II entertainer’s permit issued pursuant to the terms and provisions of Parts 4 and 5 of this Chapter.

No person shall procure, display or authorize, nor shall any female appear in the semi-nude, as defined under “Entertainment Class II” in CMC 6303 in display of any person in or on any establishment for which a permit is required by Parts 4 and 5 of this Chapter, except pursuant to a permit specifically authorizing and denoting thereon the words “semi-nude entertainment authorized.”

No person shall procure, display or authorize, nor shall any female appear in the nude, as defined under “Entertainment Class II” in CMC 6303, in display of any person in or on any establishment for which a permit is required by Parts 4 and 5 of this Chapter, except pursuant to a permit specifically authorizing and denoting thereon the words “nude entertainment authorized.”

The granting of a permit for semi-nude entertainment hereunder shall not be deemed to grant a permit for nude entertainment. Further, the granting of any permit under the provisions of this Chapter to anyone which does not denote thereon that semi-nude or nude entertainment is authorized shall not grant to the possessor of that permit any right or privilege to authorize, engage in, display, conduct or perform nude or semi-nude entertainment and the doing of such without a permit by anyone required to have a permit under this Chapter is hereby declared unlawful and prohibited. It is unlawful for any person within the City of Carson to engage in or provide or conduct nude or semi-nude entertainment as defined under “Entertainment Class II” in CMC 6303 on any premises wherein an entertainer’s permit is required by this Chapter unless such person has on his person or posted upon the premises so licensed for such entertainment a valid permit approving nude or semi-nude entertainment. It is unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to show such permit as issued by the Director of Finance, upon demand for display of the same by any law enforcement officer or agent of the City of Carson. (Ord. 71-162)

63125.6 Same – Fashion Shows.
No fashion show may be conducted at any location unless an entertainment permit for such location is in full force and effect. No person shall participate in a fashion show for which a permit is required by this Section wherein said person appears nude or semi-nude, as defined under “Entertainment Class II” in CMC 6303, unless such person has a valid permit to perform as a nude or semi-nude entertainer issued pursuant to this Chapter and in full force and effect. (Ord. 71-162)

63125.7 Same – Standards.
The City Council, in granting or denying a permit for entertainment, in addition to the standards specified in CMC 6376, shall take into consideration the following factors in determining any conditions to be imposed in respect to the granting of said permit or in determining that said permit should be denied, in the protection of the public peace, health, safety, morals, or welfare:

(a) Proximity to surrounding residential area, schools, churches, parks and public buildings;

(b) Building standards for public assemblage;

(c) Moral character of proprietor and entertainer and employee participating in entertainment;

(d) Noise, traffic, and other factors relevant to the quiet and peaceful enjoyment of the neighborhood;

(e) Increased policing, if any, necessitated by the activity for which the permit is requested;

(f) Any other factors created by the type of entertainment proposed to be supplied under said permit which may interfere with or endanger the public health, safety, morals or welfare. (Ord. 71-162)

63125.8 Same – Special Conditions or Requirements.
In granting any entertainment permit, the City Council may, in the application of the aforementioned standards and in order to protect the public peace, health, safety, morals and welfare, impose any reasonable conditions or regulations pertaining to the conduct of such entertainment and in addition may impose other limitations over and above those mentioned in this Chapter in order to protect the public health, safety, morals and welfare, including without limitation, further limits on the hours of operation and the age of persons who may attend such places of entertainment and may require all necessary adult or police supervision, including the presence of a uniformed officer. (Ord. 71-162)

63125.9 Same – Regulations for Nude or Semi-Nude (Class II) Entertainment.
In addition to any other regulation or provision of this Chapter, the following shall apply and shall control whether or not inconsistent with any provision of this Chapter, to any premises upon which Class II entertainment, as defined under “Entertainment Class II” in CMC 6303 is being conducted:

(a) Minors. No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall enter, be, or remain in or on any such premises while nude or semi-nude entertainment is presented and no owner, manager, proprietor, licensee or permittee, or the employee or agent thereof shall permit any such person to enter, be, or remain in or on any such premises while nude or semi-nude entertainment is presented.

(b) Building Facilities. All such entertainment shall be presented within a building and no such entertainment shall be visible at any time from any ground, parking lot, sidewalk, street, highway, alley, or from any point outside of an exterior of such a building. The building within which said entertainment is provided shall be of adequate size, design and construction to safely house the patrons and guests likely to be attracted to said premises by reason of said entertainment.

(c) Compliance with Applicable Laws. No permit shall be granted until the applicant has complied fully with all applicable laws, including but not limited to the City’s Zoning, Building, Health and Fire Codes and Regulations.

(d) Customer Participation. No guest or customer on the premises for which an entertainment permit is required shall appear in the nude or semi-nude as defined under “Entertainment Class II” in CMC 6303 without a permit to do so as a nude or semi-nude entertainer.

(e) Manager. All premises upon which a Class II entertainment permit is required by this Chapter shall have a manager on the premises at all times during nude or semi-nude entertainment. Such manager, if not the permittee, shall first procure a permit, pay a permit fee of $50.00 and shall be registered with and approved by the City Council in accordance with the terms and provisions of this Chapter applicable to an owner, proprietor, permittee or licensee. If approved, such person shall be issued a Manager’s Permit.

(f) Interior Lighting. Every premises for which a Class II entertainment permit is required shall be lighted throughout to an intensity of not less than twenty (20) foot-candles during any time while nude or semi-nude entertainment is in progress except where nude or semi-nude entertainment is being conducted on a stage. No owner, proprietor, licensee, permittee or the manager, agent or employee thereof shall conduct or operate or authorize any nude or semi-nude entertainment while said premises are not so lighted in accordance with the said minimum standards.

(g) Exterior Lighting. No such person, in addition, shall conduct, operate or authorize any nude or semi-nude entertainment in any such premises for which nude or semi-nude entertainment permits have been issued, at any time between sunset to one-half hour after the closing hour of said premises, unless the parking lot thereof and all adjacent ground of said premises are uniformly lighted with an intensity of not less than one (1) foot-candle.

(h) Solicitation of Trade. No Class II entertainment may be conducted on any premises for which a permit is required by this Chapter where solicitation of trade is made at or near the entrance thereof, either by person solicitation or otherwise, or by means of any device whereby the voice of the person soliciting can be heard at or near such entrance.

(i) Signs. No sign or signs which in whole or in part advertise any nude or semi-nude entertainment for which a Class II permit is required by this Chapter, whether utilizing the words nude or semi-nude or topless shall exceed in area two (2) square feet for every front foot of property. No sign or signs which in whole or in part depict the human form or any portion thereof, whether clothed or unclothed, shall be maintained, erected, used or placed upon or adjacent to the outside of any building or in connection with any premises wherein a Class II entertainment permit is required by this Chapter. No sign or signs which in whole or in part advertise any topless, nude or semi-nude entertainment, using the word “girls,” “topless,” “nude,” “semi-nude” or words of like or similar import, except the sign required by the next sentence, shall be maintained, erected, used or placed upon or adjacent to the outside of any building or in connection with any premises operating under an Entertainment Class II permit issued pursuant to this Chapter.

Every establishment operating under an entertainment Class II permit shall place at or near the entrance to the establishment described in the permit a sign of not more than two hundred twenty-five (225) square inches upon which is written: “Warning. This establishment offers topless or nude entertainment. If you would be offended, do not enter.” Such sign shall be illuminated to an intensity of not less than ten (10) foot-candles, and shall be clearly visible to any person entering the licensed establishment before such person enters the area where entertainment is conducted.

(j) Public Dance. No nude or semi-nude entertainment shall be presented on any premises for which a permit is required by this Chapter at any time while a public dance or dance is in progress.

(k) Customer Contact. No nude or semi-nude entertainer shall dance with any customer on such premises or unnecessarily converse with or associate with any customer while presenting nude or semi-nude entertainment as herein defined. No nude or semi-nude entertainers shall serve in the function of waitresses or barmaid without a special permit from the City Council. No nude or semi-nude entertainer, while performing or otherwise, shall touch any customer. No nude or semi-nude entertainer, whether or not fully or partly clothed, shall mingle with or converse with any customer on said premises within one (1) hour after appearing in the nude or semi-nude in any form of entertainment.

(l) Off Street Parking. Adequate and convenient off-street parking shall be provided for patrons and customers. Said parking shall be such that all patrons and customers may park safely and without affecting the peace and quiet and normal enjoyment of the surrounding neighborhood.

The City Council finds that Class II entertainment and attendant congestion was not contemplated when the zoning requirement for off-street parking for commercial uses was adopted. Therefore, each place of business conducting Class II entertainment, its size, general location, available off-street parking and the effect on adjoining properties, must be separately considered by the City Council as to each place conducting Class II entertainment, notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code to the contrary.

(m) Attire. No person shall enter, be, or remain in any establishment operating under a Class II entertainment permit or required to have such a permit pursuant to this Chapter, except when attired in such a manner that such person’s pubic area, private parts and the crease of the buttocks are completely covered and are not visible to the human eye, except only entertainers having the required permits, while in the course of the entertainment.

(n) Solicitation of Drinks. No entertainment may be conducted in establishments where a Class II entertainment permit is required where employees solicit or accept drinks of alcoholic beverages from customers.

(o) Gambling. No entertainment may be conducted in any establishment where a Class II entertainment permit is required in which gambling in any form is permitted or tolerated, or in which there is kept any machine or machines or other devices designed or commonly used for the purpose of gambling in any form.

(p) Platform. All entertainment for which a Class II entertainment permit is required by this Chapter shall be conducted upon a stage or platform raised at least eighteen (18) inches above the floor.

(q) Inspections. The Chief of Police and his deputies, in addition to their other duties, shall inspect any and all establishments operating pursuant to a Class II entertainment permit issued under this Chapter. The Chief of Police and/or his deputies shall be permitted by every permittee to enter free of charge any establishment operating under such a permit for the purpose of inspection.

(r) Number of Employees. At every establishment operating under an Entertainment Class II permit having a capacity of not less than two hundred (200) persons, not less than one (1) employee for the first two hundred (200) persons and one (1) additional employee for each additional one hundred (100) persons who could be accommodated, whether actually present or not, shall be constantly in attendance during the entire time that any entertainment is in progress, and shall devote his or their entire time and attention to the keeping of order, the checking of the admission of minors, and seeing to it that all provisions of this Chapter are complied with. The City Council may require additional employees or guards on an individual basis as the Council deems in the public interest.

At any establishment having a capacity of not less than three hundred (300) persons, not less than one (1) of the employees referred to in this paragraph (r) shall be a female. (Ord. 71-262; Ord. 06-1342, § 27)

63125.10 Same – Permit Prohibited.
No Class II Entertainment permit shall be granted unless it is found by the City Council that:

(a) The applicant, and any other person who will be directly engaged in the management and the operation of the place of entertainment, other than one who participates in the entertainment, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction by final judgment of an offense involving the presentation, exhibition or performance of an obscene production, motion picture, play or act, or an offense involving the use of force and violence upon the person of another, or an offense involving misconduct with children.

(b) The applicant and any other person who will directly engage in the management and operation of the place of entertainment has not knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of facts in the permit application or any document filed with the City in the preceding five (5) years in connection with any license or permit application or during any hearing on any permit application.

(c) It is not reasonably likely that the operation of an Entertainment Class II business at the location specified in the application would aggravate materially or make more frequent the commission of felonies, drunkenness, driving under the influence of intoxicating liquors and/or drugs, disturbing the peace, malicious mischief, assault and battery, sexual misconduct, and resisting arrest, at such location and in the immediate neighborhood thereof.

(d) The applicant has not allowed or permitted acts of sexual misconduct to be committed within prior business operations.

(e) The applicant has not had a similar type of permit previously revoked for good cause within a one (1) year period, or has shown a material change of circumstances since such revocation. (Ord. 71-162)

63125.11 Same – Permit Required for Nude or Semi-Nude Entertainer.
Permit Fee $50.00. No person shall appear in the nude or semi-nude in the display of any customer or person in any establishment for which a permit is required by this Chapter unless in possession of a valid, unexpired nude or semi-nude entertainers permit.

Any person desiring a permit under this Section shall specify in an application:

(a) Name and residence address;

(b) Social Security number and Driver’s License number, if any;

(c) Whether such person has ever been convicted within the last five (5) years of any crime except misdemeanor traffic violations, and if so convicted, the name of the person so convicted, the place and court in which the conviction was had, the specific charge under which the conviction was obtained, and the sentence imposed as a result of such conviction.

No permit shall be granted to an applicant who has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction by a final judgment of an offense involving the presentation, exhibition or performance of an obscene production, motion picture, play or act or an offense involving lewd conduct, prostitution, or misconduct with children. (Ord. 71-162; Ord. 06-1342, § 28)

63125.12 Same – Regulations – Penalties.
The City Council intends by CMC 63125 to 63125.11, inclusive, to provide regulations pertaining to the place of and the personnel involved in providing entertainment in certain public places such as restaurants, hotels, cafes, coffee houses, cabarets, clubs, barrooms, beer halls, beer gardens, and public dance halls, and it is not the intention of the City Council by said sections to prohibit any such entertainment where, under reasonable conditions, the public peace, health, safety and welfare will be protected. The City Council hereby finds that nudity and semi-nudity conducted in such places is a form of entertainment and, as such, is subject to regulation to protect the public peace, health, safety and welfare. The City Council does not intend by this Part to define as criminal any degree of nudity or semi-nudity but has by this Part attempted to regulate the place, time and manner of the presentation of such nudity or semi-nudity and to supervise the display thereof. The doing of entertainment business, as defined in this Chapter, without an entertainment business permit, or the doing of any entertainment business in violation of the terms and provisions of such permit, or the performing or engaging in the act of entertaining as defined in this Chapter without a permit therefor or in violation of any provisions and terms of such a permit, or the doing of any of the foregoing after suspension of revocation of permit, are hereby prohibited and any and each such violation is punishable by imprisonment or by fine or penalty as provided in this Code. The City Council hereby declares that the conducting of an entertainment business, as defined in this Chapter, or the engaging in or performing of entertainment, as defined in this Chapter, without a permit therefor, or in violation of terms and provisions of any permit, is a public nuisance and in addition to the enforcement provisions of this Code, shall be abated as a public nuisance as provided by law. (Ord. 71-162)

63126 Exhibitions – Shows.
Permit Fee $200.00. In addition to the grounds for denial of a permit set forth in CMC 6376, an exhibition permit shall not be granted if the applicant, his employee, agent or any person connected or associated with the applicant as partner, director, officer, stockholder, associate or manager:

(a) Has been convicted within the last five (5) years preceding the date of application in any court of competent jurisdiction of:

(i) Any crime requiring registration under Section 290 of the Penal Code, or

(ii) Any violation of Chapter 7.6 or Chapter 8 (Section 311 to 318.6 inclusive) of Title 9, Part 1 of the Penal Code, or

(iii) Any violation of Paragraphs (a), (b) or (d) of Section 647 of the Penal Code, or

(iv) Any offense involving the use of force and violence upon the person of another,

(v) Any offense involving the maintenance of a nuisance in connection with the same or similar business operation.

(b) Has committed within said last five (5) years any offense described in subsection (a)(i), (a)(ii), or (a)(iii) of this Section.

(c) Has allowed or permitted acts of sexual misconduct to be committed within prior business operations of the applicant, or with which applicant was connected.

(d) The applicant has had a similar type of permit previously revoked for good cause within one (1) year prior to the application, or if he has, has not shown material changes in circumstances since such revocation.

In addition to the grounds for suspension or revocation of a permit set forth in CMC 6384, the City Council may suspend or revoke an exhibition permit on any of the grounds or by reason of any matter or fact set forth in subsection (a), (b) or (c) of this Section. (Ord. 71-162; Ord. 06-1342, § 29)

63127 Explosives.
Permit Fee $250.00. No permit shall be issued to any person until such person shall have complied with all ordinances of the City of Carson in force at the time of application for such permit, regulating the manufacture, storage and/or distribution of explosives, as the case may be. (Ord. 71-162; Ord. 06-1342, § 30)

63127.5 Filming.
The permit fee is $650.00 per week and $500.00 each additional week thereafter, per production, for “filming,” as defined in CMC 63127.6, and $100.00 for “still photographic production,” as defined in CMC 63127.6. However, charitable and student films, as defined in CMC 63127.6, are exempt from the fee.

South Bay Pavilion and the StubHub Center located on property owned and adjacent to California State University, Dominguez Hills, shall not be required to obtain a film permit, still photography permit or business licenses for film and still photo productions occurring and contained within their premises. The StubHub Center and South Bay Pavilion will, however, be responsible for paying a fee for all film and still photo productions occurring on their property at a rate of $650.00 per week and $500.00 each additional week, per production, for “filming,” as defined in CMC 63127.6, and $100.00 for “still photographic production,” as defined in CMC 63127.6. However, “charitable and student films,” as defined in CMC 63127.6, are exempt from the fee. (Ord. 06-1354, § 1; Ord. 12-1490, § 1; Ord. 15-1554, § 1)

63127.6 Filming – Definitions.
(a) “Charitable or student film” means any filming by (i) a nonprofit organization, which qualifies under Section 501(c)(3) and (4) of the Internal Revenue Code as a charitable organization; or (ii) is an accredited educational institution, and for which no person, directly or indirectly, shall receive a profit from the marketing and production of the film or from showing the films, tapes or photos.

(b) “Commercial film” means and includes all activities attendant to filming any entertainment or advertising programs for any media now known or hereafter created.

(c) “Director” means the City’s Finance Director or his or her designee.

(d) “Filming” means all activities attendant to a staging or a shooting of commercial motion pictures, television shows or programs, commercial still photography, video tapes, computer-based programs or other visual reproduction technology now known or hereafter created and the filming of commercial radio station promotional events. The period of filming includes the set-up, strike and time of photography.

(e) “News media” means filming for the purpose of spontaneous, unplanned television news reporting by journalists, reporters, photographers or camera operators.

(f) “Private property” means any property not owned by the City on which filming would not interfere with public rights-of-way, access or safety.

(g) “Still photographic production” means all activity attendant to the staging or shooting of commercial still photographic production.

(h) “Strike day” means the work at a filming location that includes the removal of equipment at the end of film activities. These activities may include but are not limited to set removal, repainting, relandscaping, and unrigging from stunts/special effects. (Ord. 06-1354, § 2; Ord. 12-1490, § 1; Ord. 15-1554, § 1)

63127.7 Filming – Permit Required.
(a) No person shall use any City street, alley, sidewalk, parkway or other public property owned or controlled by the City for the purpose of making commercial films and/or commercial still photographs without first applying for and receiving a permit from the Director; provided, that the provisions of CMC 63127.5 et seq. shall not apply to or be construed to affect (1) spontaneous, unplanned filming by the news media and (2) filming solely for private family use.

(b) No person shall use any private property for the purpose of making commercial films and/or commercial still photographs without first applying for and receiving a permit from the Director. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the provisions of CMC 63127.5 et seq. shall not apply to or be construed to affect (1) news media and (2) filming solely for private family use.

(c) Any permit issued by the City for filming shall only be valid for the approved duration of that shoot. (Ord. 06-1354, § 3; Ord. 12-1490, § 1; Ord. 15-1554, § 1)

63127.8 Filming – Permit Application.
(a) Any person desiring a film permit or a still photography permit shall submit a completed application for filming on a form furnished by the Director. Each film permit application shall be accompanied by the permit fee specified in CMC 63127.5. Completed film permit applications shall be approved or denied by the City within five (5) business days. Permit application packets shall include the following information:

(1) The name, address and telephone number of both the applicant and the person in charge of the filming activity.

(2) The specific dates, times and location of filming.

(3) A general statement of the character or nature of the proposed filming activity, including a detailed description of any potentially disruptive activities.

(4) The names and telephone numbers of on-site contacts.

(5) The number of personnel to be involved.

(6) A statement regarding the use of animals, pyrotechnics, gunfire, sirens, bullhorns or other noise-creating devices or any other hazardous activity. No noise-creating devices may be used in violation of Chapter 5 of Article V without prior approval from the City.

(7) A staging plan illustrating the placement of materials and equipment that will be located in the public right-of-way or where traffic flow and pedestrian access may be affected. An encroachment permit may also be required by the City’s Public Works Department.

(8) A copy of written evidence that all residents and merchants who will be affected by the filming have been notified within a three hundred (300) foot radius of the filming shoot.

(9) The maximum number and type of vehicles and other equipment which will be used.

(10) An executed hold harmless agreement on a form approved by the City Attorney.

(11) The applicant shall submit a performance bond or post a refundable security deposit in the amount determined by the Director to be sufficient to ensure that the applicant cleans up or restores all of the property used during filming. Upon completion of filming and inspection of the site by the City, if no verifiable damage has occurred, the security deposit should be returned to the applicant.

(12) The applicant shall remit payment equal to the estimated value of the anticipated City staff time, pursuant to CMC 63127.13, if required by the Director.

(13) Such additional information as the Director may reasonably require.

(b) The Director may refer the application to such appropriate City departments as are directly impacted by the application and as the Director deems necessary from the nature of the application for review, evaluation, investigation and recommendations by the departments regarding approval or disapproval of the application.

(c) The Director shall issue a permit under CMC 63127.5 et seq. if it is determined that the following criteria have been met:

(1) The proposed use will not unreasonably interfere with traffic or pedestrian movement, or unreasonably interfere with or endanger the public peace or rights of nearby residents and merchants to the quiet, peaceable enjoyment of their property, or otherwise be detrimental to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare;

(2) The proposed use will not unduly impede, obstruct or interfere with the operation of emergency vehicles or equipment in or through the permit area, or adversely affect the City’s ability to perform municipal functions or furnish City services in the vicinity of the permitted area;

(3) The proposed use will not constitute a fire or safety hazard and all proper safety precautions will be taken as are reasonably necessary to protect the public peace, health, safety or general welfare; and

(4) A complete application, including the payment of all applicable fees, proof of all required insurance, an executed hold harmless agreement and any required performance bond or security deposit have been submitted and are satisfactory to the Director.

(d) The Director has the discretion to impose any conditions on the permit that the Director believes are necessary to facilitate the filming and to lessen any adverse effects the filming may have on the community. (Ord. 06-1354, § 4; Ord. 12-1490, § 1; Ord. 15-1554, § 1)

63127.9 Filming – Permit Rider.
Changes, revisions and/or additions to the permit conditions require a permit rider. Each application for a permit rider shall be accompanied by a fee of $50.00 for filming and $25.00 for still photography. (Ord. 06-1354, § 5; Ord. 12-1490, § 1; Ord. 15-1554, § 1)

63127.10 General Requirements for Filming Permits.
(a) Notification. With the exception of South Bay Pavilion and StubHub Center, all residents and merchants within a three hundred (300) foot radius of the film location must receive notice of filming at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the first day of filming. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City reserves the right to impose additional notice requirements beyond three hundred (300) feet and/or require more than forty-eight (48) hours’ notice if, in the City’s discretion, extraordinary circumstances of the filming warrant additional notice. The City Manager may waive some or all of the notification requirements contained in this section.

(b) Filming Hours. The hours for filming are 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. Filming activities occurring outside the designated hours require signature approval by eighty (80) percent of residents and businesses within a three hundred (300) foot radius. (Applicants must document two (2) separate attempts for signature approval where they have been unsuccessful in their endeavor.) The City Manager may waive the signature approval requirements contained in this section.

(c) No Interference. Filming shall not interfere with normal activities of any neighborhood, such as refuse collection, street sweeping, gardening, deliveries or ingress or egress to public or private property without permission of the appropriate authority.

(d) Roadwork and Construction. Any roadwork or construction by City crews and/or private contractors under permit or contract to the City or any other public agency has priority over filming activities.

(e) Inspections. The production company must allow site inspections by City staff at any time. A copy of the approved City license and permit must remain at the filming location.

(f) Crew Behavior. Cast and crew are to refrain from nonscripted, off-camera language that is loud or lewd within earshot of the general public.

(g) Condition of the Site. The production company shall conduct operations in a neat and orderly fashion, and upon completion of filming, the area shall be cleaned of trash and debris and restored to its original condition.

(h) Oversight Personnel. The production company shall ensure that the necessary oversight personnel, as described in CMC 63127.13, are on site during filming.

(i) At the City’s request, a briefing between City staff and the production company may be required. (Ord. 06-1354, § 6; Ord. 12-1490, § 1; Ord. 15-1554, § 1)

63127.11 Filming – Traffic Control.
(a) Interim traffic control on roadways is limited to three (3) minutes maximum and shall not occur more than once during any twenty (20) minute period on any major street and more than once during any ten (10) minute period on any minor street unless authorized by the appropriate City personnel.

(b) When interim traffic control measures are necessary, the permittee shall furnish and install advance warning signs and any other traffic control devices required to ensure that the measures are being undertaken in conformance with the Manual of Traffic Controls, State of California, Department of Transportation. All appropriate safety precautions must be taken to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works.

(c) Traffic may be restricted to one (1) twelve (12) foot lane of traffic and/or stopped intermittently, but not more often than permitted pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. The period of time that traffic may be restricted will be determined by the Director of Public Works based on location and other factors deemed relevant. When necessary circumstances exist, traffic may be rerouted as provided in a detour plan approved by the Director of Public Works or his or her designee.

(d) Traffic may not be detoured across a double centerline without prior written approval from the City.

(e) Any emergency road work or emergency construction by City crews and/or private contractors, under permit or contract to the appropriate City department or any other public agency, shall have priority over filming activities.

(f) No existing traffic signs may be bagged without prior City approval.

(g) Camera cars must drive with the flow of traffic and must not interfere with other vehicles in the road unless the production has obtained approval for a road closure from the proper authority.

(h) Stationary cameras should be mounted off the roadway. If a stationary camera is to be located in the traffic lane, all necessary lane closures must be provided and approved in writing in advance by the City.

(i) If the production company wets the roadway for filming purposes, the filming company may not remove cautionary warning signs until the roadway is dry and deemed safe to the City’s satisfaction. A professional lane closure company shall be hired to install the lane closure area for the wet-down and shall maintain said closure until the roadway is dry. “Wet Pavement” signs are required at either end of the wet-down. (Ord. 06-1354, § 7; Ord. 12-1490, § 1; Ord. 15-1554, § 1)

63127.12 Filming – Insurance.
(a) As a condition of issuance of a permit hereunder, every permittee must procure and maintain in full force and effect during the term of the permit a policy (or policies) of insurance from an insurance company licensed to do business in California, which policy (or policies) names the City, its officers, employees and agents as additional insureds insuring against any and all liability of permittee in connection with the filming and permittee’s obligations and liabilities under its permit, CMC 63127.5 et seq., any other regulations contained in this Code and its indemnities, including, but not limited to, commercial general liability insurance on an occurrence basis against claims for personal injury, including death, bodily injury or property damage liability and in an amount not less than $1,000,000, or such additional amounts the Director deems necessary to provide sufficient coverage that is adequate under the circumstances. Proof of insurance in a form acceptable to the City’s Risk Manager shall be submitted to the City in advance of the issuance of the permit. The Director may waive the requirement of insurance or a particular type of coverage if the Director determines that the intended use does not present any significant exposure to liability for the City, its officers, employees and agents or to public property damage.

(b) The permittee shall conform to all applicable Federal and State requirements for Workers’ Compensation Insurance for all persons operating under a permit. (Ord. 06-1354, § 8; Ord. 12-1490, § 1; Ord. 15-1554, § 1)

63127.13 Police, Fire and Other City Personnel.
(a) At the City Manager’s discretion, the presence of a law enforcement entity or private security may be required. The production company shall be solely responsible for coordinating availability with the law enforcement agencies, including but not limited to the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Deputy, Highway Patrol, on-duty or retired Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD) or private security.

(b) The production company must comply with all Los Angeles County Fire Department requirements, including obtaining all required permits.

(c) At the City Manager’s discretion, one or more members of City staff may be on site at all times during filming and related activities to assist the production company’s compliance with the requirements of this Code.

(d) Any required City personnel, law enforcement or private security services shall be retained at the production company’s sole cost and expense. The anticipated value of the staff time shall be remitted to the Director concurrent with the permit application. After filming has been completed, the Director shall review the actual amount of staff time used by the production company and shall reconcile whether the production company is owed a rebate or owes the City additional amounts. Any rebate from the City or additional amounts owed to the City shall be paid within seven (7) days of the Director’s determination thereof. (Ord. 06-1354, § 9; Ord. 12-1490, § 1; Ord. 15-1554, § 1)

63127.14 Nonprofit and Student Filming.
(a) Nonprofit organizations desiring a film permit must complete an application form and must provide a copy of their proof of tax-exempt status.

(b) For student film projects, students must supply a written certificate from the school of their attendance stating that the filming project is an assignment for the class and is not intended for commercial distribution. (Ord. 06-1354, § 10; Ord. 12-1490, § 1; Ord. 15-1554, § 1)

63127.15 Filming – Permit Denial or Revocation.
(a) The Director shall deny the permit if the conditions of CMC 63127.5 et seq. and any other applicable laws and regulations have not been met or if the application contains incomplete or false information.

(b) The Director may immediately revoke or suspend a permit which has been granted, if the conditions of CMC 63127.5 et seq. and all applicable laws and regulations are no longer being met, if the information supplied by the applicant becomes, or is determined to be, false or incomplete, or if any substantial change in circumstances results in the proposed use becoming detrimental to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare.

(c) Upon revocation of a permit, the permittee may be prohibited from applying for another permit for a period of one (1) year if it is determined by the Director that the application was filed under false pretenses or that future filming may be detrimental to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare. (Ord. 06-1354, § 11; Ord. 12-1490, § 1; Ord. 15-1554, § 1)

63127.16 Filming – Notification and Appeals.
(a) The Director shall act upon the application in a timely fashion and shall approve or disapprove the application or request additional information within two (2) business days when possible, but not longer than seven (7) business days following the date of filing of the completed application. The applicant shall be immediately notified of the action of approval, denial or revocation of the permit application or permit issued under CMC 63127.5 et seq.

(b) The notice of denial or revocation shall state the reasons for such action and the appropriate remedy or cure, if applicable.

(c) The notification shall be deemed satisfied when the notice is sent by facsimile to the facsimile number listed on the application, or if no number is listed, when notice is placed, postage prepaid, in the United States mail addressed to the applicant at the address shown on the permit application.

(d) An applicant or permittee aggrieved by a decision or action of the Director or City Manager under CMC 63127.5 et seq. shall have the right to appeal such decision to the City Council.

(e) Any appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk within five (5) business days after notice of denial, approval or revocation has been received by the applicant or permittee. The City Council shall act upon the appeal within twenty-eight (28) calendar days of the filing of the appeal.

(f) Upon receipt of an appeal, the City Clerk shall set a date for a hearing of the matter and give notice of the date, time and place of the hearing to the applicant/appellant. Prior to such hearing, the Director shall transmit to the City Clerk a report of his/her findings and at the City Council hearing shall present all documents on file.

(g) The City Council shall consider the record and such additional evidence as may be offered and may affirm, reverse or modify in whole or in part the action that was appealed. The City Council may also make or substitute additional decisions or determinations as it finds warranted under the provisions of CMC 63127.5 et seq. and may waive any requirement of CMC 63127.5 et seq. where it is found to be in the public interest. The City Council shall transmit a copy of its decision to the applicant/appellant. (Ord. 06-1354, § 12; Ord. 12-1490, § 1; Ord. 15-1554, § 1)

63128 Fireworks – Retail.
See applicable regulations set forth in CMC 3101.1 to 3101.6, inclusive. (Ord. 71-162)

63129 Fireworks – Wholesale – Storage.
See applicable regulations set forth in CMC 3101.7 and 3101.8. (Ord. 71-162)

63129.2 Fortune-Telling and Similar Practices.
Permit Fee $250.00. Every person who, for any form of compensation, desires to engage in, conduct or practice fortune-telling, as defined under “Fortune-Telling” in CMC 6303, within the City shall first obtain an annual permit to do so.

(a) Application. The application for the permit required by this Section shall be filed with the Director of Finance, shall be signed and verified by the applicant, and shall set forth the following:

(1) Name, residence address and telephone number of the applicant.

(2) Address and telephone number of the proposed location for the conduct of fortune-telling.

(3) Record of conviction for violations of the law, excluding minor traffic violations.

(4) Two (2) copies of a photograph of the applicant, one (1) inch by one (1) inch in size, taken within six (6) months of the application.

(5) Fingerprints of the applicant on a form approved by the Chief of Police.

(6) Address, including city and state, and approximate dates when the applicant practiced a similar business, either alone or in conjunction with others.

(b) Investigation. The Director of Finance shall make, or cause to be made, an investigation in order to verify the facts contained in the application. After conducting said investigation, the Director of Finance shall approve the issuance of the permit if it is found that:

(1) All information contained in the application is true and correct; and

(2) The applicant has not, within the previous six (6) months, been convicted of any crime involving fraud or moral turpitude.

(c) Issuance. Upon approval of said application, the Director of Finance shall thereafter issue the permit when:

(1) The required permit fee and license has been paid; and

(2) A bond is filed with the Director of Finance in the principal sum of $10,000, executed by a corporate surety in good standing and authorized to do business in the State of California, which bond has been approved by the City Attorney. Such bond shall be a guarantee of indemnity for any loss suffered by any person which is proximately caused by any act of the licensee, or his or her agents or employees, that occurs in connection with any fortune-telling within the City if such act is in violation of any law or constitutes any act of fraud, deceit, misrepresentation or coercion. Any City permit issued under this Section 63129.2 shall be automatically revoked whenever any such bond ceases to be effective for any reason unless the licensee shall file a new bond in compliance herewith prior to the date such bond may cease to be effective.

(d) Denial. In the event the Director of Finance denies a permit to any applicant, the Director of Finance shall give the applicant written notice within fourteen (14) days after denial of the application, stating the reasons for such denial. The applicant may appeal such decision as provided in CMC 6347 and 6385 through 6385.6.

(e) Permit Fees and Renewal. All permit fees and renewal permit fees required under this Section shall be subject to the provisions of CMC 6394 and 6395. (Ord. 86-754, § 3; Ord. 90-911, § 1; Ord. 06-1342, § 31)

63129.5 Gun Dealer.
Permit Fee $250.00. If a permit is granted to a gun dealer under this Part, it shall be subject to the following conditions, breach of any of which the permit shall be subject to forfeiture:

(a) The business shall be carried on only in the building designated in the license.

(b) The license or a copy thereof, certified by the issuing authority, shall be displayed on the premises where it can easily be seen.

(c) No pistol or revolver shall be delivered:

(1) Within fifteen (15) days of the application for purchase, and when delivered shall be unloaded and securely wrapped; nor

(2) Unless the purchaser either is personally known to the seller or shall present clear evidence of his identity.

(d) No pistol or revolver, or imitation thereof, or placard advertising the sale or other transfer thereof, shall be displayed in any part of the premises where it can be readily seen from the outside.

In addition to properly maintaining all records and documents required by State and Federal laws, a gun dealer upon purchasing, taking in trade, or accepting on consignment from the public, any firearm of any type, shall comply with Buy Form requirements enumerated in CMC 63141(a) through (g).

Upon the request of any peace officer, a gun dealer shall furnish all records pertaining to the gun dealer’s transactions, including, but not limited to, all records required to be maintained by law, and shall permit an inspection of the licensed premises. (Ord. 78-437, § 1; Ord. 06-1342, § 32)

63130 House and Street Numbering.
Permit Fee $50.00. No person shall paint, stencil or otherwise mark upon any curb, street, roadway, highway, or sidewalk any housing number or address without first obtaining an annual permit to do so. A separate permit is required of each person so engaged, except in the case of nonprofit organizations as hereinafter provided. No permit is transferable.

(a) Application. The application for any permit required by this Section shall be filed with the Director of Finance and referred to the Director of Public Works, shall be signed and verified by the applicant, and shall set forth the following:

(1) The full name and residence and business addresses of the applicant, and, in case of a nonprofit organization, the full name and residence address of each authorized person to engage in such activity;

(2) The name and address of the person, firm, company, corporation or association by whom employed, if any. If the applicant or employer be a partnership, corporation or association, the names and addresses of each of the partners or the principal officers of such corporation or associations;

(3) The streets and areas where such activity is to be conducted, and the period of time when such work is to be done in each area;

(4) A brief description of the nature and amount of equipment to be used in such business;

(5) The personal description of the applicant, if an individual;

(6) Such other data as may reasonably be required by the Finance Director.

The applicant or person applying on behalf of a nonprofit organization shall also furnish such evidence of identity as the Finance Director may require, and shall, on request, attach finger and thumb prints to such application or identity card.

(b) Permit Fees, Issuance and Revocation. A bona fide nonprofit organization, customarily holding regular meetings in the City, may, upon compliance with the terms of this Chapter, receive an organization permit permitting the activity regulated by this Part by any authorized bona fide member of such organization wholly for the benefit of and under the control of such organization. The fee for such permit shall be $10.00 plus $1.00 for each member authorized to engage in such activity. Duplicate permits, each bearing the name of the authorized member, shall be issued to such organization, and shall be carried by the member named thereon and exhibited as required of individual permittees. Any other person filing an application for a permit pursuant to this Part shall pay the permit fee of $50.00. All fees are payable upon the filing of the application and are nonrefundable.

(c) Consent of Owner or Occupant. No person shall paint, stencil or otherwise mark a street or house number on a curb or any portion of the street without first obtaining the written consent of the person owning or occupying the premises adjacent thereto. This provision shall not apply to street or house numbering performed by the City or any of its departments.

(d) Other Requirements. Any numerals painted on curbs shall be black on a white and beaded background and shall be eight (8) inches in height and one (1) inch in width.

(e) Identification. Every person so painting or placing numbers on curbs shall at all times while engaged in said activity, have in his possession and exhibit to each householder or business person before painting or placing numbers on the curb in front of the premises occupied thereby, the permit required by this Part.

(f) Quality and Standards of Work. In order to ensure the quality of work, the applicant shall submit for approval the brand name or type of paint products to be used. The Director of Public Works shall approve any paint product which will produce a durable number of good appearance. All work shall be subject to inspection by the Director of Public Works, or his authorized representatives. Any work determined to be poor of quality or appearance shall be redone at no further cost to the City or householder, and refusal of the permittee to do so, or repeated work of low quality, shall be sufficient grounds for immediate revocation of the permit by the Director of Finance.

(g) Rates. Every permittee engaging in painting, stenciling or otherwise marking curbs, shall, prior to commencing such activity in front of any premises, give to the person owning or occupying the premises a card or writing bearing the permit number and name of the permittee, and a statement of the charges to be made to such person for such service. If such writing is not furnished or fails to show such charge, it shall be conclusively presumed that no charge whatsoever is made, and any sum paid shall be a gratuity. (Ord. 71-162; Ord. 06-1342, §§ 33, 34)

63130.10 Hypnotism.
Permit Fee $50.00.

(a) The act or practice of hypnotism, except as performed by licensed psychologists, physicians, family, child and marriage counselors and qualified persons acting at the request of police agencies in the investigation of crimes, may be conducted and self-hypnosis may be taught to persons undergoing a course or program of avocational or vocational self-improvement, pursuant to and subject to the limitations and purposes of Section 2908 of the California Business and Professions Code, as amended, only upon fulfillment of the requirements of this Section and CMC 636540.40.

(b) In addition to the requirements of CMC 6374, the applicant for a hypnotism permit shall provide the following additional information in the application to be filed with the Finance Director:

(i) Record of convictions for violations of the law, except minor traffic violations, but not excluding driving under the influence of alcoholic beverages or drugs or reckless driving resulting in injury to others;

(ii) Name and address of persons for whom the applicant has worked for the last five (5) years;

(iii) Name and address of three (3) responsible persons who have known the applicant for more than three (3) years;

(iv) Fingerprints of the applicant;

(v) Proof of registration by a hypnotists’ organization approved by the Office of Private Post Secondary Education, of the California Department of Education, pursuant to Section 94311(d) of the California Education Code, and membership in at least one (1) statewide or nationwide organization of professional hypnotists;

(vi) Proof of a policy of public liability insurance in the amount of not less than $100,000; and

(vii) Such other information as the Finance Director may deem necessary.

(c) The Finance Director shall not issue a permit under the provisions of this Section until:

(i) The application has been reviewed and approved by the Sheriff’s Department. The Sheriff’s Department shall approve or disapprove the application within thirty (30) days of receipt from the Finance Director;

(ii) The Finance Director finds that the applicant meets the qualifications set forth in this Section; and

(iii) Issuance of the permit will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare. (Ord. 79-484, § 4; Ord. 06-1342, § 35)

63131 Junk Collector – Junk Dealer.
Permit Fee $250.00. Each junk collector and each junk dealer prior to the issuance of a permit shall provide the following information on his application:

(a) Name and address of applicant;

(b) Name and address of business;

(c) Name and purpose of business;

(d) Name and address of all persons conducting said business within the City;

(e) The place where business is to be conducted;

(f) Description of equipment to be used;

(g) Personal description of said applicant if an individual;

(h) Such other information or evidence as may be required by this Chapter or the Finance Director. (Ord. 71-162; Ord. 71-183, § 2; Ord. 06-1342, § 36)

63132 Laundries and Dry Cleaners – Self Service.
Permit Fee $50.00. No permit shall be issued to any self-service laundry, laundromat, or dry cleaners except with the provision that an attendant shall be in supervision of such self-service business at all times during which the business is open to the public; provided, however, such business may operate without an attendant upon compliance with the following conditions:

(a) That the self-service laundry, laundromat, or dry cleaner shall be on the ground floor of a building facing a public street or highway or public area with windows of clear glass extending the entire width of the building on the public street or public area side, except at the point of joist or doorway, and that the same shall be kept free and clear of all obstacles and equipment so as to provide a view into the room from the street or public area.

(b) That all vending machines not actually vending a product necessary for washing or dry cleaning clothes be prohibited when the room is unattended; vending machines allowed are those vending soap, detergents, bleaches, bluings, starches or other supplies used in the process of washing or drying clothes, and coin changer machines.

(c) That the room be adequately lighted by fluorescent or other types of lighting fixtures during the evening hours.

(d) That suitable metal containers be placed in the room for placing rubbish or trash by customers or the owner.

(e) That an appropriate ledge be placed around the washing machines so that in the event of leakage, water will not flow upon the floor.

(f) That adequate ventilation for the room be provided with a minimum of one (1) square inch of ventilation for each one thousand (1,000) British Thermal Units per hour.

(g) That all rooms or passages into the self-service laundry, laundromat or dry cleaner room, except the entrance thereto and toilets and washrooms, be kept locked at all times.

(h) That all equipment used in any self-service laundry, laundromat, or dry cleaner operating without an attendant be approved by the Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., or a laboratory of equal experience and standing.

(i) That all self-service laundries, laundromats, or dry cleaners operating without an attendant be closed and locked and not open to the public between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. of each day.

(j) Repealed by Ord. 16-1587.

(k) That it shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain at any time, or for any length of time whatever, any self-service laundry, washing machine, drying machine, or dry cleaning machine for public use or open to the public unless there is present at all times a person as attendant having the ability and initiative to effectively operate and care for such business, or unless such self-service laundry, laundromat, or dry cleaners complies with the provisions of subsections (a) through (j) of this Section. Any person violating the provisions of this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 71-162; Ord. 71-183, § 2; Ord. 75-331; Ord. 06-1342, §§ 37, 38; Ord. 16-1587, § 2)

63133 Locksmith.
Permit Fee $100.00. Each permit issued for a locksmith shall contain an identifying number to be assigned by the Chief of Police. Each locksmith shall stamp on every key made, repaired, sold or given away by him, except a key merely duplicated from another key, such identification number. Each locksmith shall keep a book which shall be open to inspection of the City Law Enforcement Agency at all times in which the following must be entered:

(a) Name and address of every person for whom a key is made, by code or number;

(b) Name and address of every person for whom a locked automobile, building, structure, house or store, whether vacant or occupied, is opened and a key provided therefor. (Ord. 06-1342, § 39)

63134 Massage Parlors.
Permit Fee $2,500. In addition to the requirements of CMC 6374, an application for a permit for a massage parlor permit also shall show fingerprints and thumbprints of the applicant, unless specifically waived by the Director of Finance. “Massage parlor” means a place where massages, fomentations, electric or magnetic treatment or alcohol rubs are administered or given. For purpose of this Part, “massage” means any method of pressure on, friction against, stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating the external parts of the human body with the hands or any apparatus with or without such supplementary aids as: liniment; antiseptic; oil; powder; cream; lotion; ointment or other similar preparations. “Massage” shall include, but not be limited to, the following: muscle therapy; facial massage; shiatsu; Turkish baths; acupressure; reflexology; and related actions or services. Notwithstanding the preceding, “massage parlor” shall not include any health, medical or beauty-related establishment that offers massage services that are both (a) incidental to the primary business; (b) administered solely by means of customer-operated equipment in a private cubicle, room or booth on the business premises; and (c) pursuant to a cosmetology license to perform pedicures and foot massages. (Ord. 71-183, § 3; Ord. 98-1151U, § 2; Ord. 98-1151, § 2; Ord. 01-1222, § 2; Ord. 09-1431, § 3)

63134.1 Same – Eligibility.
(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, no person who has engaged in disqualifying conduct shall be eligible for a permit to operate a massage parlor.

(b) For purposes of this Section and CMC 63135.2, “person who has engaged in disqualifying conduct” means a person who has done any of the following within five (5) years of the date of the permit application:

1. Has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of, or pleaded nolo contendere to, any the following:

a. A misdemeanor or felony offense that relates directly to the operation of a massage parlor.

b. A felony whose commission occurred on the premises of a massage parlor.

c. A violation of California Penal Code Sections 266h, 266i, 314, 315, 316, 318, 647(a) or 647(b).

d. A felony offense involving the sale of a controlled substance specified in California Health and Safety Code Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, or 11058.

e. Conspiracy or attempt to commit any of the aforesaid offenses.

f. An offense in a jurisdiction outside the State of California that is substantially the equivalent of any of the aforesaid offenses.

2. Has been found guilty of, or has pleaded guilty or nolo contendere to, any lesser-included offense of any of the aforesaid offenses.

3. Has been required to register under the provisions of California Penal Code Section 290.

4. Has been subjected to a permanent injunction against the conducting or maintaining of a nuisance pursuant to California Penal Code Sections 11225 through 11235 or any similar provisions of law in a jurisdiction outside the State of California.

5. Has had denied, suspended or revoked any massage-related permit or license issued by any other public agency that regulates massage parlors or massage technicians. (Ord. 71-183, § 3; Ord. 98-1151U, § 3; Ord. 98-1151, § 3)

63134.2 Same – Design Standards.
Massage parlors shall be designed in accordance with the following standards:

(a) A recognizable and readable sign identifying the nature of the establishment shall be posted at the main entrance. Such sign shall comply with all applicable requirements of this Code.

(b) The following items shall be posted in a conspicuous public location within the premises: (i) the permit issued for the business; and (ii) the permit issued for each massage technician working at the establishment. Photographs of the permittee, two (2) inches by two (2) inches or larger in size, shall be affixed to each respective permit that is on display.

(c) A schedule of services shall be posted in a conspicuous public location within the premises. Such schedule shall indicate each massage service offered, the price thereof, and the minimum length of time such massage service shall be performed. All text on such schedule shall be at least one (1) inch in height, and all letters shall be capitalized.

(d) Separate, closed cabinets shall be provided for the storage of clean and soiled linen. Such cabinets shall be plainly marked “clean linen” and “soiled linen.”

(e) Walls within any room where water or steam baths are given shall have a washable, mold-resistant surface.

(f) Wash basins shall be provided with hot and cold running water, soap, and single service towels in wall-mounted dispensers.

(g) Pads used on surfaces upon which patrons lie during the administration of massage services shall be covered with durable, washable plastic or other waterproof material acceptable to the Finance Director.

(h) At least one (1) artificial light, the equivalent of a sixty (60) watt bulb, shall be provided directly above any surface upon which patrons lie during the administration of massage services.

(i) Neither tinted nor “one way” glass shall be installed on any interior wall or doorway.

(j) Cubicles, rooms, booths or other areas within which massage services are administered shall not be equipped with any recording device. For purposes of this paragraph, the term “recording device” means any device that is used, or capable of being used, for recording, videotaping or monitoring the activities, conversation or sounds of patrons.

(k) Cubicles, rooms, booths or other areas within which massage services are administered shall not be fitted with a door capable of being locked.

(l) Exterior doors shall not be equipped with an electronic locking device.

(m) Exterior doors, and any doors separating the waiting or reception area from the remainder of the premises, shall remain unlocked during business hours. (Ord. 71-183, § 3; Ord. 98-1151U, § 4; Ord. 98-1151, § 4)

63134.3 Same – Performance Standards.
Massage parlors shall be operated in compliance with the following standards:

(a) Every massage technician employed or utilized on the premises shall have a valid permit.

(b) Arrangements for massage services to be administered shall be made within the room containing the posted schedule of services.

(c) No services shall be performed other than the administration of massage services listed on the posted schedule of services.

(d) No sums shall be charged other than those listed on the posted schedule of services.

(e) Employees and massage technicians shall not advise, suggest, or otherwise indicate to a patron the availability of any service that is not listed on the posted schedule of services.

(f) Massage technicians shall not perform any service for a patron that such patron did not request within the room containing the posted schedule of services.

(g) A clean sheet or other effective sanitary covering shall be placed over any surface upon which a patron lies during the administration of massage services. Such sheet or covering shall be deposited in the “soiled linen” cabinet at the conclusion of any service.

(h) Clean and sanitary towels, sheets, and linens shall be provided in sufficient quantity. Towels, sheets, and linens shall not be used by more than one (1) person without having first been laundered. Heavy white paper may be substituted for sheets provided that such paper is used once for each person and then discarded into a sanitary receptacle.

(i) Walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms, appliances, apparatuses, and other physical facilities shall be in good repair and shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.

(j) Wet and dry heat rooms, steam and vapor rooms, steam and vapor cabinets, shower compartments, and bathrooms shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected each day the business is in operation.

(k) Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected after each use.

(l) Instruments used in administering massage services shall be disinfected and sterilized after each use.

(m) Employees and massage technicians shall be clean and dressed appropriately in clean, opaque uniforms that do not expose specified anatomical areas, undergarments or the bare midriff. For purposes of this Section, the term “specified anatomical areas” means the following human anatomical areas: genitals; pubic regions; buttocks; anuses; and female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areolae. As used in this paragraph, “dressed appropriately” shall further mean the wearing of clothing that (at a minimum) complies with the following requirements:

1. All garments covering the upper torso (e.g., shirts and dresses) shall have both: (i) sleeves not less than two (2) inches in length, measuring from the top of the shoulder; and (ii) necklines no lower than two (2) inches below the clavicle; and

2. Hems of dresses, skirts, smocks, and other similar garments shall not be more than two (2) inches above the top of the knee; and

3. Cuffs and hems of shorts, culottes, pants and other similar garments shall not be more than six (6) inches above the top of the knee.

(n) Massage technicians and employees shall not expose specified anatomical areas, as defined in paragraph (m) above, to patrons.

(o) Patrons shall not be permitted to expose specified anatomical areas, as defined in paragraph (m) above, while receiving massage services.

(p) At least one (1) responsible person acting as manager shall be on the premises at all times the establishment is open for business. Such manager shall be familiar with the requirements of this Section and shall be capable of communicating the provisions of this Section to employees and patrons.

(q) Business shall not be conducted between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.

(r) Alcoholic beverages shall not be sold, served, furnished, kept, or possessed on the premises.

(s) A legible record book containing the following information shall be maintained at the establishment: (i) the type, date and time of each massage service administered; (ii) the name and address of the patron receiving such massage service; and (iii) the name of the massage technician who administered such massage service. Such records shall be open for inspection by City officials and maintained for a minimum period of two (2) years.

(t) The establishment shall not be operated under any name other than the name listed on the permit application.

(u) Children under the age of eighteen (18) must be accompanied by an adult or provide written authorization by parent or legal guardian.

(v) A policy of insurance shall be maintained whereby the permittee is insured against liability for injury or death to any person as a result of massage services. The minimum liability limits shall not be less than $1,000,000 for each incident of injury or death to a person. Proof of such insurance policy shall be submitted in conjunction with the permit application.

(w) All massages shall be administered on-site and indoors; provided, however, that massages may be administered outdoors to the head, neck, back and arms of patrons sitting in chairs in public or semi-public places. (Ord. 71-183, § 3; Ord. 98-1151U, § 5; Ord. 98-1151, § 5)

63134.4 Same – Exception.
CMC 63134 to 63134.3 do not apply to the following:

(a) Any treatment administered in good faith in the course of practice of any healing art personally by any person duly certified by and in good standing with the massage therapy organization as set forth in Business and Professions Code Section 4600 et seq.

(b) Barbers and beauticians who are duly licensed under the laws of the State of California while engaging in practice within the scope of their licenses; provided, however, that this provision shall apply solely to the massaging of the neck, face and scalp and, in connection with manicures and pedicures, the hands and feet.

(c) “Massage businesses” or “establishments” as defined under Section 4612(b)(1) of the California Business and Professions Code, except that such businesses or establishments shall not be exempt from this chapter to the extent Section 4612 permits the regulation of zoning, business licensing, reasonable health and safety requirements of such businesses or establishments by local ordinance. (Ord. 71-183, § 3; Ord. 98-1151U, § 6; Ord. 98-1151, § 6; Ord. 09-1431, § 4)

63134.5 Repealed.
Repealed by Ord. 98-1151.

63134.6 Repealed.
Repealed by Ord. 98-1151.

63134.7 Repealed.
Repealed by Ord. 98-1151.

63134.8 Repealed.
Repealed by Ord. 98-1151.

63134.9 Repealed.
Repealed by Ord. 98-1151.

63135 Massage Technicians.
Permit Fee $250.00. As used in this Part “massage technician” means any person, male or female, who administers to another person, for any form of consideration, a massage, alcohol rub, fomentation, bath, electric or magnetic massage procedure, manipulation of the body, or other similar procedure. (Ord. 71-183, § 3)

63135.1 Same – Application.
In addition to the requirements of CMC 6374, an application for a permit for a massage technician also shall show:

(a) The two (2) previous addresses, if any, immediately prior to the present address of the applicant.

(b) Written statements of at least five (5) bona fide residents of the County of Los Angeles that the applicant is of good moral character.

(c) Written proof that the applicant is over the age of eighteen (18) years.

(d) Applicant’s height, weight, color of eyes and hair.

(e) Two (2) portrait photographs at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches.

(f) Business, occupation, or employment of the applicant for the three (3) years immediately preceding the date of the application.

(g) The permit history of the applicant; whether the applicant has had a permit for any business or similar activity issued by this or any other county, by any city, or by the State revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation of the applicant subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation.

(h) All convictions except for minor traffic violations, and the reasons therefor.

(i) A certificate from a medical doctor stating that the applicant has, within thirty (30) days immediately prior thereto, been examined and found to be free of any contagious or communicable disease.

(j) Such other identification and information necessary to discover the truth of the matters hereinabove specified as required to be set forth in the application.

(k) Fingerprints and thumbprints of the applicant, unless specifically waived by the Director of Finance. (Ord. 71-183, § 3)

63135.2 Same – Qualifications.
(a) A diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized school shall be submitted in conjunction with a permit application.

(b) The Chief of Police may take such action as appears necessary to verify that the applicant actually has satisfied the requirements of this Section.

(c) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, no person who has engaged in disqualifying conduct shall be eligible for a permit for a massage technician. For purpose of this paragraph, “person who has engaged in disqualifying conduct” shall have the meaning set forth in CMC 63134.1. (Ord. 71-183, § 3; Ord. 98-1151U, § 8; Ord. 98-1151, § 8)

63135.3 Same – Definition.
As used in CMC 63135 to 63135.2, the term “recognized school” means any school or institution of learning that satisfies both of the following requirements:

(a) Provides a course of instruction in at least the following subjects: massage techniques; anatomy; physiology; hygiene; sanitation; and theory and ethics of massage practice; and

(b) Requires a residence course of study of not fewer than five hundred (500) hours and not fewer than three (3) months before the student may be furnished with a diploma or certificate of graduation.

Schools offering correspondence courses not requiring actual attendance at class shall not be deemed “recognized schools.” (Ord. 71-183, § 3; Ord. 98-1151U, § 9; Ord. 98-1151, § 9)

63135.4 Same – Exception.
CMC 63135 to 63135.3 do not apply to the following:

(a) Any treatment administered in good faith in the course of practice of any healing art personally by any person duly certified by and in good standing with the massage therapy organization as set forth in Business and Professions Code Section 4600 et seq.

(b) Barbers and beauticians who are duly licensed under the laws of the State of California while engaging in practice within the scope of their licenses; provided, however, that this provision shall apply solely to the massaging of the neck, face and scalp and, in connection with manicures and pedicures, the hands and feet. (Ord. 71-183, § 3; Ord. 98-1151U, § 10; Ord. 98-1151, § 10; Ord. 09-1431, § 5)

63136 Mobile Home Parks.
Parks with not more than 35 spaces

Permit Fee $100.00

Parks with more than 35 but not more than 70 spaces

Permit Fee $150.00

Parks with more than 70 spaces

Permit Fee $200.00

(Ord. 06-1342, § 40)

63137 Motion Picture Theater.
Permit Fee $50.00. Every person conducting, managing or carrying on a motion picture theater or other place where moving or motion pictures are exhibited for which a fee is charged, received or collected or as an incident to some other type of business, or activity, shall first procure a permit. A permit granted pursuant to this Section does not permit any entertainment of any kind except motion pictures and any music which may accompany the showing of such motion pictures. (Ord. 71-162; Ord. 06-1342, § 41)

63138 Motor Vehicle Rental.
Permit Fee $50.00.

(a) Every person conducting the business of renting motor vehicles without providing drivers therefor shall keep a record of all rentals on a form to be prescribed by the Chief of Police.

(b) No person shall rent a motor vehicle without a driver unless the person who is to operate such vehicle first exhibits to the lessor a driver’s license duly issued to him by the State of California, or if such person is a nonresident of California, a driver’s license of the state of which he is a resident. All information required by the Chief of Police which appears upon such license shall be taken from such license.

(c) A permit issued pursuant to this Section does not permit the sale of such vehicles. (Ord. 71-162; Ord. 06-1342, § 42)

63139 Patrol System.
Permit Fee $100.00. “Patrol System” means any private service, private system or person who for any consideration whatsoever agrees to furnish or furnishes watchmen, guards, either uniformed or otherwise, patrolmen or other persons, herein referred to as patrolmen to protect persons or property or to prevent theft, unlawful taking, loss, embezzlement, misappropriation or concealment of property of any kind or performs the service of watchman, guard, patrolman, or other person for any of such services.

“Patrol System” as regulated herein shall not include a person employed exclusively and regularly by one (1) employer in connection with the affairs of such employer only and where there exists an employer-employee relationship. (Ord. 71-162; Ord. 06-1342, § 43)

63139.1 Same – Application.
In addition to those items otherwise required by this Chapter, said application for a patrol system permit shall contain the following:

(a) The name and address of the applicant;

(b) If the applicant is a partnership, the name and address of all partners;

(c) If the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of the corporate officers and manager, and a certified copy of the resolution authorizing such application;

(d) The district or territory proposed to be served by the patrol system;

(e) A description of the methods of operation;

(f) The names and addresses of all patrolmen who are or will be owners, officers, or employees of the applicant;

(g) A statement as to what offenses, if any, any person mentioned in subsections (a), (b), or (c) of this Section, has been convicted of, and the time, place and circumstances thereof;

(h) Such other information as either the Finance Director or the Chief of Police may require;

(i) A copy of the applicant’s license pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 7520; and

(j) For each person listed in subsection (f) of this Section, a copy of that person’s guard card. (Ord. 71-162; Ord. 06-1342, § 44)

63139.2 Same – Evidence to Be Submitted.
Repealed by Ord. 06-1342. (Ord. 71-162)

63139.3 Same – Investigation by Chief of Police.
Upon receipt of an application for a permit to conduct a patrol system, the Chief of Police shall investigate the character, fitness and qualifications of every person whose name appears on such application. He shall transmit such application to the Finance Director and recommend that he:

(a) Grant the permit as applied for;

(b) Grant the permit subject to certain conditions or for less territory than applied for, or both; or

(c) Deny the permit.

He shall also inform the Finance Director as to what persons in his opinion should be permitted to act as patrolmen. (Ord. 71-162)

63139.4 Same – Terms of Permit.
Every permit to conduct a patrol system shall contain, among other things, an accurate description of the area in which operations are permitted and the names of all patrolmen permitted to such license. A permit to conduct a patrol system shall not authorize any person either as patrolman, agent or owner to patrol any territory outside of the area so specified in the permit. (Ord. 71-162)

63139.5 Same – Application to Modify.
The holder of a permit to conduct a patrol system may file an application at any time with the Finance Director either to change or increase the territory of operation or to add patrolmen or both. If additional patrolmen are requested, such patrolmen shall file either applications for permits or applications to modify existing patrol systems permits in the same manner as in the case of the original application. (Ord. 71-162)

63139.6 Same – Personnel.
The operator of a patrol system shall neither employ nor utilize the services in any way of a patrolman whose name is not on the permit of such operator, or who does not possess a valid, subsisting permit. The holder of a permit to conduct a patrol system shall inform the Finance Director within five (5) days after any patrolman no longer is an owner, member or employee of such permittee, and shall return the permit and badge of such patrolman to the Chief of Police. The Finance Director shall remove such patrolman’s name from the permit of such patrol system. (Ord. 71-162)

63139.7 Same – Permit Not to Be Sold.
The holder of a patrol system permit shall not sell or offer to sell, transfer or relinquish the privilege to operate a patrol system in territory granted to him or for any consideration whatever agree to advocate, or not to oppose the granting of any other patrol system permit. (Ord. 71-162)

63140 Patrolman.
Repealed by Ord. 06-1342. (Ord. 71-162)

63140.1 Same – Application.
Any person desiring a permit to act as a patrolman shall file a certified application containing the following:

(a) The name and address of the applicant.

(b) A statement of all businesses and occupations engaged in for the last five (5) years, and the names and addresses of not less than three (3) persons able to verify the statement;

(c) A statement of what offenses, if any, the applicant has been convicted of, and the time, place and circumstances thereof;

(d) A complete set of fingerprints of the applicant taken by the Chief of Police;

(e) The name and permit number of the patrol system by whom he will be employed, or of which he is to be an owner or officer. If no such permit has been granted, the applicant shall state when an application for such permit was filed;

(f) Such other information as either the Chief of Police or City Council may require;

(g) With every application for a patrolman’s permit, the applicant shall also file a letter from a patrol system permittee, certifying that such permittee desires to employ such patrolman or that such patrolman is, or will be an owner or member of such patrol system.

Upon receipt of the application for a permit, the Finance Director shall refer said application to the Chief of Police, who shall investigate the character and qualifications of said person. He shall transmit said application to the Finance Director and recommend that he:

(i) Grant the permit applied for; or

(ii) Grant the permit subject to certain conditions, or for less territory than applied for, or both; or

(iii) Deny the permit. (Ord. 71-162)

63140.2 Same – Badge – Change of Employer.
If an application for a patrolman’s permit other than for a renewal is granted, the Chief of Police shall issue to the applicant a permit and a patrolman’s badge. Upon written application by a patrolman holding a valid permit accompanied by the written application of the patrol system which proposes to employ such patrolman, and upon satisfying the City Council by competent evidence that such patrolman is, or will be no longer employed by the patrol system formerly employing such patrolman, the City Council may modify the permit of the patrol systems by removing such patrolman’s name from the one permit and adding it to the other permit. A patrolman shall turn in his badge and permit to his employer when his permit is revoked, or when he ceases to be employed as a patrolman. (Ord. 71-162)

63140.3 Same – Illegal Activities.
A patrolman shall not, either by himself, or through the actions of another, harass, annoy, or commit a nuisance against or injure the property of or unnecessarily enter or otherwise trespass upon the property of any person whose property the patrol system of such patrolman is not employed to protect. (Ord. 71-162)

63140.4 Same – Equipment and Uniform.
The Chief of Police shall specify the police equipment, including weapons which a permittee may wear while on duty. A permittee shall not wear any equipment or weapon or carry any weapon not so specified. A patrolman shall not wear any uniform which is in imitation of, or can be mistaken for, an official police uniform of the police force of any city within the County of Los Angeles, or an official uniform of a Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Deputy, or an official uniform of any state officer. (Ord. 71-162)

63140.5 Same – Identification Regulations.
While engaged in his duties as such, a patrolman shall keep upon his person at all times, his permit and shall wear the badge issued hereunder, and shall wear no other badge of any kind, character or description, except a badge issued to him by lawful governmental authority. A patrolman shall not assume or use a rank or title the same as or similar to any rank or title used by the City law enforcement agency, or by a police department within the County of Los Angeles, or by the Sheriff of Los Angeles County. A person shall not give, deliver, or sell any patrolman’s badge or any badge of a design the same as, or so similar to the patrolman’s badge as to be mistaken therefor, to any private person. A person shall not purchase or receive as a gift, pawn or pledge any patrolman’s badge. (Ord. 71-162)

63140.6 Same – Reports.
Permittees shall not perform official police or investigation activities, but shall immediately report every violation of law and every unusual occurrence within the permittee’s knowledge to the nearest Sheriff or police substation. A permittee shall make a full report of such violation or other occurrence without unnecessary delay to the Chief of Police or to such substation. (Ord. 71-162)

63141 Pawnbroker, Junk Dealer, Salvage Dealer, Secondhand Dealer, Swap Meet Operator, and Certain Auctioneers – Regulations.
Permit Fee $250.00. In addition to other provisions of this Chapter, pawnbrokers, junk dealers, secondhand dealers, salvage dealers, auctioneers dealing in the purchase or consignment of personal property, and operators of swap meets shall be subject to the following provisions and none of the foregoing shall violate the same:

(a) Records. Each of the foregoing shall at the close of each day mail to the Law Enforcement Agency of the City the “Buy Form” or other form as required by said Law Enforcement Agency, for the purpose of recording and furnishing by said person to said Law Enforcement Agency required information relative to purchases, pledges or consignments. Such form shall contain a full, true and complete report of all goods, wares, merchandise, or other things received on deposit, pledges or consignments. Such form shall contain a full, true and complete report of all goods, wares, merchandise, or other things received on deposit, pledged or purchased, during that day, except household furniture, used tires and used batteries, where such excepted items were taken in part payment for new items, and except merchandise originally sold new by said person and subsequently taken as a trade-in on other merchandise sold by the same person, and shall also contain other information which the Law Enforcement Agency may reasonably require to assist said agency in the detection of stolen property.

(b) Every such person shall enter upon the “Buy Form” positive identification furnished by the seller, pledgemaker, or consignor, such as a driver’s license number, work badge number, auto or truck license number or junk collector’s business license number, in addition to the individual’s true name and address. In lieu of such positive identification, the permittee shall require the seller, pledgemaker, or consignor to furnish a plain impression print of his right index finger, or next finger in the event of amputation, upon the face side of the original sheet of the “Buy Form.”

(c) Every person who sells, pledges or consigns any property to a secondhand dealer, auctioneer, junk dealer, pawnbroker or owner or operator of a swap meet in the course of said business, except household furniture, used tires, or used batteries taken in part payment for new tires or new batteries, and except merchandise originally sold new by the aforementioned business licensees or permittees and subsequently taken as a trade-in on other merchandise sold by the same business permittees, shall furnish true, positive identification to the business permittee by which such person can be located by the Law Enforcement Agency of the City.

(d) Every such business permittee shall preserve for a period of at least two (2) years a carbon copy of each original writing furnished to the Law Enforcement Agency.

(e) Secondhand dealers, auctioneers, junk dealers, pawnbrokers and owners and operators of swap meets shall not melt, destroy, sell or otherwise dispose of any article, goods, wares, merchandise or thing obtained or used in such business where a report of the acquisition of the same has been required until fourteen (14) days after making the report to the Law Enforcement Agency as hereinbefore required, and until said time has so elapsed said permittee shall not clean, alter, repair, paint or otherwise change the appearance of said articles.

(f) The Law Enforcement Agency may waive the holding period with respect to any property held during said period if satisfied that such property is in the lawful possession of said permittee. The Law Enforcement Agency may, during said period, place a “hold order” upon any such property so held by such permittee where the Law Enforcement Agency has reasonably determined that said property may be stolen, which said hold order shall not exceed a period of ninety (90) days, and upon release of such hold order the permittee shall keep a true record of such property and include therewith the true name and address of the person to whom such property was sold or any other method of disposition. No person shall sell, destroy or otherwise dispose of any property while subject to such hold order.

(g) Exemptions. The aforementioned provisions in respect to the destruction, sale or disposal of property shall not apply to the following:

(1) Property purchased from a permittee holding a similar City permit if in the sale of such property said permittee has complied with all of the provisions of this Chapter, except that purchases made by junk dealers from junk collectors are not so exempt.

(2) Property purchased on a bill of sale or invoice from a regularly established place of business which has been dealing in that type of article for not less than two (2) years.

(3) Purchases or sale by junk dealers or junk collectors of rags, bottles other than milk or cream bottles, secondhand sacks other than cement sacks, barrels, cans, shoes, lamps, stoves, or household furniture (with the exception of sewing machines and musical instruments) or the purchase or sale by secondhand dealers of household furniture, with the exception of sewing machines, all musical instruments and typewriters. This exemption shall also exempt the exempt items or transactions from the provisions of subsection (d).

A pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, salvage dealer or salvage collector shall not, and an agent or employee of a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, salvage dealer and salvage collector shall not, accept any pledge, or loan any money or personal property or purchase or receive any goods, wares or merchandise or any article or thing whatsoever, or in any manner whatsoever engage in or conduct business between 7:00 p.m. of any day and 7:00 a.m. of the following day. (Ord. 71-162; Ord. 06-1342, § 47)

63142 Mobile Food Vendors.
(A) Authority. This Section is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to the City of Carson by Section 22455 of the California Vehicle Code, which permits local authorities to regulate the type of vending and the time, place and manner of vending from vehicles upon the street in order to promote public safety.

(B) Definitions. For purposes of this Section, the following words or phrases shall have the following meanings:

1. Food or Food Products. Any type of edible substance or beverage.

2. Mobile Food Vendor. A person that operates or assists in the operation of a mobile food truck/vending vehicle.

3. Mobile Food Truck/Vending Vehicle. Any motorized device or vehicle by which any person or property may be propelled or moved upon a highway, or any device which is towed by a motorized device or vehicle, from which food or food products are prepared, sold, offered for sale, displayed, bartered, exchanged or otherwise given.

4. Vend or Vending. To sell, offer for sale, display, barter, exchange, or otherwise give food or food products from a mobile food truck/vending vehicle.

5. Vendor. A person who vends, including an employee or agent of a vendor.

(C) Mobile Food Trucks/Vending Vehicles in the Public Right-of-Way. A mobile food vendor may locate its vehicle in the public right-of-way as long as the mobile food vendor adheres to the following standards and conditions:

1. The mobile food truck/vending vehicle is in full compliance with all parking and Vehicle Code provisions which apply to the location at which it is parked.

2. The mobile food truck/vending vehicle does not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic.

3. Vending is prohibited on the exposed street and/or traffic side of the mobile food truck/vending vehicle.

4. A mobile food vendor shall not distribute any item from the mobile food truck/vending vehicle in a manner that causes any person to stand in that portion of the street that is between the vehicle and the center of the street.

5. A mobile food vendor shall not encroach onto a public sidewalk with any part of its vending vehicle or any other equipment or furniture related to the operation of its business.

6. A mobile food vendor shall not keep, maintain or operate any mobile food truck/vending vehicle upon any public street, parkway, alley, or highway within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of the boundaries of any public or private elementary or secondary school between the hours of 6:30 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. on any day when such school is in session.

7. A mobile food vendor must have a valid business license and permit from the City.

8. A mobile food vendor must have a valid public health operating permit, operators food handler’s certificate, food vehicle certificate sticker, and seller’s permit.

9. All food products sold or provided from the mobile food truck/vending vehicle shall comply with all applicable food labeling requirements established by the State of California.

10. No mobile food vendor shall engage in vending unless he or she maintains clearly designated litter and recycling receptacles in the immediate vicinity of the mobile food truck/vending vehicle, marked with a sign requesting use by patrons. Prior to leaving the location, the mobile food vendor shall pick up, remove and dispose of all trash generated by the mobile food vendor’s operation located within a twenty-five (25) foot radius of the mobile food vendor’s location.

11. A mobile food vendor shall not operate within twenty-five (25) feet of any street intersection controlled by a crosswalk, traffic light, or stop sign.

12. Sales from a mobile food truck/vending vehicle in, upon, or adjacent to a public right of way shall occur only within the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. of the same day.

(D) Food Truck Events. This Section sets forth additional procedures for approval of food truck events, as defined herein. If any provision conflicts or is inconsistent with other code sections, interpretation shall first seek to apply both provisions in the conjunctive, or otherwise seek the more restrictive interpretation.

1. Definition – Food Truck Events. An event which includes a consortium of mobile food vendors devoted to the sale of prepared food products primarily for consumption in the immediate vicinity for a specified, pre-determined period of time at a specified, pre-determined location. Food truck participation as an accessory to any community event, regardless of the number of participating trucks, shall be considered a “food truck event” and shall be subject to the regulations herein described. A proposed event shall not be denied solely on the basis of food truck participation; however, the food truck portion of a proposed event may be denied, conditioned or reduced in accordance with the regulations of this Section.

2. Findings of Fact. To approve a permit for a food truck event, or other events that include participation of one or more food trucks, the Director of Administrative Services must find the following:

a. The proposed site is suitable for a food truck event considering its location, the size of the event (number of vendor participants), impact on parking and circulation, and any other factors determined by the Director of Community Development, with input from other appropriate City departments. Specifically:

1. Sufficient restroom facilities shall be located no farther than five hundred (500) feet from the food truck event.

2. No more than ten (10) percent of the total number of parking spaces provided on the site/location shall be displaced by the food truck event and no more than ten (10) vendors are allowed per food truck event. An event that displaces more than ten (10) percent of the total parking may be approved on a case-by-case basis with the concurrence of the Los Angeles County Fire Department and the Los Angeles County Sherriff’s Department based upon circulation, public health, safety and welfare.

3. Any potential significant adverse impact to properties in the vicinity can be mitigated, and the food truck event does not present an unwarranted noise or traffic burden. Mitigation may include: limiting the number of vendors, operating hours, and/or operating days to minimize any significant detrimental impacts to the surrounding neighborhood.

4. The food truck event shall be operated safely and in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations.

5. The food truck event shall not unreasonably burden city resources necessary to protect the security and welfare of the public.

6. In addition to the requirements for a permit, an application for a food truck event must be submitted by the proponent of the event and shall include the following:

a. Five (5) business days’ advance notice;

b. An accurate, scaled site plan showing the proposed layout of the food truck event, including the placement of participant vehicles, on-site parking and circulation;

c. The proponent’s responses to all required findings of fact;

d. The lease, license, or other agreement between the proponent and the owner and/or business of the subject property approving such event;

e. The rules for participant vendors, which demonstrate the applicant’s knowledge of applicable laws and regulations and commitment to their enforcement;

f. The written agreement between the proponent and the owner and/or business that will allow the patrons of the food truck event to use nearby restroom facilities;

g. A statement confirming that the food truck event will be operated safely and in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations; and

h. A list of participating vendors which includes the business name, owners, address, and phone number.

7. The proponent of the event, as the holder of the event permit, is responsible to ensure that each participating vendor at all permitted events has a valid and current Carson business license and permit.

8. Applications for a food truck event permit must be accompanied by payment of the appropriate license and permit fees, and may be subject to conditions pursuant to subsection (D)(2)(a)(3) of this Section and any new or revised conditions that may arise based on a review of previous permits, if any. Approved permits shall set forth the date and operating hours, conditions of approval, and other operating rules and restrictions.

9. In addition to the regulations for mobile food vendors in this code, each food truck event shall adhere to the following regulations for vending from vehicle:

a. Each operator of a mobile food truck/vending vehicle shall possess and at all times display in conspicuous view upon each such vehicle a city business license and permit issued pursuant to this Section.

b. No mobile food truck/vending vehicle shall be parked, stopped or left standing in any manner which blocks or impedes vehicular access to any driveway or restricts the free movement of emergency vehicles upon the area of the food truck event.

c. Each mobile food truck/vending vehicle shall be equipped with trash and recycling receptacles of sizes adequate to accommodate all trash and refuse generated by such vending.

d. Each vendor or the food truck event organizer or applicant shall pick up and deposit in the trash receptacle any paper, cups, wrappers, litter or other refuse of any kind which were a part of the goods or merchandise supplied from the vehicle and which have been left or abandoned within twenty-five (25) feet of such vehicle on any public or private property. Each vendor or the food truck organizer or applicant shall not dispose of any trash or refuse in any public or private trash receptacle unless specific written authorization is obtained from the property owner or his/her authorized representative.

e. The food truck event proponent shall make a $250.00 deposit, by either cash, cashier’s check, or money order, with the submission of the application for the food truck event to ensure the premises are free of trash and debris after each day’s activities. If the site is free of debris, as required, the $250.00 shall be returned in whole or in part after the event. The deposit may be used to offset direct costs incurred by the City related to enforcement or clean up activities.

f. No vending shall be permitted until the vehicle is parked and trash and recycling receptacles and other features are established in accordance with the City-approved scaled site plan showing the proposed layout of the food truck event.

(E) Compliance with State and Local Laws.

1. Mobile food vendors shall comply with all applicable State and local laws.

2. This Section is not intended to be enforced against pedestrian food vendors or against food vendors who operate human-powered push carts and other self-propelled vehicles on private property. Pursuant to CMC 4126, pedestrian food vendors or any vendors who operate human-powered push carts and other self-propelled vehicles are not allowed in or on any public street, sidewalk, or park in the City of Carson. (Ord. 12-1491, § 5)

63143 Peddlers – Sidewalk Vendors.
(a) Every person engaged in the business of peddling, selling or delivering liquids or edibles for human consumption from motorized devices or vehicles, either retail or wholesale, except dairy products and except persons selling or delivering, or both, to retail or wholesale establishments for resale agricultural products raised by them, shall first procure a permit therefor.

(b) No sidewalk vendor shall operate (as “sidewalk vendor” and “operate” are defined in CMC 31001) without first procuring and thereafter maintaining at all times a sidewalk vendor’s permit issued by the Director. The Director shall not issue any sidewalk vendor’s permit unless the sidewalk vendor has submitted an application containing all of the following information, demonstrating, to the satisfaction of the Director:

(1) Payment of the applicable permit fee;

(2) The full legal name and current mailing address of the sidewalk vendor;

(3) A copy of the sidewalk vendor’s California driver’s license or identification number or individual taxpayer identification number (no social security number shall be required). The number collected shall not be available to the public for inspection, is confidential, and shall not be disclosed except as required to administer the permit program or to comply with a State law or State or Federal court order;

(4) A description of the food, beverages or merchandise to be offered for sale or exchange;

(5) The proposed hours of operation of the sidewalk vendor;

(6) An explanation of whether the sidewalk vendor will operate as a stationary sidewalk vendor or a roaming sidewalk vendor (as such terms are defined in CMC 31001), or both, and if stationary, the area(s) where the sidewalk vendor intends to operate (though the sidewalk vendor shall not be bound to operate in such area(s), subject to compliance with the operating requirements set forth in CMC 31002);

(7) A description and photograph (including signage and colors) of any stand (as defined in CMC 31001), and any additional table, crate, carton, rack, or any other device to increase the selling or displaying capacity of a stand, to be used in the operation of the sidewalk vendor;

(8) The California seller’s permit number (California Department of Tax and Fee Administration sales tax number), if any, of the sidewalk vendor;

(9) If the sidewalk vendor is an agent of an individual, company, partnership, or corporation, the name and business address of the principal;

(10) A copy of any permit required by Part 7 of Division 104 of the Health and Safety Code and any other license, permit or entitlement required by applicable law;

(11) Information on any policy of general liability insurance held by the applicant, including the insurer, the policy limits and a copy of the certificate of insurance;

(12) A certification by the applicant that, to his or her knowledge and belief, the information contained in the application is true; and

(13) Any additional information deemed necessary by the Director to explain the proposed use or operation of the sidewalk vendor or to demonstrate that the applicant is prepared to comply with the operating requirements of CMC 31002. (Ord. 71-162; Ord. 88-835, § 2; Ord. 12-1491, § 4; Ord. 18-1828, § 6)

63143.1 Same – Exceptions.
CMC 63143 does not apply to:

(a) Merchants having a fixed place of business in the City of Carson;

(b) Employees of such merchants;

(c) Farmers selling farm products produced by them and are otherwise permitted by City;

(d) Certified farmers selling farm and agricultural products produced by them at City authorized farmers’ markets on a seasonal, temporary or intermittent basis.

A “fixed place of business” as that term is used in this Section is any structure permanently affixed at a particular site in compliance with the provisions of the Building Code and of the Health Code of the City of Carson. (Ord. 71-162; Ord. 10-1458, § 3)

63143.10 Pony Rides, Kiddie and Amusement Rides.
Permit Fee $50.00. An operator of a pony ride, kiddie or amusement ride, including inflatable jumpers, or other similar amusement business shall procure and at all times maintain in full force and effect a policy of general liability insurance with coverage of $1,000,000 for injuries and property damage, insuring against all damages resulting from injuries to any person using or visiting such pony ride, kiddie ride, amusement ride or other similar amusement business. Said insurance policy or policies shall be filed with the Finance Director. Such policy or policies shall be subject to the approval of the Director of Risk Management or her/his designee and shall contain a clause stating that the City be provided at least thirty (30) days’ (or as soon as possible) notice prior to cancellation or change in the policy. (Ord. 06-1342, § 48; Ord. 16-1594, § 2)

63144 Photograph Solicitors.
Regulations same as for solicitors. The permit fee for a photograph solicitor is $50.00. (Ord. 71-162; Ord. 06-1342, § 49)

63145 Rebound Tumbling Center – Operation Requirements.
Rebound tumbling equipment shall be maintained in a good state of repair. Rebound tumbling equipment which has broken springs or broken webbing shall not be used. The permittee shall take precautionary measures to prevent broken springs from disengaging from the assembly. (Ord. 71-162; Ord. 06-1342, § 50; Ord. 16-1589, § 2)

63145.1 Same – Rules and Regulations.
The permittee shall enforce, and all customers using rebound tumbling equipment shall observe and obey, the following rules and regulations which shall be printed in clear, easily read letters not less than one (1) inch in size, and posted in one (1) or more conspicuous and well lighted locations within the tumbling equipment center:

(a) Not over one (1) person on one (1) apparatus at a time.

(b) No flips, twists, or similar difficult routines unless under the immediate supervision of a qualified instructor, or until qualified as demonstrated by an officially acceptable certificate or as determined by the operator. In case of dispute with a patron, the operator’s ruling shall be final.

(c) No use of equipment in shoes or in bare feet.

(d) All patrons shall strictly and promptly comply with requests or requirements of operator.

(e) No use while under the influence of any alcoholic beverage and when not in condition to safely use the equipment as determined by operator.

(f) No jumping from apparatus to apparatus or to any point outside the frame of the apparatus.

(g) No actions allowed which will or may seriously distract or interfere with a performer.

(h) No children under six (6) years of age shall be allowed to use the equipment unless accompanied by a responsible adult.

(i) No smoking, eating, or drinking while using the equipment. (Ord. 71-162)

63145.2 Same – Supervision.
(a) A rebound tumbling center, whenever open for use, shall be under the direct supervision of as many supervisors as are necessary to obtain compliance with the posted rules.

(b) The supervisor shall observe all equipment units whenever they are in use.

(c) Each unit shall be numbered or otherwise clearly designated.

(d) A suitable loudspeaker system shall be maintained to enforce the rules except where there are less than eight (8) equipment units.

(e) There shall be at least one (1) supervisor on active supervising duty for each twelve (12) equipment units which are in use. (Ord. 71-162)

63145.3 Same – Qualifications of Supervisors.
A rebound tumbling supervisor shall be:

(a) Eighteen (18) years of age or over.

(b) Of good moral character.

(c) Trained and experienced in the supervision and control of personnel, both skilled and unskilled, in the art of rebound tumbling.

(d) Physically and otherwise fully fit to manage the facility. (Ord. 71-162)

63145.4 Same – Handling and Reporting Accidents.
The operator of a rebound tumbling center shall:

(a) Direct all accidents and injuries to competent care for handling and disposition.

(b) All accidents of a nature to cause unconsciousness, broken or sprained extremities or bones, removal, breaking or loosening of teeth, hemorrhaging or lacerations which may require suturing, and eye injuries shall be reported in writing to the City Health Officer unless such officer agrees to accept oral or telephone reports.

(c) Maintain on the premises records of all medical aid or care administered.

(d) Keep, in a place readily available at all times to the operator and his employees, the telephone number of available emergency service. (Ord. 71-162)

63145.5 Same – Facilities and Equipment.
Each operator of a rebound tumbling center shall provide and maintain the following facilities and equipment:

(a) A telephone which shall be available for emergency use at all times while the rebound tumbling center is in operation.

(b) First Aid Equipment shall be maintained on the premises at all times and replenished as necessary. Such equipment shall be an adequate first aid kit of at least sixteen (16) units as recommended by the American Red Cross First Aid Manual.

(c) Litter, waste containers and appropriate signs shall be provided as needed and the premises and all facilities shall be kept in a clean condition.

(d) Drinking facilities shall be provided on the premises which shall consist of either a sanitary drinking fountain or bottled water and paper cups available in a suitable, sanitary dispenser.

(e) Toilet facilities shall be maintained on the premises at all times consisting of not less than one (1) water-flush type toilet for each sex, except that the operator may maintain one (1) or both of such toilets at another location not more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from the equipment units. If such toilets are located on property under different ownership or management, a written agreement between the operator and the owner or person in lawful possession of the premises on which such toilets are located that such toilets will be kept unlocked and available for the use of such patrons, shall be furnished to the Director of Finance. Such agreement shall be subject to the Health Officer’s approval. (Ord. 71-162)

63145.6 Same – Restoration of Premises and Bond.
Within sixty (60) days of the abandonment, closing down or surrender of the premises of any tumbling rebound center, the operator thereof, or his successor, or the owner of the premises upon which the same is located, shall remove said rebound tumbling equipment and fill any cavities, holes, or sumps installed in the ground or on said premises for the purpose of housing said equipment and shall otherwise restore the site as nearly as practicable to its original condition. No permit shall be issued hereunder until said operator has filed with the Finance Director a faithful performance bond in an amount determined by the Public Works Director to be necessary for guaranteeing the faithful performance of the provisions of this Section. Such bond shall be subject to the approval of the City Attorney. The permit fee for a rebound or tumbling center is $50.00. (Ord. 71-162; Ord. 06-1342, § 51)

63146 Salvage or Junk Dealer.
Permit Fee $250.00. The provisions of CMC 63141 apply to salvage dealers and junk dealers. (Ord. 06-1342, § 52)

63147 Second Hand Dealers.
Permit Fee $250.00. The provisions of CMC 63141 apply to second hand dealers. (Ord. 06-1342, § 53)

63147.5 Skateboard Center or Skating Rink.
Permit Fee $50.00. Any person desiring to operate a skateboard center or skating rink in the City shall file with the Director an application for a permit. If such application is granted, a permit shall be issued on the following conditions:

(a) Repealed by Ord. 16-1588.

(b) Facilities. Skateboard and skating facilities shall be maintained in a good state of repair.

(c) Regulations. The permittee shall enforce, and all customers of the skateboard center or skating rink shall observe and obey the following rules and regulations which shall be printed in clear and easily read letters not less than one (1) inch in size and posted in one (1) or more conspicuous and well-lighted locations within the skateboard center or skating rink:

(1) No flips, twists, or similar difficult routines will be permitted except under the immediate supervision of a qualified instructor, or until competence to perform the routine has been demonstrated to the owner or the representative of the owner. In case of a dispute with a patron concerning competence, the ruling of the owner or the owner’s representative shall be final.

(2) Shoes must be worn at all times.

(3) All patrons shall strictly and promptly comply with all requests or requirements of the owner or the owner’s representative.

(4) The facilities may not be used by a person under the influence of any alcoholic beverage or when the owner or the owner’s representative determines the person is not able to safely use the facilities.

(5) No jumping from one structure to another structure or from a point inside to a point outside a structure will be permitted.

(6) No person under six (6) years of age shall be allowed to use the facilities unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian.

(7) No person may smoke, eat, or drink while skating or skateboarding.

(d) Supervision. The owner shall comply with the following rules regarding supervision:

(1) The skateboard center or skating rink whenever open for use shall be under the direct supervision of as many persons as are necessary to obtain compliance with the posted rules.

(2) The supervisor shall observe all structures whenever they are in use.

(3) Each structure shall be numbered or otherwise clearly designated.

(4) A suitable loudspeaker system shall be maintained to enforce the rules except where there are less than eight (8) structures.

(5) There shall be at least one (1) supervisor on active duty for each twelve (12) structures which are in use.

(e) Qualifications of Supervisors. A skateboard and/or skating rink supervisor shall be:

(1) Eighteen (18) years of age or more.

(2) Of good moral character.

(3) Trained and experienced in the supervision and control of both skilled and unskilled persons while skateboarding or skating.

(4) Physically and otherwise able to undertake his duties.

(f) Handling and Reporting Accidents. The following procedures shall be adhered to with respect to accidents:

(1) Persons receiving injuries shall be notified where emergency care may be received.

(2) All accidents of a nature to cause unconsciousness, broken or sprained extremities or bones, breaking or loosening of teeth, hemorrhaging, lacerations which may require suturing, and eye injuries shall be reported in writing to the City Health Officer unless such officer agrees to accept oral or telephone reports.

(3) Records of all medical aid or care required shall be maintained on the premises.

(4) Telephone number(s) of available emergency medical service shall be kept in a place readily available at all times to the owner and the owner’s employees.

(g) Facilities and Equipment. The owner of the skateboard center or skating rink shall provide and maintain on the premises the following facilities and equipment:

(1) A telephone which shall be available for emergency use at all times the skateboard center and/or skating rink is in operation.

(2) First Aid Equipment of at least sixteen (16) units as recommended by the American Red Cross First Aid Manual.

(3) Litter and rubbish containers shall be provided as needed and the premises and all facilities shall be kept in a clean condition.

(4) Drinking water facilities shall be provided on the premises which shall consist of either a sanitary drinking fountain or bottled water and paper cups available in a suitable, sanitary dispenser.

(5) Toilet facilities consisting of not less than one (1) water-flush type toilet for each sex shall be maintained on the premises at all times, except that the owner may maintain one (1) or both of such toilets at another location not more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from the premises. If such toilets are located on property under different ownership or management than the skateboard center or skating rink, a written agreement between the operator and the owner or person in lawful possession of the premises on which such toilets are located providing that such toilets will be kept unlocked and available for the use of such patrons shall be furnished to the Director of Finance.

(h) Restoration of Premises and Bond. Within sixty (60) days of the abandonment, closing down or surrender of the premises of any outdoor skateboard center or skating rink, the owner shall remove said skateboard or skating structures and fill any cavities, holes, or sumps installed on said premises and shall otherwise restore the site as nearly as practicable to its original condition. No permit shall be issued hereunder until the owner has filed with the Director of Finance a faithful performance bond in an amount determined by the Public Works Director to be necessary for, guaranteeing the faithful performance of the provisions of this Section. Such bond shall be subject to the approval of the City Attorney. (Ord. 78-444, § 1; Ord. 06-1342, §§ 54, 55; Ord. 16-1588, § 2)

63148 Solicitor.
Permit Fee $50.00. Each person desiring to act as a solicitor or canvasser as defined under “Solicitor” or “Canvasser” in CMC 6303 shall obtain a permit from the City Council before engaging in such activity.

An individual who does not solicit the retail sale of goods, wares, or merchandise for future delivery except as an incident to engaging in a business otherwise licensed or operating under a permit issued under this Chapter, for which he or his employer has a current, valid license and/or permit, shall not be deemed to be engaged in the business of solicitation. (Ord. 71-162; Ord. 06-1342, § 56)

63148.1 Same – Application.
In addition to the requirements set forth in CMC 6374 the applicant shall set forth in an application to the Director of Finance, the following:

(a) Name and permanent home address of each solicitor.

(b) Length of time for which right to do business is desired.

(c) The name and address of the employer or the person, firm or corporation for whom said solicitor is performing or seeks to perform his services.

(d) The name and address of the person, firm or corporation where further development, consummation or completion of the services performed by said solicitor will be done, the proposed method of delivery to the purchaser or consumer, and the length of time within which delivery will be made.

(e) The nature of the soliciting to be performed. For example, whether said soliciting is for the sale of goods, and if so, the general description of the goods to be sold; or whether the soliciting is for the sale of services to be performed in the future and if so the type of service sought to be sold and the time and place for future performance.

(f) Two (2) photographs of the applicant taken within sixty (60) days immediately prior to the filing of the application, which pictures shall be two (2) inches by two (2) inches showing the head and shoulders in a clear and distinguishing manner. (Ord. 71-162)

63148.2 Same – Investigation.
Upon receipt of an application for a solicitor’s permit the Director of Finance shall cause the necessary investigation and report concerning the applicant’s business and moral character for the protection of the public. If as a result of such investigation the applicant’s character or business responsibility is reported to be unsatisfactory and such is endorsed upon the application with the reason thereof being stated, the Finance Director shall notify the applicant that the application is rejected and that no permit will be issued.

If, on the other hand, as a result of such investigation the business responsibility and character are found to be satisfactory, such fact shall be endorsed upon the application and returned to the Finance Director who shall so report to the City Council. (Ord. 71-162)

63148.3 Same – Permit.
Each permit shall show the name and address of each solicitor permittee and shall have attached thereto a picture of said permittee in addition to other matters which business permits are required to show pursuant to the provisions of this Code.

In connection with considering the application for such permit, the Director of Finance shall require reports from such other City Officials and agencies as necessary to determine the character, fitness and qualifications of the applicant as well as the effect on the public health, peace, welfare and safety of the granting of such permit. (Ord. 71-162)

63148.4 Same – Principal Permit.
Permit Fee $50.00. Every person either employing or contracting with one (1) or more individuals to have such individuals solicit the retail sale of goods, wares, merchandise, or services for future delivery, may obtain a Principal Solicitor Permit.

The Finance Director shall not issue such permit until the applicant files with the Finance Director a list of all solicitors employed by the applicant or with whom the applicant has contracted, and a signed agreement that the applicant will notify the Finance Director in writing of every change in personnel of those soliciting for him, within five (5) days after any such change occurs. (Ord. 71-162; Ord. 06-1342, § 57)

63148.5 Same – Unlawful Activity.
It is unlawful for any person to engage in the activity of soliciting as defined in this Chapter, in the City of Carson unless such person has a valid permit to do so issued by the City Council in accordance with the terms and provisions of this Chapter, and unless such person has upon his person or with him an identification card showing the existence of such a valid permit. It is unlawful for any person engaged in the activity of solicitation within the City of Carson to fail or refuse to display or show said identification card upon demand for the display of the same by any Law Enforcement Agent of the City of Carson or by any person being solicited by said solicitor. (Ord. 71-162)

63148.6 Same – Definitions.
(a) “Solicit” and “solicitation” means the request, directly or indirectly, of money, credit, property, financial assistance or other things of value on the plea or representation that such money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value will be used for a charitable purpose as those purposes are defined in this Section, conducted door to door, in any place of public accommodation, in any place of business open to the public generally, on the City streets and sidewalks, in the public parks, on the public beaches or in any public places. These words also mean and include the following methods of securing such money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value, when conducted in the following manner:

(1) Any oral or written request;

(2) The local distribution, circulation, posting or publishing of any handbill, written advertisement or other publication, unless such handbill or written advertisement has been placed within a business open to the public generally with the express permission of the owner or lessee of such business;

(3) The sale of or taking orders for any goods, services, merchandise, wares or other tangible items.

A solicitation, as defined in this subsection, shall be deemed completed when made, whether or not the person making the same receives any contribution or makes any sale referred to in this subsection.

(b) “Charitable” means and includes the words patriotic, philanthropic, social services, welfare, benevolent, educational, religious, civic or fraternal, either actual or purported.

(c) “Contributions” means and includes the words alms, food, clothing, money, property, subscription or pledge, and also donations under the guise of loans of money or property.

(d) “Person” shall mean any individual, firm, copartnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association, church, religious sect, religious denomination, society, organization, or league and shall include any trustee, receiver, assignee, agent, or other similar representative thereof.

(e) “Director of Finance” means that person whose duties and responsibilities are described in CMC 2722 and 2723 and any person designated in writing by the Director of Finance as the Director’s representative. (Ord. 71-162; Ord. 83-646, § 1)

63148.7 Charitable Solicitations – Permit Required.
No person shall solicit contributions for any charitable purpose within the City without having obtained a permit from the Director of Finance authorizing such solicitation; provided, that when a permit has been issued to any person defined in CMC 63148.6, other than an individual, the individual agents and solicitors for such person shall not be required to obtain individual permits. (Ord. 71-162; Ord. 83-646, § 1)

63148.8 Same – Exemptions.
The provisions of this Article shall not apply to solicitations made upon premises owned or occupied by the organization on whose behalf such solicitation is made; nor to solicitation for the relief of specific individuals specified by name at the time of the solicitation, where the solicitor represents in each case that the entire amount collected, without any deduction whatever, shall be turned over to the named beneficiary, nor shall it be applicable to any corporation or unincorporated association soliciting contributions solely from persons who are members thereof at the time of such solicitation. (Ord. 71-162; Ord. 83-646, § 1)

63148.9 Same – Application for Permit.
(a) An application for a permit to solicit shall be made to the Director of Finance upon forms prescribed by the Director of Finance. The application shall be sworn to or affirmed and filed with the Director of Finance at least ten (10) days prior to the time at which the permit applied for shall become effective; provided, however, that the Director of Finance may for good cause shown allow the filing of an application less than ten (10) days prior to the effective date of the permit applied for. The Director of Finance shall either grant or deny the requested permit within ten (10) days of the date the application is made. In the event the Director of Finance fails to act within the time prescribed herein, the permit shall be deemed granted.

(b) The application herein required shall contain the following information:

(1) The name, address, home telephone number, business address, and business telephone number of the person applying for the permit;

(2) If the applicant is not an individual, the applicant’s correct legal name, address of its principal office, and the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the applicant’s principal officers;

(3) The purpose for which the solicitation is to be made, the total amount of funds proposed to be raised thereby, and the use or disposition to be made of any receipts therefrom;

(4) The name, address, telephone number and social security number of the person or persons who will be in direct charge of conducting the solicitation, and the names of all fund raisers connected to or to be connected with the proposed solicitation;

(5) An outline of the method or methods to be used in conducting the solicitations;

(6) The time when such solicitation will be made, giving the preferred dates and hour of day for the commencement and termination of the solicitation;

(7) A full statement of the character and extent of the charitable or religious work being done by the applicant within the City;

(8) A statement to the effect that if a permit is granted, it will not be used or represented in any way as an endorsement by the City or by any department or officer thereof;

(9) A financial statement, which shall be maintained on the basis of generally accepted accounting principles as defined by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, the Governmental Accounting Standards Board, or the Financial Accounting Standards Board;

(10) The amount of any wages, fees, commissions, expenses, or other compensation to be expended in connection with the proposed solicitation, and to whom paid;

(11) If, while any application is pending, or during the term of any permit granted thereon, there is any change in fact, policy, or method that would alter the information given in the application, the applicant shall notify the City Manager in writing thereof within twenty-four (24) hours after such change; and

(12) Proof of current tax-exempt status. (Ord. 71-162; Ord. 83-646, § 1; Ord. 06-1342, §§ 58, 59)

63148.10 Same – Investigation.
The Director of Finance shall examine all applications filed under CMC 63148.9. The applicant shall make available for inspection all of the applicant’s financial books, records, and papers at any reasonable time before the application is granted, during the time a permit is in effect, or after a permit has expired. The Director of Finance may inspect said financial books, records, and papers solely for determining the truth of the information contained in the application or the truth of any representation made by the permit holder with regard to any solicitation conducted under this Article. (Ord. 71-162; Ord. 83-646, § 1)

63148.11 Same – Issuance of Permit.
The Director of Finance shall issue the permit unless any of the following have been demonstrated:

(a) That any statement made in the application is factually incorrect;

(b) That the solicitation is not made for the charitable purpose described in the application;

(c) That the applicant has not complied with the provisions of this Article. (Ord. 71-162; Ord. 83-646, § 1)

63148.12 Same – Renewal of Permit by the Director of Finance.
Upon the expiration of any permit and if requested in writing so to do, the Director of Finance must renew the permit within ten (10) days of such request if the factual information upon which the original application was granted remains unchanged and that no violation of this Article has been committed. The Director of Finance may require a new application subject to the provisions of this Article. (Ord. 83-646, § 1)

63148.13 Same – Form of Permit.
Permits issued under this Article shall bear the name and address of the person to whom the permit is issued, the number of the permit, the date issued, the dates within which the permit holder may solicit, and a statement that the permit does not constitute an endorsement by the City or by any of its departments, officers or employees of the purpose of or of the person conducting the solicitation and brief written statement describing by approximate percentage the disbursement of all funds solicited under the permit. All permits must be signed by the Director of Finance. (Ord. 83-646, § 1)

63148.14 Same – Term of Permits.
All permits issued under this Article shall be valid for a period of thirty (30) days unless renewed, revoked or suspended pursuant to the provisions of this Article. Upon good cause shown, the Director of Finance may issue a permit which may be valid for more than thirty (30) days, but in no event shall a permit be valid for more than six (6) months. (Ord. 83-646, § 1)

63148.15 Same – Permit Nontransferable.
Any permit issued under this Article shall not be transferable or assignable. (Ord. 83-646, § 1)

63148.16 Same – Identification Card.
All persons to whom permits have been issued hereunder shall furnish an identification card to their agents and solicitors which card is required to be in the possession of the agents and solicitors and presented when soliciting. Identification cards shall include the permit number, the name and address of the permittee, a statement describing the permittee’s charitable purpose and activity, the signature of the permittee’s chief executive officer, the name and signature of the solicitor to whom the card is issued and the specific period of time during which the solicitation is authorized.

No person shall solicit any contributions unless he or she exhibits an identification card of a form approved by the Director of Finance and reads it to the person solicited or presents it to the person solicited for perusal, allowing sufficient time for perusal, before accepting any contribution. (Ord. 83-646, § 1)

63148.17 Same – Denial of Permits.
In the event the Director of Finance denies a permit to any applicant, the Director of Finance, within two (2) business days thereof shall send by registered mail or give the applicant written notice in person of the denial, stating with specificity the reasons for such denial. (Ord. 83-646, § 1)

63148.18 Same – Revocation of Permits.
Whenever it shall be shown that any person to whom a permit has been issued under this Article has violated any of the provisions thereof, or that any promoter, agent, or solicitor of a permit holder has misrepresented the purpose of the solicitation, the Director of Finance shall immediately suspend the permit, and within two (2) business days thereof, shall either send by registered mail or give the permit holder written notice in person of the revocation or suspension, stating with specificity the reasons for the suspension or revocation. The Director of Finance shall report such suspension or revocation to the City Council at the next regular meeting of that body following his action. (Ord. 83-646, § 1)

63148.19 Same – Appeals from Action of the Director of Finance.
If an applicant or permit holder is aggrieved by any action to deny, suspend or revoke a permit by the Director of Finance, such applicant or permit holder may appeal to the City Council by filing within fifteen (15) days of the Director’s decision with the City Clerk a statement addressed to the City Council setting forth the facts and circumstances regarding the action by the Director of Finance. The City Clerk shall set a time and place for hearing the appeal and notify the applicant or permit holder thereof. The City Council at a regular meeting, held not more than thirty (30) days from the date on which the appeal shall have been filed with the City Clerk, shall hear the applicant or permit holder, the Director of Finance, and all relevant evidence and shall determine the merits of the appeal and render a decision thereon.

Within two (2) business days of the hearing, written notice of the City Council’s decision shall be sent by registered mail to the applicant or permit holder, stating with specificity the reasons for its decision. The action of the City Council shall be final and appealable to the Superior Court of the State of California pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5.

The right to appeal to the City Council from the denial, suspension or revocation of any permit granted under this Article shall terminate upon the expiration of fifteen (15) days following written notice of the action taken by the Director of Finance. (Ord. 83-646, § 1)

63148.20 Same – Notice of Suspension or Revocation.
The Chief of Police shall be notified forthwith by the Director of Finance of the suspension or revocation of any permit issued under this Article. (Ord. 83-646, § 1)

63148.21 Same – Books and Records.
No person shall solicit any contributions for any charitable purpose without maintaining a system of accounting whereby all donations to it and all disbursements are entered upon the official books or records of such person’s treasurer or other financial officer. (Ord. 83-646, § 1)

63148.22 Same – Report Required for Permit Holder.
It shall be the duty of all persons issued permits under this Article to furnish to the Director of Finance within ninety (90) days after the expiration of the permit, a report and financial statement showing the amount raised by the solicitation, the amount expended in collecting such funds, including a report of the wages, fees, commissions, and expenses paid to any person in connection with such solicitation, and the disposition of the balance of the funds collected by the solicitation. The permit holder may be required by the Director of Finance to make available for inspection all financial books, records and papers whereby the accuracy of the report may be verified. (Ord. 83-646, § 1)

63148.23 Same – Manner of Solicitation.
(a) No person shall solicit without a permit;

(b) No person shall allow any person under sixteen (16) years of age to solicit;

(c) No person shall solicit at any dwelling, including but not limited to a house, apartment, or condominium where there is a sign indicating “No Solicitations,” “Do Not Disturb,” or any other indication that the occupants do not wish to be solicited or in any other way have their privacy disturbed;

(d) No person to whom a permit has been issued under this Article, nor any of the agents or solicitors of such person, shall touch, come into physical contact with, or affix any object to the person or any contributor, or member of the public, without first receiving express permission therefor from such contributor or member of the public;

(e) No person to whom a permit has been granted under this Article, nor any of the agents or solicitors of such person, shall persistently and importunately request any donation from any member of the public after such member of the public expresses his or her desire not to make a donation;

(f) No person to whom a permit has been granted under this Article, nor any of the agents or solicitors of such person, shall intentionally and deliberately obstruct the free movement of any person on any street, sidewalk or other public place or in any place open to the public generally;

(g) No person to whom a permit has been granted under this Article, nor any of the agents or solicitors of such person, shall solicit from a captive audience. “Captive audience” shall be defined as purposefully stationary persons, such as persons in lines or seated in public areas;

(h) No person shall threaten any injury or damage to any person who declines to be solicited;

(i) No person shall accept food stamps as a contribution; and

(j) No person shall misrepresent his or her physical or mental health while soliciting. (Ord. 83-646, § 1)

63148.24 Same – Time of Solicitation.
It shall be unlawful for any person to go upon private residential premises after sunset or earlier than 8:00 a.m. for the purpose of solicitation, unless such person has been requested or invited to do so by the owner or occupant of said premises. This Section shall not be interpreted to grant any person permission to enter upon private property. (Ord. 83-646, § 1)

63148.25 Same – Written Receipts Required.
Any person receiving money or anything having a value of $5.00 or more from any contributor under a solicitation made pursuant to a permit granted under this Article shall give to the contributor a written receipt signed by the solicitor showing plainly the name and permit number of the person under whose permit the solicitation is conducted, the date, and the amount received; provided, however, that this Section shall not apply to any contributions collected by means of a closed box or receptacle used in solicitation with the written approval of the Director of Finance, where it is impractical to determine the amount of each contribution. (Ord. 83-646, § 1)

63148.26 Same – Fraudulent Misrepresentation.
(a) No person shall directly or indirectly solicit contributions from any person by misrepresentation of his name, occupation, financial condition, social condition, residence or principal place of business, and no person shall make or cause to be made any misstatement of fact, deception, or fraudulent misrepresentation in connection with any solicitation of any contribution in the City, or in any application or report filed under this Article;

(b) No charitable organization or professional fund raiser soliciting contributions shall use a name, symbol, or statement so closely related or similar to that used by another charitable organization or governmental agency that the use thereof would tend to confuse or mislead the public; and

(c) Nor shall a charitable organization or professional fund raiser solicit funds by the use of statements or material that would indicate that such funds were being raised for an organization or agency from which organization or agency explicit permission for the raising of such funds has not been received in accordance with other provisions of this Article. (Ord. 83-646, § 1)

63148.27 Same – Authority of the Director of Finance.
Nothing in this Article shall be construed as granting to the Director of Finance, or to any other person, the authority to grant, deny, revoke, renew or suspend any permit by reason of disapproval of or agreement with the philosophy, opinion, or beliefs of the applicant, permit holder or the person such applicant or permit holder represents, or for any other reasons not specifically provided for in this Article. (Ord. 83-646, § 1)

63148.28 Same – Penalties.
Any person, as hereinbefore defined or any agent, servant, employee, or officer thereof violating any of the provisions of this Article, or who aids or abets in the procuring of a violation of any provision, part or portion of this Article, or who files or causes to be filed an application for a permit containing fraudulent misrepresentations or false statements of fact, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not more than $500.00 for each offense, or undergo imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or both. Each violation shall be deemed a separate offense, and shall be punishable as such. (Ord. 83-646, § 1)

63149 Sound Vehicles.
The words “Sound Amplifying Equipment” as used herein shall mean any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music, or any other sound. “Sound Amplifying Equipment” as used herein shall not be construed as including standard automobile radios when used and heard only by occupants of the vehicle in which installed or warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles or horns or other warning devices on other vehicles used only for traffic safety purposes. “Sound Truck” as used herein is a vehicle equipped with sound amplifying equipment. (Ord. 71-162)

63149.1 Same – Permit.
No person shall use or cause to be used a sound truck with its sound amplifying equipment in operation in the City without filing a registration statement with the Director of Finance and obtaining a permit therefor. (Ord. 71-162)

63149.2 Same – Registration Statement.
A registration statement shall be filed in duplicate and shall state the following:

1. Name and home address of the applicant.

2. Address of place of business of applicant.

3. License number and motor number of each sound truck to be used by applicant.

4. Name and address of person who owns each sound truck to be used by applicant.

5. Name and address of person having direct charge of each sound truck to be used by applicant.

6. Names and addresses of all persons who will use or operate any sound truck.

7. The purpose for which the sound truck or trucks will be used.

8. A statement as to the section or sections of the City in which each sound truck is proposed to be used.

9. The proposed hours of operation of each sound truck.

10. The number of days of proposed operation of each sound truck.

11. A general description of the sound amplifying equipment which is to be used.

12. The maximum sound producing power of the sound amplifying equipment which is to be used in or on each sound truck, in terms of:

(a) The wattage to be used.

(b) The approximate maximum distance for which sound will be thrown from each sound truck. (Ord. 71-162)

63149.3 Same – Possession of Copy of Registration Statement.
Any person operating any sound truck shall have in his possession at all times while the sound truck’s sound amplifying equipment is in operation a copy of such registration statement duly certified by the Director of Finance, and said copy shall be displayed and shown to any policeman of the City upon request. (Ord. 71-162)

63149.4 Same – Regulation of Use.
The use of sound trucks in the City with sound amplifying equipment in operation shall be subject to the following regulations:

(a) Sound amplifying equipment shall not be operated unless the sound truck upon which equipment is mounted is operated at a speed of at least ten (10) miles per hour except when said truck is stopped or impeded by traffic. Where stopped by traffic the said sound amplifying equipment shall not be operated for longer than one (1) minute at each such stop.

(b) Sound shall not be issued within one hundred (100) yards of hospitals, schools, churches, courthouses, courtrooms, County buildings or the City Hall.

(c) The only sounds permitted are music or human speech.

(d) The sound truck shall be operated only on those streets or boulevards designated in the permit to operate the same and shall be operated for not more than four and one-half (4-1/2) hours each day between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 1:30 p.m., and the hours of 4:30 p.m. and 6:30 p.m., except that on Sundays and legal holidays no operation shall be authorized. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City Council may determine upon competent evidence that in individual cases different hours of operation would be justified, and in any such case the such different hours of operation.

(e) No permit for the operation of a sound truck shall exceed thirty (30) days, unless a longer time has been specified by the City Council upon receiving evidence justifying the same, or unless the thirty (30) day permit has been extended by the City Council upon hearing evidence justifying such extension. (Ord. 71-162)

63150 Street Vendors.
See CMC 63143 regulating Peddlers. (Ord. 71-162)

63150.5 Tobacco and Electronic Cigarette Permit – Purpose.
The purpose of this Section is to encourage responsible tobacco and electronic cigarette retailing and to discourage violations of tobacco-related laws that (1) prohibit the sale or distribution of tobacco and electronic cigarette products to minors and (2) prohibit the display of tobacco and electronic cigarette products from being within reach of the public. This permit process is not intended to expand or reduce the degree to which tobacco-related activities are regulated by Federal or State law, including criminal prosecution for violations of such laws, or to alter the penalty provided therefor. (Ord. 06-1365, § 1; Ord. 14-1547, § 2)

63150.5.1 Definitions.
“City” means the City of Carson, California.

“Code Enforcement Officer” means any employee or agent of the City who is designated to enforce any provision of this Code.

“Director” means the City’s Finance Officer or his or her designee.

“Electronic cigarette” means an electronic and/or battery-operated device, the use of which may resemble smoking, which can be used to deliver an inhaled dose of nicotine or other substances. The term includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an electronic cigarette, an e-cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic hookah, or any other product name or descriptor. The term does not include any inhaler prescribed by a licensed doctor.

“Newly established business” means a business which was not engaged in tobacco and electronic cigarette retailing within the City during the immediately preceding permit renewal period.

“Person” means any natural person, partnership, cooperative association, domestic or foreign corporation, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity.

“Tobacco and electronic cigarette paraphernalia” means cigarette papers or wrappers, pipe holders, smoking materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines, and any other item designed to facilitate smoking or the ingestion of tobacco products.

“Tobacco and electronic cigarette retailer” means any person who sells, offers for sale, or offers to exchange, for any form of consideration, tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia; “tobacco and electronic cigarette retailing” shall mean engaging in any of these things.

“Tobacco product” means any substance containing tobacco leaf, including but not limited to any tobacco cigarette, cigar, pipe tobacco, snuff, smokeless tobacco or any other form of tobacco which may be utilized for smoking, chewing, inhaling or other manner of ingestion. (Ord. 06-1365, § 2; Ord. 14-1547, § 2)

63150.5.2 Requirements for Tobacco and Electronic Cigarette Permit.
It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a tobacco and electronic cigarette retailer without first obtaining and maintaining a valid tobacco and electronic cigarette permit pursuant to CMC 63150.5 et seq., for each location at which such activity is to occur. No permit will be issued to authorize tobacco and electronic cigarette retailing at any place other than a fixed location; peripatetic tobacco and electronic cigarette retailing and tobacco and electronic cigarette retailing from vehicles are prohibited.

Each day that a person offers tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia for sale or exchange within the City without a valid permit shall constitute a separate violation of this Code. (Ord. 06-1365, § 3; Ord. 14-1547, § 2)

63150.5.3 Application Procedure.
A completed application for a tobacco and electronic cigarette permit (including the payment of all necessary fees) shall be submitted to the Director. The application shall be sought in the name of the person proposing to conduct retail tobacco sales and shall be signed by such person or, in the case of a business, by an authorized agent thereof. A valid City business license is also required before a tobacco and electronic cigarette permit may be issued. Each person applying for a tobacco and electronic cigarette permit shall be responsible for reviewing the conditions of conducting retail tobacco sales within the City and shall agree to abide by these conditions by signing the application under penalty of perjury. All applications shall be submitted on the form supplied by the Director and shall contain the following information:

1. The legal name, address, and telephone number of the applicant.

2. The business name, address and telephone number of the fixed location for which a tobacco and electronic cigarette permit is sought.

3. A statement whether or not the applicant has ever applied for and was denied or has been issued a tobacco and electronic cigarette permit from the City or any other jurisdiction which was revoked or suspended and the dates and circumstances surrounding the suspension and/or revocation.

4. A statement of whether the applicant, its agents or employees have been convicted of a felony involving or related to the sale of tobacco, tobacco paraphernalia or tobacco products within the past five (5) years.

5. Such additional information as the Director may reasonably require. (Ord. 06-1365, § 4; Ord. 14-1547, § 2)

63150.5.4 Issuance and Renewal of Permit.
Upon the receipt of a complete application for a tobacco and electronic cigarette permit and the payment of the applicable permit fee, the City shall issue a permit unless any of the following occur:

1. The application is incomplete or inaccurate.

2. The application seeks authorization for tobacco and electronic cigarette retailing at an address that appears on a permit that is suspended, has been revoked, or is subject to suspension or revocation proceedings for violation of any of the provisions of CMC 63150.5 et seq.; provided, however, this subsection shall not constitute a basis for denial of a permit if either or both of the following apply:

a) The applicant provides the City with documentation demonstrating, to the Director’s satisfaction, that the applicant has acquired or is acquiring the premises or business in an arm’s length transaction. For the purposes of this subsection, an “arm’s length transaction” is defined as a sale in good faith and for valuable consideration that reflects the fair market value in the open market between two (2) informed and willing parties, neither under any compulsion to participate in the transaction. A sale between relatives, related companies or partners, or a sale for the primary purpose of avoiding the effect of the violations of this Section that have occurred at the location, will be presumed not to be an “arm’s length transaction.”

b) It has been more than three (3) years since the most recent permit for that location was revoked.

3. The application seeks authorization for tobacco and electronic cigarette retailing by a person who has a currently suspended tobacco and electronic cigarette permit or who has had a permit revoked, pursuant to CMC 63150.5 et seq., within the last three (3) years.

4. The application seeks authorization for tobacco and electronic cigarette retailing in a manner which would violate this Code or any other local, State or Federal law.

5. The applicant, or its agents or employees, has been convicted of a felony involving or related to the sale of tobacco, tobacco paraphernalia or tobacco products within the past five (5) years.

6. The issuance of a tobacco and electronic cigarette permit would be in conflict with any other City ordinance. (Ord. 06-1365, § 5; Ord. 14-1547, § 2)

63150.5.5 Permits Not Transferable.
A tobacco and electronic cigarette permit shall be nontransferable. Should a new person acquire a business that is engaged in tobacco and electronic cigarette retailing, that person must apply for a new permit prior to the commencement of any retail activity. (Ord. 06-1365, § 6; Ord. 14-1547, § 2)

63150.5.6 Display of Permit.
Each tobacco and electronic cigarette permit shall be prominently displayed in a publicly visible location where tobacco and electronic cigarette retailing occurs. (Ord. 06-1365, § 7; Ord. 14-1547, § 2)

63150.5.7 Permit Fee.
The fee for filing an application for a tobacco and electronic cigarette permit shall be established by resolution of the City Council and may be amended from time to time. The application fee is nonrefundable; however, if a permit is denied, the business license fee paid shall be refunded. This permit fee is calculated so as to recover the cost of both the administration and enforcement of the permit, including the cost of issuing the permit, renewing the permit, administering the tobacco and electronic cigarette permit program, retailer inspection and compliance checks, documentation of violations, adjudications and prosecutions of violators. (Ord. 06-1365, § 8; Ord. 14-1547, § 2)

63150.5.8 Permit Violation – Compliance Monitoring.
It shall be a violation of a tobacco and electronic cigarette permit for any tobacco and electronic cigarette permittee, or his or her agents or employees, to violate any local, State or Federal tobacco-related law.

Compliance with this Section shall be monitored by the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department – Carson Station. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any City peace officer or code enforcement officer is authorized to enforce CMC 63150.5 et seq. The City shall request that the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department verify compliance of each tobacco and electronic cigarette permittee with CMC 63150.5 et seq., a minimum of one (1) time per twelve (12) month period. Compliance checks shall include an investigation into whether a tobacco and electronic cigarette permittee is complying with tobacco laws prohibiting the sale of tobacco products to minors. The Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department may use youth decoys and shall comply with protocols for the compliance checks developed in consultation with the Los Angeles County Department of Health Services.

The City shall not enforce any tobacco-related minimum age law against a person who otherwise might be in violation of such law because of such person’s age (herein “youth decoy”) if the potential violation occurs when the youth decoy is participating in a compliance check supervised by a peace officer, a code enforcement official or an agent of another governmental agency. (Ord. 06-1365, § 9; Ord. 14-1547, § 2)

63150.5.9 Permit Compliance Incentives.
Upon a finding by the City that a tobacco and electronic cigarette permittee has not violated CMC 63150.5 et seq., within the preceding three (3) year period, the Director shall grant a ten (10) percent discount from the permit fee set forth in CMC 63150.5.7.

Upon a finding by the City that a tobacco and electronic cigarette permittee has not violated CMC 63150.5 et seq., within the preceding six (6) year period, the Director shall grant an additional ten (10) percent discount, for a total of a twenty (20) percent discount, from the permit fee set forth in CMC 63150.5.7. (Ord. 06-1365, § 10; Ord. 14-1547, § 2)

63150.5.10 Suspension or Revocation of Permit.
A. In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, a tobacco and electronic cigarette permit may be suspended or revoked if the City finds, after notice to the tobacco and electronic cigarette permittee and an opportunity for the permittee to be heard, that the permittee, or his or her agents or employees, has violated any of the provisions of CMC 63150.5 et seq., or any other local, State or Federal law relating to tobacco; provided, however, that a violation by a permittee at one (1) location may not be cause for such permittee to lose its permit at any other location within the City where such permittee is engaged in the retail sale of tobacco. Similarly, the violation of a tobacco and electronic cigarette permit at a particular location will not bar the City from granting a new tobacco and electronic cigarette permit to another applicant who is unrelated to the prior permittee for the same location.

1. Upon a finding by the City of a first violation of any provision of CMC 63150.5 et seq., within any three (3) year period, the Director may:

a) Issue a written warning to the permittee.

b) Advise the permittee of the penalties for further violations of CMC 63150.5 et seq.

c) Require the permittee to provide documentation to the City that all employees engaged in the retail sales of tobacco have received training in a City-approved program within sixty (60) days after the warning, or such other time as shall be set by the Director.

2. Upon a finding by the City of a second permit violation of any provision of CMC 63150.5 et seq., within any three (3) year period, the tobacco and electronic cigarette permit may be suspended up to thirty (30) days.

3. Upon a finding by the City of a third permit violation of any provision of CMC 63150.5 et seq., within any three (3) year period, the tobacco and electronic cigarette permit may be suspended up to ninety (90) days.

4. Upon a finding by the City of a fourth permit violation of any provision of CMC 63150.5 et seq., within any three (3) year period, the tobacco and electronic cigarette permit may be suspended for up to one (1) year.

5. Upon a finding by the City of a fifth permit violation of any provision of CMC 63150.5 et seq., within any three (3) year period, the tobacco and electronic cigarette permit may be revoked.

B. A tobacco and electronic cigarette permit shall be revoked if the City finds, after notice to the permittee and an opportunity for the permittee to be heard, that any one (1) of the conditions listed below existed at the time of the violation. The revocation of a tobacco and electronic cigarette permit shall prohibit the permittee from tobacco and electronic cigarette retailing within the City for a period of three (3) years. The revocation shall be without prejudice to the filing of a new application for a tobacco and electronic cigarette permit by a new applicant at an address where a permit has been revoked.

1. One (1) or more of the bases for denial of the tobacco and electronic cigarette permit listed in CMC 63150.5.4 existed at the time the tobacco and electronic cigarette permit application was made or at any time before the permit was issued.

2. The application is incomplete for failure to provide the information required by CMC 63150.5.3.

3. The information contained in the application, including any supplemental information, is found to be false in any material respect.

4. The application seeks authorization for a type of tobacco and electronic cigarette retailing that is unlawful pursuant to this Code or any other local, State or Federal law.

C. In the event the City denies, suspends or revokes a tobacco and electronic cigarette permit, written notice of the denial, suspension or revocation shall be served upon the applicant or permittee, as the case may be, within five (5) days of the decision to deny, suspend or revoke the permit to the mailing address specified in the application.

D. During a period of suspension of a tobacco and electronic cigarette permit, the permittee must remove from public view all tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia at the address that appears on the suspended or revoked tobacco and electronic cigarette permit. (Ord. 06-1365, § 11; Ord. 14-1547, § 2)

63150.5.11 Notification and Appeals.
1. Any notice of denial, suspension or revocation of a tobacco and electronic cigarette permit shall state the reasons for such action and the appropriate remedy or cure, if applicable.

2. Any notification to be given pursuant to CMC 63150.5 et seq., shall be deemed given once the notice is sent by facsimile to the facsimile number listed on the application, or if no number is listed, when notice is placed, postage prepaid, in the United States mail, addressed to the applicant at the address shown on the permit application.

3. Any applicant or permittee aggrieved by a decision or action of the Director under CMC 63150.5 et seq., shall have the right to appeal such decision to the City Council.

(a) Any appeal that is filed pursuant to this Section shall be filed, and all appropriate fees shall be paid, with the City Clerk within fourteen (14) calendar days after notice of denial, approval or revocation is given by the City. The City Council shall act upon any such appeal within twenty-eight (28) calendar days of the filing of the appeal.

(b) Upon receipt of an appeal that is filed pursuant to this Section, the City Clerk shall set a date for a hearing of the matter and give notice of the date, time and place of the hearing to the applicant/appellant. Prior to such hearing, the Director shall transmit to the City Clerk a report of his/her findings. At the hearing by the City Council, the Director shall present all documents on file with respect to the matter being appealed.

(c) The City Council shall consider the record and such additional evidence as may be offered and may affirm, reverse or modify, in whole or in part, the action that was appealed. The City Council may also make or substitute additional decisions or determinations as it finds warranted under the provisions of CMC 63150.5 et seq., and may waive any requirement of CMC 63150.5 et seq., where it is found to be in the public interest. The City Clerk shall transmit a written copy of the City Council’s decision to the applicant/appellant within five (5) days of the hearing. (Ord. 06-1365, § 12; Ord. 14-1547, § 2)

63151 Tow Truck.
Permit fee – $50.00 per year, for tow truck operators whose principal place of business or employment is within the City, except the operation and operators of any licensed auto dismantlers’ tow vehicle or any tow truck operated by a licensed repossessing agency and its registered employees. (Ord. 71-162; Ord. 06-1342, § 60)

63152 Trash, Solid Waste, Recyclable Materials – Collection.
No person shall operate a vehicle within the City of Carson for collecting, transporting, conveying, hauling and/or disposing of any rubbish, garbage, or other solid waste for a fee, service charge, or other consideration or a gratuity, from the property where such materials originate to any other location for transfer, salvage, disposal or recycling without a permit therefor from the City. Such permit shall state on its face: “Solid Waste Collector Permit, Subject to Article V, Chapter 2 of the Carson Municipal Code.”

(a) Permit Application. An application for a solid waste collector permit shall be made on a form provided by the City. The application shall include the following information:

(1) Name and address of applicant.

(2) Business address and addresses where all vehicles will be kept.

(3) Form of organization such as proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, or corporation; the names and home addresses of owners and officers; and their percentage of ownership, if greater than five (5) percent.

(4) A description of each vehicle and other equipment that the applicant owns or has under its control, including the age of the vehicle, and a statement as to whether said vehicle meets the requirements of Article V, Chapter 2 of this Code, and evidence that the applicant owns or has the right to the use of said vehicle.

(5) The type of property to be serviced by the applicant (whether residential, commercial or industrial) and the type of material to be collected by the applicant.

(6) Whether the applicant has a franchise granted by the City Council, and if not, whether the applicant is an excepted collector as defined in CMC 5270.

(7) Any other information requested by the City Administrator.

(b) Any permit issued to an excepted collector for collection of solid waste from commercial/industrial premises as defined in CMC 5201(f) shall terminate and become void on March 1, 1996, if not previously terminated.

(c) Permit Fee. Permit fee – $50.00 per year, plus $100.00 per year for each vehicle to be utilized in the City. (Ord. 71-162; Ord. 91-956, § 2; Ord. 91-959, § 3; Ord. 06-1342, § 61)

63152.1 Same – Exclusions.
Householders hauling occasional loads of rubbish, waste, refuse, debris or manure not containing garbage from his own premises to a legal point of disposal shall be excepted from the provisions of CMC 63152. CMC 63152 does not apply to the hauling or disposal of grass cuttings, prunings, manure or other rubbish not containing garbage to or at a legal point of disposal as a part of a gardening or horticulture business or occupation. (Ord. 71-162)

63153 Waste Disposal Sites – Permit Required.
Every person operating a site in the City for the disposal of trash, rubbish, debris, garbage or other waste, solid or liquid, whether exclusively for his own use or otherwise, shall first procure a permit and pay an annual permit fee of two (2) percent of the gross receipts arising from the operation of such waste disposal site, but in no case shall the annual permit fee be less than $250.00.

Such gross receipts fee shall be computed monthly for each calendar month and shall be payable on or before the last day of the succeeding calendar month. The licensee shall submit a monthly accounting of the gross receipts on which the license fee is based, and an annual reconciliation thereof. Such accounting shall be subject to annual audit by the City within sixty (60) days after the end of each calendar year.

Notwithstanding the provisions of this Section, the imposition and payment of the annual permit fee shall be suspended during any calendar year, or portion thereof, in which a person operating a waste disposal site, which includes a transfer station, is obligated under an agreement with the City to pay a fee that is based upon the tonnage of solid waste delivered to that waste disposal site. (Ord. 71-162; Ord. 03-1292, § 1)

63153.1 Same – Requisites for Permit.
The Finance Director shall not issue a permit to operate a waste disposal site unless the applicant first has:

(a) Presented a written statement from the Director of Community Development to the effect that the applicant has procured the necessary zoning and/or Special Use Permit.

(b) Presented an industrial waste permit from the City Engineer.

(c) Filed a faithful performance bond in the required amount with the City Clerk or deposited with the Finance Director and assigned to the City savings and loan certificates, or shares, or other evidence of deposit as provided in this Code.

(d) Presented to the Finance Director a written statement from the City Engineer either that the Sanitary Sewer and Industrial Waste Ordinance adopted by CMC 8500 does not require a permit from the applicant or that the applicant has obtained such permit as is required. (Ord. 71-162)

63153.2 Same – Bond.
The applicant shall file with the City Clerk a faithful performance bond, subject to the approval of the City Attorney, written in favor of the City, conditioned that:

(a) The applicant shall comply with all terms and conditions of any permit, special use permit, and industrial waste permit granted, and with all laws, statutes, ordinances and regulations relating to waste disposal sites.

(b) The applicant and surety agree that should the applicant and the surety fail as determined by the City Engineer to comply with any such terms, conditions, laws, statutes, ordinances and regulations or fail to correct such failure within ten (10) days after service of written notice thereof by first class mail on the applicant and the surety, the City officers or agents may enter onto the site and perform any corrective work necessitated by any failure of the operator of the site to comply with such terms, conditions, laws, statutes, ordinances or regulations.

(c) The principal and the surety agree to reimburse the City for all costs incurred by or on behalf of the City in the performance of such corrective work.

(d) The bond shall provide that the surety shall not be entitled to cancel the bond until thirty (30) days after written notice of intent to cancel, to the Director of Finance. Any such cancellation shall not impair any right of the City to reimbursement for correction of conditions resulting from any failure to comply with such terms, conditions, laws, statutes, ordinances, or regulations, which failure occurred before the effective date of cancellation of the bond, whether the work of correction is performed before or after such effective date. (Ord. 71-162)

63153.3 Same – Amount of Bond.
If the area of the waste disposal site is five (5) acres or less, the bond shall be not less than $5,000. If the area of the waste disposal site is more than five (5) acres, the bond shall be for not less than $1,000 per acre. Subject to the foregoing provisions, the amount of such bond shall be fixed by the City Engineer, Planning Commission, or City Council. (Ord. 71-162)

Chapter 3.5
OIL INDUSTRY BUSINESS LICENSE TAX
Sections:

§ 63501    Title.

§ 63502    Purpose.

§ 63503    Definitions.

§ 63504    Tax Certificate Required.

§ 63505    Oil Refinery and Petroleum Products Business License Tax.

§ 63506    Exemptions.

§ 63507    Issuance of Tax Certificate.

§ 63508    Administration – Gann Limit Override.

§ 63509    Tax Certificate Expiration – Renewal.

§ 63510    Calculation of Initial Business License Tax.

§ 63511    Calculation of Renewal Business License Tax.

§ 63512    Tax Certificate Not Transferable – Duties Upon Transfer of Business.

§ 63513    Tax Payments Due – Delinquency.

§ 63514    Penalties for Delinquency.

§ 63515    Refunds.

§ 63516    Audits and Adjustments.

§ 63517    Notice.

§ 63518    Apportionment Guidelines and Other Rules and Regulations.

§ 63519    Gross Receipts Confidential.

§ 63520    Violations.

§ 63521    Delinquent Tax Constitutes Debt to the City.

§ 63522    Remedies Cumulative.

§ 63523    Appeals.

§ 63524    Amendments to This Chapter.

§ 63525    Construction.

§ 63526    Severability.

63501 Title.
This Chapter shall be known as the “Oil Industry Business License Tax” of the City. (Ord. 17-1630, § 2)

63502 Purpose.
The purpose of this Chapter is to impose a business license tax on persons engaged in the business of operating any facility where petroleum or petroleum products are blended, mixed, processed, or refined and/or any facility that stores petroleum products. It is an excise tax on the privilege of doing business in the City; it is not a property or sales tax. This Chapter is enacted solely for the purpose of raising revenue for general municipal purposes. It is not intended to be regulatory. The payment of a business license tax required by this Chapter, and its acceptance by the City, and the issuance of a tax certificate to any person shall not entitle the holder thereof to carry on any business unless he or she has complied with all of the requirements of this Code and all other applicable laws, nor to carry on any business in any building or on any premises in the event that such building or premises are situated in a zone or locality in which the conduct of such business is in violation of any law. (Ord. 17-1630, § 2)

63503 Definitions.
For purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

“Blend” or “mix” shall mean mechanical mixing of petroleum or petroleum products. “Blend” or “mix” shall also include without limitation activities by which finished motor gasoline is further mixed with other motor gasoline blending components (including ethanol) or oxygenates, resulting in increased volumes of finished motor gasoline and/or changes in the formulation of finished motor gasoline (e.g., conventional motor gasoline mixed with MTBE to produce oxygenated motor gasoline).

“Business” shall mean all activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in within the City, including any commercial or industrial enterprise, trade, profession, occupation, vocation, calling or livelihood, or the activities of independent contractors, whether or not carried on for gain or profit, but shall not include: (1) the services rendered by an employee to his or her employer, or (2) the activities of one who manages residential real property that he or she owns.

“Director” shall mean the City of Carson’s Finance Director or the Director’s designee.

“Engage in the business” shall mean to commence, operate, manage or carry on a business and to exercise corporate or franchise powers, whether done as an owner or by means of one (1) or more officers, agents, managers, employees, servants or otherwise, within the City, whether or not the business is operated from a fixed location and whether or not such location is within the City.

“Gross receipts” shall mean the total amount actually received or receivable, in the course of business from: (i) sales, or (ii) the performance of acts or services for which charge is made or credit allowed. “Gross receipts” include without limitation cash receipts, credits allowed, property received in lieu of cash, and any other valuable consideration taken in exchange for goods, services or other valuable consideration.

“Oil refinery” shall mean any industrial facility where petroleum or petroleum products are blended, mixed, processed or refined into other products.

“Operate” or “operating” shall mean activities involved in the day to day functions of the business conducted for the purpose of generating profits.

“Person” shall mean any natural or legal person including an individual, receiver, administrator, executor, assignee, trustee in bankruptcy, trust, estate, firm, partnership, joint venture, club, company, joint stock company, business trust, domestic or foreign corporation, association, syndicate, society or any group of individuals acting collectively, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit or otherwise.

“Petroleum” is commonly known as crude oil.

“Petroleum products” shall mean materials derived from petroleum. For the purposes of this Chapter, petroleum products are any product derived from hydrocarbons, including without limitation liquid petroleum gas (LPG), natural gas, gasoline, gas oil, jet fuel, diesel fuel, heavy fuels, lubricants, asphalt, bulk tar, petroleum coke, residuum, paraffins, naphtha, sulfur and petrochemicals, among others.

“Tax” shall mean the business license tax imposed by this Chapter.

“Tax certificate” shall mean the certificate issued under CMC 63507 to a taxpayer to evidence payment of the tax imposed by this Chapter.

“Taxpayer” shall mean any person required to pay the tax imposed by this Chapter. (Ord. 17-1630, § 2)

63504 Tax Certificate Required.
A. Except as provided in CMC 62506, it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the City in the business of operating an oil refinery or facility that stores petroleum products without first obtaining a tax certificate pursuant to this Chapter.

B. The tax imposed under Chapter 3 of Article VI shall not apply to the businesses subject to tax under this Chapter but such businesses shall otherwise comply with that chapter as by, including without limitation, obtaining and displaying a business tax certificate. (Ord. 17-1630, § 2)

63505 Oil Refinery and Petroleum Products Business License Tax.
Except as provided in CMC 63506, every person engaged in the City in the business of operating an oil refinery or facility that stores petroleum products shall pay calendar quarterly business license tax of one-quarter (1/4) percent of gross receipts of any such business conducted within the City. (Ord. 17-1630, § 2)

63506 Exemptions.
The following business activities are not subject to the provisions of this Chapter:

A. Retail gasoline sales.

B. Storage of gasoline or other fuels for use by the business doing the storage to fuel vehicles operated by or for the benefit of that business. (Ord. 17-1630, § 2)

63507 Issuance of Tax Certificate.
A. A person subject to the tax imposed by this Chapter shall submit a tax return each calendar quarter for a tax certificate on a form provided by the Director. The tax return shall include sufficient information, including gross receipts information, to allow computation of the tax due, as well as any other information deemed necessary by the Director for the administration of this Chapter and calculation of the tax owed. The tax return shall also be accompanied by payment of all taxes, interest and penalties due under this Chapter.

B. Tax returns shall be signed under penalty of perjury by one authorized to bind the taxpayer.

C. Upon confirmation that the tax return evidences compliance with this Chapter, the Director shall issue the taxpayer a tax certificate evidencing that compliance. (Ord. 17-1630, § 2)

63508 Administration – Gann Limit Override.
A. The Director shall be responsible for issuing tax certificates pursuant to this Chapter and otherwise for its administration and enforcement. The people of the City of Carson intend this Chapter to be enforced consistently with Chapter 3 of Article VI and any rule or regulation promulgated under that chapter except as expressly provided to the contrary in this Chapter or a regulation adopted pursuant to this Chapter.

B. Pursuant to California Constitution, Article XIII B, the appropriation limit for the City is increased to the maximum extent over the maximum period of time allowed under law to allow the City to spend the revenues generated by the taxes and fee imposed by this Chapter to fund City services and for other lawful purposes of the City. (Ord. 17-1630, § 2)

63509 Tax Certificate Expiration – Renewal.
Tax certificates shall expire at the end of each calendar quarter. (Ord. 17-1630, § 2)

63510 Calculation of Initial Business License Tax.
A taxpayer paying an initial business license tax under this Chapter shall report on the tax return required by CMC 63507 any gross receipts the business received in the calendar quarter immediately prior to the date of the tax return to allow calculation of the tax imposed by this Chapter. (Ord. 17-1630, § 2)

63511 Calculation of Renewal Business License Tax.
Upon expiration of a tax certificate issued under this Chapter, the taxpayer shall report on the tax return required by CMC 63507 the gross receipts of the business during the previous calendar quarter to allow calculation of the tax imposed by this Chapter. (Ord. 17-1630, § 2)

63512 Tax Certificate Not Transferable – Duties upon Transfer of Business.
A. No tax certificate issued under this Chapter may be transferred to any other person.

B. Whenever any person required to pay a tax pursuant to this Chapter shall quit business or dispose of a business, any tax payable under this Chapter shall be immediately due and payable.

C. Whenever any person required to pay a tax pursuant to this Chapter transfers a business to another person, the transferor and transferee of the business shall be jointly and severally liable for any tax, interest and penalties due from that business under this Chapter. No tax certificate may issue to the transferee until such tax, interest and penalties are paid.

D. Successor and Assignee Responsibility.

1. If any person, while liable for any amount under this Chapter, sells, assigns or otherwise transfers half (1/2) or more of a business subject to the tax imposed by this Chapter, whether voluntarily or involuntarily, the person’s successor, assignee or other transferee, or other person or entity obtaining ownership or control of the business (“transferee”) shall pay that amount when due. A transferee shall notify the Director of a transfer thirty (30) days before the transfer date; or if the agreement to sell, transfer, or otherwise dispose of the business is made less than thirty (30) days before the date of transfer, on the first business day after the transfer.

2. A transferee shall be deemed to have satisfied an unpaid liability if the transferee complies with the requirements of California Revenue and Taxation Code Section 7283.5 and this Section by withholding from the purchase price, for the benefit of the City, an amount sufficient to cover the liability, or by otherwise paying the liability and obtaining from the Director a “tax clearance certificate” showing that all outstanding liability has been paid through the date of transfer.

3. Within ninety (90) days of receiving a written request from a transferee, the Director may issue a “tax clearance certificate” stating either the amount due as to the business under this Chapter, or stating that there is no liability due for the business through a stated date. The Director may also request financial records from the transferor to audit the amount due under this Chapter. The Director shall issue a tax clearance certificate within thirty (30) days of completing the audit, stating any amount owed, unless the Director determines the records provided for audit are insufficient to determine whether taxes, fees, penalties and/or interest are due and in what amounts. If so, the Director may rely on available information to estimate any amount due and shall issue a tax clearance certificate stating that amount. (Ord. 17-1630, § 2)

63513 Tax Payments Due – Delinquency.
A. Tax payments required by this Chapter shall be due and payable on the first day of the calendar quarter and shall become delinquent thirty (30) days thereafter and the penalties of CMC 63514 shall then attach.

B. Every new business subject to this Chapter shall file a tax return and pay any tax due prior to the first day of operation, and the tax shall become delinquent ninety (90) days thereafter and the penalties of CMC 63514 shall then attach. (Ord. 17-1630, § 2)

63514 Penalties for Delinquency.
A. Upon a taxpayer’s failure to pay the entire tax when due, the Director shall add a penalty of fifteen (15) percent of the tax, or unpaid portion thereof, on the first day of each month following the date the tax was due; provided, however, no penalty shall be assessed in excess of fifty (50) percent of the tax due. For the purposes of this Article VI, a payment made by mail shall be deemed received on the date shown on a postage cancellation stamp imprinted on the envelope in which the payment is received, or, if payment is made by means other than U.S. mail, payment shall be deemed received on the date the payment is stamped “received” by the Director.

B. On the first day of the month following the date on which the maximum penalty provided for in subsection (A) of this Section has accrued, interest at the rate of one (1) percent per month shall begin to accrue. Interest shall accrue at this rate on the amount of the unpaid tax and penalties, for each month or portion of a month until the tax and penalties are paid. (Ord. 17-1630, § 2)

63515 Refunds.
No tax, penalty or interest shall be refunded unless it is determined by the Director that it has been paid in error, computed incorrectly, overpaid, or collected illegally. No refund shall be made unless a request is received in writing by the Director within one (1) year of the payment of the tax, interest or penalty to be refunded. (Ord. 17-1630, § 2)

63516 Audits and Adjustments.
A. Any person engaged in a business subject to the tax imposed by this Chapter shall maintain and preserve, for a period of at least four (4) years, suitable records as may be necessary to determine the amount of the tax due under this Chapter and shall, upon request of the Director, provide the necessary records to substantiate the tax paid or due for such business. If, upon audit of such records, the Director determines the tax imposed by this Chapter has not been paid in full, the Director shall notify the taxpayer of the balance due, including any accrued penalties and interest. Such amount shall be paid within thirty (30) days after notice is issued by the Director.

B. If an audit reveals an underpayment of two (2) percent or greater, the taxpayer shall reimburse the City for the full reasonable costs incurred by the City in conducting the audit and enforcing this Chapter, including all legal fees and payment for necessary consultants to conduct the audit.

C. If an audit reveals an overpayment, the Director shall notify the taxpayer of the amount overpaid. Unless the taxpayer in writing requests a refund of the overpayment within thirty (30) days after notice is issued by the Director, the overpayment shall be applied as a credit against the next tax due.

D. If an audit reveals an underpayment of $100.00 or less, the Director shall take no action to collect the underpayment. The Director may adjust this figure for inflation on January 1st of each year using the consumer price index for all urban consumers for the Los Angeles-Riverside-Orange County Metropolitan Statistical Area or any successor to that index.

E. Rather than request information and conduct an audit, the Director may request that a taxpayer file a corrected tax return. If such a tax return is filed and the Director is satisfied with its accuracy, the existence of any underpayment or overpayment under this Chapter shall be determined with reference to that corrected tax return. If a taxpayer fails to file a corrected tax return or if the Director is not satisfied with a corrected tax return, the Director may conduct an audit under subsection (A) of this Section. (Ord. 17-1630, § 2)

63517 Notice.
Any notice to a taxpayer under this Chapter shall be sufficient if deposited with postage prepaid in the United States mail and addressed to the address provided on the taxpayer’s most recent tax return unless a change of address notice has been received, in which case notice is sufficient if mailed to the most recent address of which the Director has been informed. (Ord. 17-1630, § 2)

63518 Apportionment Guidelines and Other Rules and Regulations.
A. The Director, in consultation with the City Attorney, and subject to the approval of the City Manager, may promulgate guidelines for the apportionment of the gross receipts of businesses which operate both inside and outside the City to assist taxpayers in calculating the portion of their activities subject to the tax imposed by this Chapter. The Director, in consultation with the City Attorney, and subject to the approval of the City Manager, may adopt any other rules, guidelines or regulations necessary or desirable for the enforcement of this Chapter.

B. The Director shall give notice of such regulations in the manner required for ordinances of the City Council and such regulations will take effect when that notice is given unless the Director specifies a later date. (Ord. 17-1630, § 2)

63519 Gross Receipts Confidential.
Information concerning gross receipts or other data furnished to or secured by the City pursuant to this Chapter shall be confidential, shall not be subject to public inspection, and shall not be made available to anyone who is not charged with the administration of this Chapter. It shall not be a violation of this Chapter to report the City’s receipts under this Chapter in aggregate. (Ord. 17-1630, § 2)

63520 Violations.
It is a violation of this Chapter, punishable as a misdemeanor, to knowingly or intentionally misrepresent to any officer or employee of the City any material fact, relative to any tax imposed under the provisions of this Chapter. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any provision of this Chapter may be enforced by any action at law or equity or by any other remedy authorized by this Code. (Ord. 17-1630, § 2)

63521 Delinquent Tax Constitutes Debt to the City.
A tax, fee, penalty, or interest imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall be deemed a debt to the City. An action may be commenced in any court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the City for the amount of such debt. (Ord. 17-1630, § 2)

63522 Remedies Cumulative.
The conviction and punishment of any person for failure to comply with this Chapter shall not relieve such person from paying any tax, fee, penalty, or interest due and unpaid at the time of such conviction, nor shall payment prevent prosecution of a violation of this Chapter. All remedies shall be cumulative, and the use of one (1) or more remedies by the City to enforce this Chapter shall not bar the use of any other remedy. (Ord. 17-1630, § 2)

63523 Appeals.
A. Initiation – Contents of Notice of Appeal. Any person may appeal any decision of the Director made under this Chapter to the City Manager within fifteen (15) days of the decision. Any such appeal shall be made by filing it with the City Clerk and any such appeal shall be in writing and shall include the following:

1. The name and address of appellant;

2. The matter being appealed;

3. A statement of the grounds of appeal.

B. Notice of Deficiency. If the City Clerk finds a notice of appeal to be deficient, the City Clerk shall deliver or mail or cause to be mailed to the appellant by certified mail addressed to the appellant at the address of the appellant shown on the notice of appeal a notice of deficiency specifying the particulars in which the notice of appeal is deficient. If such deficiency is corrected by the appellant within seven (7) days after mailing of a notice of deficiency by filing with the City Clerk a sufficient amendment to the notice of appeal, the notice of appeal shall be deemed to be withdrawn.

C. City Manager Decision. Within sixty (60) days after the timely filing of an appeal pursuant to this Section, the City Manager or a hearing officer appointed by the City Manager shall allow an opportunity for submission of argument and evidence in writing or orally and then determine whether and to what extent to grant or deny the appeal. A hearing officer’s decision shall constitute a recommendation to the City Manager. The City Manager’s decision shall be final as to the City, but subject to judicial review pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5.

D. Notice of Decision. The City Manager shall cause notice of his or her decision to be given to the appellant. Such notice shall be given in the manner required by subsection (B) of this Section for a notice of deficiency. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. (Ord. 17-1630, § 2)

63524 Amendments to This Chapter.
The City Council of the City shall have the authority to amend this Chapter by ordinance, provided the amount of the tax imposed by this Chapter is not “increased” as that term is defined by Government Code Section 53750(h). (Ord. 17-1630, § 2)

63525 Construction.
It is the intent of the people of the City of Carson that the tax imposed by this Chapter be limited to the taxing power of the City and not to tax activity outside the tax jurisdiction of the City or to disfavor intercity or interstate commerce. It shall be construed in light of that intent. (Ord. 17-1630, § 2)

63526 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remainder of the Chapter. The people of the City hereby declare that they would have adopted this Chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases, or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 17-1630, § 2)

CHAPTER 4
TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
Sections:

§ 6400    Title.

§ 6401    Definitions.

§ 6402    Tax Imposed.

§ 6403    Exemptions.

§ 6404    Operator’s Duties.

§ 6405    Registration.

§ 6406    Reporting and Remitting.

§ 6407    Penalties and Interest.

§ 6408    Failure to Collect and Report Tax – Determination of Tax by Tax Administrator.

§ 6409    Appeal.

§ 6410    Records.

§ 6411    Refunds.

§ 6412    Actions to Collect.

§ 6412.01    Pay First – Litigate Later.

§ 6413    Violations – Misdemeanor.

§ 6414    Severability.

6400 Title.
This Chapter shall be known as the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance of the City of Carson. (Ord. 17, § 6400)

6401 Definitions.
Except where the context otherwise required, the definitions given in this Section govern the construction of this Chapter:

(a) Person. “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

(b) Hotel. “Hotel” means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobilehome or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof.

(c) Occupancy. “Occupancy” means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes.

(d) Transient. “Transient” means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty (30) days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, an uninterrupted period of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of this Chapter may be considered.

(e) Rent. “Rent” means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.

(f) Operator. “Operator” means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this Chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this Chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.

(g) Tax Administrator. “Tax Administrator” means the Director of Finance of the City of Carson. (Ord. 17, § 6401; Ord. 93-1015, § 1)

6402 Tax Imposed.
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax established by resolution of the City Council. The tax imposed shall be calculated as a percentage of the occupancy rent charged by the operator. Said tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the City which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the City. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient’s ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the Tax Administrator may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the Tax Administrator. (Ord. 17, § 6402; Ord. 74-321, § 1; Ord. 89-874, § 1; Ord. 89-880, § 1; Ord. 93-1015, § 2)

6403 Exemptions.
No tax shall be imposed upon:

(a) Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the City to impose the tax herein provided;

(b) Any federal or State of California officer or employee when on official business;

(c) Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty.

No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the Tax Administrator. (Ord. 17, § 6403)

6404 Operator’s Duties.
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this Chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided. (Ord. 17, § 6404)

6405 Registration.
Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this Chapter, or within thirty (30) days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register said hotel with the Tax Administrator and obtain from him a “Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate” to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Said certificate shall, among other things, state the following:

(1) The name of the operator;

(2) The address of the hotel;

(3) The date upon which the certificate was issued;

(4) (See below.)

This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance by registering with the Tax Administrator for the purpose of collecting from the transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax to the Tax Administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this City. This Certificate does not constitute a permit.

(Ord. 17, § 6405)

6406 Reporting and Remitting.
The taxing period shall commence on the first day, and expire on the last day of each calendar month. Each operator shall, on or before the last day of each calendar month following the taxing period, make a return to the Tax Administrator, on forms provided by him or her, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator. The Tax Administrator may require further information he or she deems necessary to be included in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this Chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the City until payment thereof is made to the Tax Administrator. (Ord. 17, § 6406; Ord. 93-1015, § 3)

6407 Penalties and Interest.
(a) Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this Chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.

(b) Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty (30) days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten (10) percent penalty first imposed.

(c) Fraud. If the Tax Administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this Chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subparagraphs (a) and (b) of this Section.

(d) Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this Chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

(e) Penalties Merged With Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this Section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. (Ord. 17, § 6407)

6408 Failure to Collect and Report Tax – Determination of Tax by Tax Administrator.
If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect said tax and to make, within the time provided in this Chapter, any report and remittance of said tax or any portion thereof required by this Chapter, the Tax Administrator shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due.

As soon as the Tax Administrator shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this Chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this Chapter. In case such determination is made, the Tax Administrator shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known place of address. Such operator may within ten (10) days after the serving or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the Tax Administrator for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the Tax Administrator shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the Tax Administrator shall give not less than five (5) days’ written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing the Tax Administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen (15) days unless an appeal is taken as provided in CMC 6409. (Ord. 17, § 6408)

6409 Appeal.
Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the Tax Administrator with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the City Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within fifteen (15) days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The Council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the City Clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator at his last known place of address. The findings of the Council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. (Ord. 17, § 6409)

6410 Records.
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the City of any tax imposed by this Chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three (3) years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the City, which records the Tax Administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. (Ord. 17, § 6410)

6411 Refunds.
(a) Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City under this Chapter it may be refunded as provided in subparagraphs (b) and (c) of this Section provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the Tax Administrator within three (3) years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the Tax Administrator.

(b) An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the Tax Administrator that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator.

(c) A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City by filing a claim in the manner provided in subparagraph (a) of this Section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the Tax Administrator, or when the transient having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the Tax Administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax.

(d) No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this Section unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. (Ord. 17, § 6411)

6412 Actions to Collect.
Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the City. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the City shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the City. Any person owing money to the City under the provisions of this Chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the City of Carson for the recovery of such amount. (Ord. 17, § 6412)

6412.01 Pay First – Litigate Later.
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against the City or any officer thereof, to prevent or enjoin the collection of taxes sought to be collected pursuant to this chapter and payment of all tax, interest, and penalties shall be required as a condition precedent to seeking judicial review of any tax liability imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 09-1435, § 1)

6413 Violations – Misdemeanor.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable therefor by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment in the City jail for a period of not more than six (6) months or by both such fine and imprisonment.

Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the Tax Administrator, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and is punishable as aforesaid. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this Chapter to be made, is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as aforesaid. (Ord. 17, § 6413)

6414 Severability.
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Chapter or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Chapter or any part thereof. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional. (Ord. 17, § 6414)

CHAPTER 4.5
ADMISSIONS FEE*
(Repealed by Ord. 91-958)

*Editor’s Note: Chapter 4.5, Admissions Fee, was established by Ord. 90-926.

CHAPTER 5
TAXICAB REGULATION
Sections:

Division I. Taxicab Business

§ 6500    Definitions.

§ 6501    Definitions.

§ 6502    Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity.

§ 6503    Application Fee.

§ 6504    Public Hearing.

§ 6505    Notice of Public Hearing.

§ 6506    Council Hearing.

§ 6507    Issuance of Certificate.

§ 6508    Denial of Certificate.

§ 6509    Modification of Certificate.

§ 6510    Public Liability Insurance.

§ 6510.1    Self-Insurance Against Public Liability.

§ 6511    Transfer of Certificates.

§ 6512    Duration of Certificates.

§ 6513    Discontinuance of Service Automatically Cancels Certificate.

§ 6514    Suspension and Revocation of Certificates.

§ 6515    Suspension of Revocation Hearing.

§ 6516    Surrender of Certificate.

§ 6517    Sale or Transfer of Business.

§ 6518    Renewal Fee.

§ 6519    Substitution of Vehicles.

Division II. Taxicab Drivers

§ 6520    Driver’s Permit Required.

§ 6521    Driver Requirements.

§ 6522    Issuance of Permit.

§ 6523    Denial of Permit.

§ 6524    Display of Permit.

§ 6525    Change of Employment.

§ 6526    Change of Address.

§ 6527    Suspension and Revocation of Driver’s Permit.

§ 6528    Revocation – Hearing.

§ 6529    Term of Permit.

Division III. Operating Requirements and Regulations

§ 6530    Taximeters.

§ 6531    Registration of Fares.

§ 6532    Unlawful Display of Flag.

§ 6533    Charges Based on Taximeters.

§ 6534    Placement of Taximeter.

§ 6535    Posting Schedule of Fares.

§ 6536    Rates.

§ 6537    Acceptance of Personal Property – Prohibited.

§ 6538    Direct Route of Travel.

§ 6539    Receipts.

§ 6540    Refusal to Pay Fare.

§ 6541    Number of Passengers.

§ 6542    Additional Passengers.

§ 6543    Unattended Taxicabs.

§ 6544    Deception of Passengers.

§ 6545    Manifests.

§ 6546    Taxicab Driver to Accept Qualified Passengers.

§ 6547    Hiring of Taxicab.

§ 6548    Hours of Service.

Division IV. Taxicab Specifications and Equipment

§ 6549    Replacement of Broken or Faulty Taximeter.

§ 6550    Conformance to Color Scheme.

§ 6551    Inspection of Taxicabs.

§ 6552    Authority of Police to Inspect Taxicabs.

§ 6553    Unsafe or Unsuitable Taxicab.

§ 6554    Things Deemed to Make a Taxicab Unsafe or Unsuitable.

§ 6555    Cleaning of Interior.

§ 6556    Cleaning of Exterior.

Division V. Taxicab Stands

§ 6557    Standing or Parking in Other than Designated Stands.

§ 6558    Permits for Taxicab Stands.

§ 6559    Permit License Fee.

§ 6560    Parking Other Vehicles in Taxicab Stands.

Division VI. Enforcement and Penalties

§ 6561    Enforcing Official.

§ 6562    Additional Rules and Regulations.

Division I. Taxicab Business

6500 Definitions.
Unless otherwise stated, whenever used herein, the following terms shall respectively be deemed to mean:

1. City. The term “City” means the City of Carson.

2. Driver. Any person in direct and immediate possession or charge of driving or operating a taxicab.

3. Owner. Every person, firm or corporation having proprietary control or right to proprietary control of any passenger-carrying automobile or motor propelled vehicle, as herein defined.

4. Taxicab. A motor propelled vehicle which is used for the transportation of passengers for hire over and along public streets, not over a defined route, but as to route and destination in accordance with and under the direction of the person hiring such vehicle.

5. Taximeter. A mechanical instrument or device by which the charge for the hire of a taxicab is registered, calculated, or indicated by figures in accordance with the distance traveled and/or the time elapsed and the number of passengers carried.

6. Stand. A place upon a public street in the City for the use, while awaiting employment, of the particular taxicabs authorized to utilize the same.

7. Person. Any natural person, firm, corporation or association of persons. (Ord. 50, § 6500)

6501 Definitions.
All words, terms and phrases not defined in the foregoing section shall, where used in this Chapter, have the meanings or meaning commonly ascribed to them. (Ord. 50, § 6501)

6502 Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of operating any taxicab in the City of Carson without first having obtained from the City Council a Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity. All persons applying for such a Certificate shall file with the City Council a sworn application which shall set forth:

(a) Name and residence address of the owner, person applying and financially interested in the operating of said taxicabs.

(b) The fictitious name, if any, under which such applicant does business or proposes to do business.

(c) The business address of all persons, directors, officers, trustees and/or other individuals connected or professed to be connected directly or indirectly, with the business.

(d) The number of vehicles actually owned and the number of vehicles actually operated by such owner on the date of application.

(e) The number of vehicles for which a Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity is desired.

(f) A description of each vehicle for which a Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity is requested giving name, type, make, year of manufacture and passenger seating capacity.

(g) The color scheme, insignia, name, monogram or other distinguishing characteristics proposed to be used on each vehicle.

(h) The make and type of taximeter intended to be installed in each taxicab.

(i) The street number and exact location of each taxicab stand which applicant proposed to use.

(j) The proposed schedule of rates to be charged which shall not exceed that established and set from time to time by resolution of the City Council.

(k) A statement of the applicant’s estimate of the need for taxicab service, supported by factual data.

(l) A financial report of the applicant.

(m) The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers.

(n) Any facts which the applicant believes would show that public convenience and necessity require the granting of a certificate.

(o) Such other information as the City Council or City Administrator may require. (Ord. 50, § 6502).

6503 Application Fee.
Each application for a Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity shall be accompanied by an initial application fee of $100.00, an annual fee of $150.00 and $50.00 for each taxicab covered by the initial application. (Ord. 50, § 6503; Ord. 00-1199, § 2)

6504 Public Hearing.
Upon receipt of the fully completed application for a Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity to engage in the business of operating a taxicab, the City Clerk shall set a time not sooner than ten (10), nor more than thirty (30) days thereafter, for the hearing of said application before the City Council. (Ord. 50, § 6504)

6505 Notice of Public Hearing.
Written notice of each hearing shall be given to all persons to whom Certificates of Public Convenience and Necessity for operation of a taxicab have been theretofore issued. Due notice of the time and place of the public hearing before the City Council shall be given to the general public by causing a notice of such hearing to be posted in at least three (3) public places within the City. (Ord. 50, § 6505)

6506 Council Hearing.
No Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity shall be granted until the Council shall, after the hearing, declare by resolution that the public convenience and necessity requires the proposed service and that the following conditions exist:

(a) That the applicant is financially responsible and that the officers of said applicant are of good moral character.

(b) That the persons holding permits or licenses for the operation of motor vehicles for hire are under an experienced and efficient management earning a fair and reasonable return on the capital devoted to such service.

(c) That the applicant has complied with the provisions of all City, State and Federal laws applicable to the proposed operations.

(d) That the service requested will not result in a greater hazard to the public and will not create traffic congestion or parking problems.

(e) That the vehicles described in the application and proposed to be used are adequate and safe for the purpose intended.

(f) That the color scheme, insignia, name, monogram, or other distinguishing characteristics proposed to be used on such vehicle or vehicles is not in conflict with and does not imitate any color scheme, insignia, name, monogram or other distinguishing characteristics used by any person, in such manner as to mislead or tend to mislead, deceive or defraud the public; and that no other color scheme, insignia, name, monogram or other distinguishing characteristic has heretofore been designated for such applicant.

(g) That existing transportation is inadequate to meet the public need.

(h) That all the information contained in the application has been verified as true and sufficient.

(i) That the location of any proposed taxicab stand or stands are such that they will not congest or interfere with travel on any street or use thereof by the public, and the proposed stands are not within three hundred (300) feet of any other stand on the same street (except that at and across any intersection, stands may be permitted within two hundred (200) feet of one another). (Ord. 50, § 6506)

6507 Issuance of Certificate.
If the Council finds that the taxicab service applied for is required by the public convenience and necessity, and that the applicant is fit, willing, and able to perform such public transportation and to conform to the provisions of the Carson Municipal Code and all rules promulgated by the City Administrator, then the City Council shall by resolution declare that the Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity be issued by the City Administrator. Such certificate shall specifically designate the number of taxicabs authorized by the certificate. (Ord. 50, § 6506; Ord. 69-66, § 2)

6508 Denial of Certificate.
If the Council finds that the public convenience and necessity does not justify the granting of a Certificate, it shall deny the application and forthwith notify the applicant of said finding. (Ord. 50, § 6507; Ord. 69-66, § 2)

6509 Modification of Certificate.
The Council may, upon a showing at a public hearing as provided for in CMC 6504 that the public convenience and necessity justify the operation of additional taxicabs, amend an existing Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity to authorize such additional taxicabs. Each application for a modification of a Certificate of Public Necessity shall be accompanied by an application fee of $25.00 plus $15.00 for each additional taxicab requested. (Ord. 50, § 6508)

6510 Public Liability Insurance.
It shall be unlawful to operate any taxicab, as defined in CMC 6500, unless there shall be filed with the Director of Finance a liability insurance policy issued by a solvent corporation holding a certificate of authority to do insurance business in the State of California, which policy shall conform in all respects to the requirements of this Section and which meets the approval of the Director of Risk Management or her/his designee. In lieu of filing the insurance policy herein referred to, a Certificate of Insurance issued by an insurance corporation meeting the approval of the Director of Risk Management or her/his designee may be filed. The Certificate must show that a policy meeting the requirements of this Section has been issued and shall set forth the expiration date of such policy. The liability policy required under this Section shall name the City as additional insured and shall insure against loss from the liability imposed by law for injury to or death of any person or damage to any property caused by the operation of any vehicle operated under the provisions hereof in the following amounts, to wit:

(a) $250,000 for death or injury to any one (1) person in any one (1) accident.

(b) $500,000 for death or injuries to two (2) or more persons in any one (1) accident or occurrence.

(c) $100,000 for damage to property of others.

The policy of insurance so provided shall contain a provision that such policy may not be cancelled or reduced in amount except after thirty (30) days’ (or as soon as possible) notice in writing, to be given to the City Manager of the City of Carson. (Ord. 50, § 1; Ord. 61, § 1; Ord. 69-66, § 2; Ord. 00-1199, § 3; Ord. 16-1593, § 2)

6510.1 Self-Insurance Against Public Liability.
Notwithstanding the requirements for public liability insurance set forth in CMC 6510, a Certificate holder may, in lieu thereof, self-insure against liability in accordance with the following provisions:

(a) The Certificate holder shall file with the Finance Director a current balance sheet, certified by a certified public accountant, which indicates that the Certificate holder has a net worth of not less than $750,000. Said certified balance sheet shall be filed periodically, as required by the Finance Director, but not less than annually. Whenever the City shall find that the Certificate holder’s net worth appears to be less than $750,000, the Finance Director may revoke the authority of the Certificate holder to file certified balance sheets in lieu of a policy of liability insurance, and shall require the Certificate holder to file a policy of liability insurance as provided in CMC 6510.

(b) The Certificate holder shall file evidence satisfactory to the City that the Certificate holder shall pay damages which it or the operators of the Certificate holder’s vehicles may become legally obligated to pay as a result of injury to third persons, or damage to real or personal property of third persons, resulting from the operation of any vehicles by the Certificate holder or its operators.

(c) The Certificate holder shall comply with all requirements, rules and regulations of the Finance Director, including, but not necessarily limited to, the maintenance of adequate reserves, notice of claims, adjusting policy, and claims management procedures.

(d) Prior to the issuance or renewal of a Certificate, the applicant or Certificate holder shall execute an indemnity agreement on a form provided by the City which provides that, by the acceptance or use of the Certificate, the applicant or Certificate holder agrees to indemnify, hold harmless and defend the City, its officers and employees, against any and all claims, demands or causes of action which may be asserted against them, or any of them, for damages to persons or property of whatsoever nature arising out of the operations conducted pursuant to said Certificate. (Ord. 87-786, § 1)

6511 Transfer of Certificates.
No Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity may be sold, assigned, mortgaged or otherwise transferred without the consent of the City Council. (Ord. 50, § 6510; Ord. 69-66, § 2)

6512 Duration of Certificates.
The initial Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity issued hereunder to any applicant shall be for a period of one (1) year, at the end of which time the certificate holder may reapply for a new certificate. Every certificate issued other than as an initial certificate, shall be for an indefinite period of time. All certificates are subject to revocation in the manner prescribed herein. (Ord. 50, § 6511; Ord. 69-66, § 2; Ord. 69-89, § 1)

6513 Discontinuance of Service Automatically Cancels Certificate.
After the service for which a certificate is granted hereunder is discontinued, or if the person sells his business or discontinues his or its business for a period of forty-five (45) days, the certificate granted hereunder shall be automatically null and void and shall be reissued only in accordance with the provisions hereof. (Ord. 50, § 6512; Ord. 69-66, § 2)

6514 Suspension and Revocation of Certificates.
A certificate issued under the provisions of this Chapter may be suspended or revoked at any time by the City Council if the holder thereof has:

(a) Violated any of the provisions of the Carson Municipal Code;

(b) Discontinued operations for more than thirty (30) days;

(c) Violated any laws of the City of Carson, or of the State of California, or of the United States, the violations of which reflect unfavorably on the fitness of the holder to offer public transportation;

(d) Operated the taxicab or taxicabs at a rate of fare in excess of that established and set from time to time by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 50, § 6513; Ord. 69-66, § 2)

6515 Suspension of Revocation Hearing.
Upon being informed that sufficient justification exists to suspend or revoke a Certificate, the City Council shall fix a time and place for a public hearing thereon. At least five (5) days’ written notice setting forth the grounds for suspension or revocation and information regarding the time and place where such hearing will be held shall be given the holder of the Certificate in question and to all persons holding valid Certificates. Notice of the time and place of such public hearing before the City Council shall be posted in at least three (3) public places within the City. (Ord. 50, § 6514; Ord. 69-66, § 2)

6516 Surrender of Certificate.
If the City Council finds that sufficient justification does exist for the suspension or revocation of a Certificate, then the City Council shall by resolution demand that such Certificate be surrendered to the City Administrator. Certificates which shall have been suspended or revoked by the City Council shall forthwith be surrendered to the City Administrator and the operation of any taxicab or taxicabs covered by such Certificate shall cease and be unlawful. (Ord. 50, § 6515; Ord. 69-66, § 2)

6517 Sale or Transfer of Business.
If an owner to whom a Certificate of Convenience and Necessity has been issued desires to sell or transfer his business, the intended Buyer must make application to the City of a Certificate of Convenience and Necessity as required by CMC 6502. The seller and holder of the Certificate must file an affidavit of intention to surrender and cancel the existing certificate and licenses conditionally upon and concurrently with consummation of sale and issuance of a new Certificate and licenses in the name of the buyer.

If the buyer applicant meets the requirements as set forth in CMC 6505 for the issuance of a Certificate of Convenience and Necessity, the Council shall issue a new Certificate to the buyer and concurrently herewith shall cancel the seller’s Certificate. (Ord. 50, § 6516; Ord. 69-66, § 2)

6518 Renewal Fee.
Notwithstanding CMC 6511, the holder of every Certificate shall annually apply to the City Manager for a renewal of his Certificate and his application shall include an annual renewal fee of $150.00 plus $50.00 per taxicab, authorized in the Certificate. The deadline for filing a renewal application and submitting the renewal fee shall be the expiration date of the holder’s Certificate. Failure to meet such deadline shall result in a penalty fee in the amount of fifty (50) percent of the total renewal fee. (Ord. 50, § 6517; Ord. 69-66, § 2; Ord. 00-1199, § 4)

6519 Substitution of Vehicles.
If a taxicab owner desires to substitute one (1) vehicle in place of another and if such vehicle to be substituted complies with all requirements of the Carson Municipal Code, the City Administrator is authorized to approve the substitution. (Ord. 50, § 6518; Ord. 69-66, § 2)

Division II. Taxicab Drivers

6520 Driver’s Permit Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive a taxicab in the City of Carson without first having obtained a driver’s permit from the City Administrator. All persons applying for such a permit shall file with the City Administrator a sworn application which shall set forth:

(a) The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers;

(b) A concise history of his employment;

(c) The educational background of the applicant;

(d) Two (2) recent photographs (size one and one-half (1-1/2) inch by one and one-half (1-1/2) inch);

(e) The names and addresses of four (4) Carson residents who have known the applicant for a period of at least one (1) year and who will vouch for the sobriety, honesty, and general good character of the applicant;

(f) An application fee of $25.00 shall accompany each application for a driver’s permit. (Ord. 50, § 6519; Ord. 69-66, § 2; Ord. 00-1199, § 5)

6521 Driver Requirements.
The City Administrator shall not issue a permit to:

(a) Any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years;

(b) Any person not a citizen of the United States or who has not filed a Petition for Naturalization;

(c) Any person not possessing a valid driver’s license issued by the State of California;

(d) Any person who has been convicted of driving a vehicle recklessly or while under the influence of intoxicating liquors or narcotics;

(e) Any person who has been convicted of a felony or crime involving moral turpitude;

(f) Any person who has violated any provisions of the Carson Municipal Code which in the City Administrator’s opinion affects the applicant’s qualifications as a driver. (Ord. 50, § 6520; Ord. 69-66, § 2)

6522 Issuance of Permit.
Upon completion of his investigation, which shall include a complete review of a police report on the applicant, if the City Administrator finds the applicant is a fit and proper person to be a taxicab driver in the City of Carson, he shall issue or cause to be issued to said applicant a Taxicab Driver’s Permit. Such permit shall have affixed thereto a photograph as required by CMC 6519. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any of the vehicles approved on any Certificate without having such permit displayed in said vehicle in such a way as to be easily seen by any passenger. (Ord. 50, § 6521; Ord. 69-66, § 2)

6523 Denial of Permit.
If, upon completion of his investigation, the City Administrator finds the applicant is not a fit and proper person to be a taxicab driver, he shall refuse to issue a Taxicab Driver’s Permit to the applicant. (Ord. 50, § 6522; Ord. 69-66, § 2)

6524 Display of Permit.
Every driver issued a permit under CMC 6522 shall post his driver’s permit in such a place as to be in full view of all passengers while such driver is operating a taxicab. (Ord. 50, § 6523; Ord. 69-66, § 2)

6525 Change of Employment.
If a driver changes his employment to a different owner, he shall within twenty-four (24) hours thereafter notify the City Administrator for the purpose of having his driver’s permit changed so as to properly designate the name of the new employer. (Ord. 50, § 6524; Ord. 69-66, § 2)

6526 Change of Address.
If a driver changes his residential address, he shall within ten (10) days thereafter notify the City Administrator for the purpose of having his driver’s permit changed so as to properly designate his residential address. (Ord. 50, § 6525; Ord. 69-66, § 2)

6527 Suspension and Revocation of Driver’s Permit.
A driver’s permit issued under the provisions of this Division of the Code may be suspended or revoked at any time by the City Administrator if the holder thereof has:

(a) Been convicted of a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude; using, possessing, selling or transporting narcotics; or imparting information for obtaining narcotics;

(b) Been convicted of driving recklessly or while under the influence of liquor or narcotics;

(c) Had his State driver’s license revoked or suspended;

(d) Been convicted of any of the offenses set forth in Sections 20001, 22350, 22351, 23102 and/or 23103 of the Vehicle Code of the State of California and amendments thereto, or any combination of either or any of the said offenses;

(e) Charged or received a fare in excess of the rates provided for herein or violated any of the other provisions hereof;

(f) Been determined by the City Administrator, for any reason, including, but not limited to those reasons set forth in CMC 6520, whether specifically set forth herein or not, after due investigation, to be an unfit person to drive a taxicab. (Ord. 50, § 6526; Ord. 69-66, § 2)

6528 Revocation – Hearing.
Revocation of a Taxicab Driver’s Permit shall be made only after a hearing granted to the holder of such permit before the City Administrator, after five (5) days notice to said permit holder setting forth the grounds of complaint against him and stating the time and place where such hearing will be held. Upon revocation of any permit, such permit shall be surrendered forthwith to the City Administrator. The decision of the City Administrator shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 50, § 6527; Ord. 69-66, § 2)

6529 Term of Permit.
Each permit approved by the City Manager shall be an annual permit and shall be automatically renewable by the City Manager if, in the opinion of the City Manager, said driver should receive a subsequent permit. A renewal fee of $25.00 shall be required for each renewal. (Ord. 50, § 6528; Ord. 69-66, § 2; Ord. 00-1199, § 6)

Division III. Operating Requirements
and Regulations

6530 Taximeters.
It shall be unlawful for any owner or driver to operate any taxicab in the City of Carson unless such vehicle is equipped with a taximeter of such type, style, and design as may be approved by the City Administrator of said City, and it shall be the duty of every owner operating a taxicab to keep such taximeter in perfect condition so that said taximeter will, at all times, correctly and accurately indicate the correct charge for the distance traveled and waiting time, and such taximeter shall be at all times subject to inspection by the Chief of Police of the City of Carson, and said Chief of Police is hereby authorized at his instance or upon complaint of any person to investigate or cause to be investigated such taximeter, and upon the discovery of any inaccuracy in said meter, to remove or cause to be removed such vehicle equipped with such taximeter from the streets of the City of Carson until such time as said taximeter shall have been correctly adjusted. (Ord. 50, § 6530)

6531 Registration of Fares.
Every taximeter shall register the charge to the nearest $0.10 and be equipped with a flag or other mechanical device with the words “For Hire” printed or stamped thereon, and said flag shall be so attached and connected to the mechanism of said taximeter as to cause said mechanism to operate when said flag is in a position other than upright and indicate that the taxicab is not for hire, and which said flag shall, when moved forward or downward, start the operation of said taximeter so that the same will operate in the manner defined herein. (Ord. 50, § 6531)

6532 Unlawful Display of Flag.
It shall be unlawful for any driver of a taxicab while carrying passengers to display the flag or device attached to such taximeter in such a position as to denote that such vehicle is for hire, or is not employed, or to have such flag or other attached device in such a position as to prevent said taximeter from operating, and it will be unlawful for any driver to throw such flag or other device of a taximeter into a position which causes said taximeter to record when such vehicle is not actually employed or fail to throw said flag or other device on such taximeter into a nonrecording position at the termination of each and every service. (Ord. 50, § 6532)

6533 Charges Based on Taximeters.
The charges for transportation of passengers in taxicabs operated in the City of Carson must be based on the charges indicated on said taximeters and it shall be unlawful for any owner, driver, or operator of any taxicab to charge any passenger or passengers any sum in excess of the sum indicated on said taximeter. (Ord. 50, § 6533)

6534 Placement of Taximeter.
The taximeter must be placed in said taxicab so that the reading dial showing the amount to be charged shall be well-lighted and readily discernible by the passenger riding in such taxicab. (Ord. 50, § 6534)

6535 Posting Schedule of Fares.
There shall be displayed in the passenger compartment of each taxicab in full view of the passenger a card not less than four (4) inches by six (6) inches in size which shall have plainly printed thereon the name of the owner, or the fictitious name under which said owner operates, the business address and telephone number of said owner, and a correct schedule of the rates to be charged for conveyance in said vehicle, including rates for minimum flag drop, mileage and waiting time.

In addition thereto, such rates, including rates for minimum flag drop, mileage and waiting time shall be displayed on each side of the taxicab on the exterior of the front doors in letters not less than one-half inch in size in a color contrasting with the color of the taxicab. (Ord. 50, § 6535; Ord. 72-225, § 1)

6536 Rates.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or driver of any taxicab as defined in CMC 6500 to fix or charge or collect or receive a rate in excess of rates established and set from time to time by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 50, § 6536)

6537 Acceptance of Personal Property – Prohibited.
It is unlawful for any driver of a taxicab, or other vehicle regulated hereby, to purchase, accept, receive, acquire, or to agree to purchase, accept, receive, or acquire any jewelry, watches, cameras, firearms, clothing, or any articles of personal property in payment of or as a pledge for the payment of any fares due and payable for conveyance in any taxicab or vehicle regulated hereby. (Ord. 50, § 6537)

6538 Direct Route of Travel.
Any driver employed to transport passengers to a definite point shall take the most direct route that will take the passengers to their destination safely and expeditiously. (Ord. 50, § 6538)

6539 Receipts.
If requested, every driver shall give a receipt upon payment of the correct fare. In case of dispute the matter shall be determined by the Watch Commander at the Sheriff’s Station. Failure to comply with such determination shall subject the offending party to a charge of misdemeanor. (Ord. 50, § 6539)

6540 Refusal to Pay Fare.
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the lawful fare of any of the vehicles regulated by this Code after employing or hiring such vehicle, and any person who shall hire such vehicle with intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 50, § 6540)

6541 Number of Passengers.
No driver of any taxicab shall accept, take into his vehicle or transport any larger number of passengers than the rated seated capacity of his vehicle. Rated capacity shall mean: three (3) passengers in the back seat and two (2) in the front seat of the taxicab unless the rated capacity of a taxicab is otherwise designated in writing by the Chief of Police. (Ord. 50, § 6541)

6542 Additional Passengers.
Whenever any taxicab is occupied by a passenger, or passengers, the driver shall not permit any other person to occupy, or ride, in said taxicab, except at the specific request of, and originating with, the original passenger or passengers. (Ord. 50, § 6542)

6543 Unattended Taxicabs.
It shall be unlawful for any taxicab to remain unattended at any place other than at a duly designated taxicab stand. It shall also be unlawful for any taxicab to remain unattended in a designated taxicab stand for a period of time longer than five (5) minutes, except when the Chief of Police grants, in his sole discretion upon written request a temporary waiver which would permit unattended parking in a stand for a longer period of time. (Ord. 50, § 6543)

6544 Deception of Passengers.
No driver shall deceive, or attempt to deceive any passengers who may ride in his taxicab as to his destination, or the rate of fare to be charged, or cause him to be conveyed to a place other than directed by him. (Ord. 50, § 6544)

6545 Manifests.
The driver of every taxicab shall keep a separate Manifest of every service rendered as such driver, which Manifest shall include the following information:

(a) Location where passengers entered vehicle.

(b) Time of entry.

(c) Location where passengers were discharged.

(d) Number of passengers.

(e) Amount of fare collected.

The owner of every such taxicab shall keep said Manifests in his office files for a period of ninety (90) days after date of service rendered, and the same shall at all convenient times be open to examination by any authorized representative of the City Administrator. The falsifying of any Manifest by an owner or by a driver shall be grounds for revocation of the owner’s certificate. (Ord. 50, § 6545)

6546 Taxicab Driver to Accept Qualified Passengers.
It shall be the duty of the driver of every taxicab, occupied, to receive and carry on such taxicab all persons who apply for passage thereon along its route and tender the proper fare therefor, except persons who are intoxicated or are conducting themselves in a boisterous or disorderly manner. (Ord. 50, § 6546)

6547 Hiring of Taxicab.
The services of a taxicab operating pursuant to any Certificate granted under the provisions of this Code shall be available only upon telephone call, engagement of the taxicab when parked at a regular stand or when hailed from the street, sidewalk, or curb, but not otherwise. No taxicab driver, owner, or his agent shall solicit passengers. (Ord. 50, § 6547)

6548 Hours of Service.
The number of taxicabs authorized by a Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity shall be based on twenty-four (24) hour service unless otherwise specified by the City Council. (Ord. 50, § 6548)

Division IV. Taxicab Specifications
and Equipment

6549 Replacement of Broken or Faulty Taximeter.
Taximeters placed upon taxicabs to replace broken or faulty meters shall under no conditions be operated more than twenty-four (24) hours prior to being inspected, tested, approved and sealed by an authorized representative of the City Administrator. (Ord. 50, § 6549)

6550 Conformance to Color Scheme.
All taxicabs must be and conform to the color scheme, insignia, or any other distinguishing characteristics approved by the City Council at the same time as the Certificate was approved. (Ord. 50, § 6550)

6551 Inspection of Taxicabs.
To insure continued maintenance of safe operating conditions, taxicabs, their equipment, and taximeters operating or used pursuant to this Section shall be inspected semi-annually at a garage or garages approved by the Chief of Police. The garage or garages shall after such semi-annual inspection issue a “Certificate of Safety” certifying that said vehicle, its equipment, and taximeter comply with the safety requirements of the Carson City Code. The cost of said inspections shall be paid by owner of said vehicle. (Ord. 50, § 6551)

6552 Authority of Police to Inspect Taxicabs.
The Chief of Police of Carson or any member of the Sheriff’s Department under his direction shall have the right, at any time after displaying proper identification, to enter into or upon any taxicab for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not any of the provisions set forth herein are being violated. (Ord. 50, § 6552)

6553 Unsafe or Unsuitable Taxicab.
Any taxicab which is found, in the opinion of the City Administrator or the Police Chief or their agents, after such inspection, to be unsafe or in any way unsuitable for taxicab service shall be immediately ordered out of service, and before again being placed in service owner shall obtain a “Certificate of Safety” for said vehicle. (Ord. 50, § 6553)

6554 Things Deemed to Make a Taxicab Unsafe or Unsuitable.
For the purposes of this Section the existence of the following named things, but not to the exclusion of other things, shall be deemed to make a taxicab unsafe or unsuitable for taxicab service:

1. Excessive leakage of oil, grease, gas or any other substances from any part of the taxicab.

2. The existence of any defects in the frame of the taxicab.

3. The failure of any movable parts of the car, including doors, windows, hoods, trunk, lights, etc., to function in the proper working order.

4. Failure to maintain the tires, lights, turning signals, or brakes in good and safe operating condition.

5. Failure to maintain the motor and other mechanical parts of the car in good and safe operating condition.

6. The failure to have an adequate exhaust system, that complies with State Law, properly installed and in good working condition.

7. The existence of large or excessive dents or scratches in the body of the taxicab.

8. Improper maintenance of the exterior paint, in the proper color scheme.

9. The existence of excessive wear and tear on the upholstery, floor mats and other parts of the interior of the taxicab.

10. Failure to have adequate interior lighting in proper working condition. (Ord. 50, § 6554)

6555 Cleaning of Interior.
The interior of every taxicab shall be thoroughly cleaned at least once in every twenty-four (24) hours. (Ord. 50, § 6555)

6556 Cleaning of Exterior.
The exterior of every taxicab shall be thoroughly cleaned at least once in every seven (7) days. (Ord. 50, § 6556)

Division V. Taxicab Stands

6557 Standing or Parking in Other than Designated Stands.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any taxicab or vehicle for hire to stand or park the same upon any public street, other public place or on any private property within the City of Carson while awaiting employment except in spaces or stands set apart for that purpose; provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall prevent any taxicab or vehicle for hire from parking on private property if the owner of the private property gives permission in writing, and a copy of such written permission is filed with the City Administrator, provided further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent any taxicab or vehicle for hire from parking in spaces legally available for other passenger vehicles or on any private property when said taxicab or vehicle for hire is out of service and the driver is not soliciting. (Ord. 50, § 6557)

6558 Permits for Taxicab Stands.
Jurisdiction to issue permits for taxicab stands or places shall be vested in the City Council. All permits shall be revocable at the pleasure of the City Council and all applications therefor shall be referred to the City Traffic Engineer for his recommendation. The City Council shall not grant a taxicab stand permit without taking into consideration the need for such stand by the applicant and the convenience of the general public and shall not grant such stand where it would tend to create a traffic hazard. Such permits shall not be transferable. (Ord. 50, § 6558)

6559 Permit License Fee.
For each permit for a taxicab stand or parking space or place upon any public street or other public place, the owner of the taxicab company using said space shall pay to the City of Carson an annual fee of $5.00. (Ord. 50, § 6559)

6560 Parking Other Vehicles in Taxicab Stands.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any other vehicle to park in a taxicab, or vehicle for hire, space or stand. (Ord. 50, § 6560)

Division VI. Enforcement and Penalties

6561 Enforcing Official.
The Police Chief or his agents of the City of Carson is hereby given the authority and is instructed to watch and observe the conduct of holders and drivers operating under this Chapter. Upon discovering a violation of any section of this Code, the Police Chief or his agents shall report same to the City Administrator and initiate appropriate action. (Ord. 50, § 6561; Ord. 69-66, § 2)

6562 Additional Rules and Regulations.
The City Administrator may in his discretion promulgate any rules or regulations pertaining to the operation of taxicabs not inconsistent with this Chapter. (Ord. 50, § 6562)

CHAPTER 6
VIDEO SERVICE FRANCHISES
Sections:

Division 1. Video Service Franchises

§ 6600    Definitions.

§ 6601    Exclusive Use of Telephone Facilities.

§ 6602    Franchise to Operate.

§ 6603    Uses Permitted by Grantee.

§ 6604    Duration of Franchise.

§ 6605    Franchise Payments.

§ 6606    Limitations of Franchise.

§ 6607    Rights Reserved to the City.

§ 6608    Permits, Installation and Service.

§ 6609    Location of Property of Grantee.

§ 6610    Removal and Abandonment of Property of Grantee.

§ 6611    Changes Required by Public Improvements.

§ 6612    Failure to Perform Street Work.

§ 6613    Faithful Performance Bond.

§ 6614    Indemnification of City.

§ 6615    Inspection of Property and Records.

§ 6616    Operational Standards.

§ 6617    Miscellaneous Provisions.

§ 6618    Use of Utility Poles and Facilities – Agreement.

§ 6619    Application for Franchise.

§ 6620    Franchise Renewal.

§ 6621    Acceptance and Effective Date of Franchise.

§ 6622    Violations.

§ 6623    Preemption and Compliance with Superseding Law.

Division 2. State Franchises*

§ 6624    State Video Service Franchise Fees.

§ 6625    State Video Service Fees for Public, Educational and Governmental (PEG) Access.

§ 6626    Customer Service Penalties.

§ 6627    Encroachment Permits.

§ 6628    Undergrounding.

*Editor’s Note: Ordinance No. 08-1398 added Division 2 to Chapter 6 of Article VI as CMC 6700, 6705, 6710, 6715 and 6720. These sections have been editorially renumbered to avoid duplication.

Division 1. Video Service Franchises

6600 Definitions.
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number.

(a) City. “City” shall mean the City of Carson, a municipal corporation of the State of California, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or re-incorporated form.

(b) Council. “Council” shall mean the present governing body of the City or any future board constituting the legislative body of the City.

(c) Franchise. “Franchise” shall mean and include any authorization granted hereunder in terms of a franchise, privilege, permit, license, or otherwise to construct, operate and maintain a CATV system in the City. Any such authorization, in whatever term granted, shall not mean and include any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the City in accordance with Ordinance No. 2, entitled “Carson Municipal Code.”

(d) Grantee. “Grantee” shall mean the person, firm or corporation to whom or which a franchise, as hereinabove defined, is granted by the Council under this Chapter, and the lawful successor, transferee or assignee of said person, firm or corporation.

(e) Street. “Street” shall mean the surface of and the space above and below any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway or drive, nor or hereafter existing as such within the City.

(f) Property of Grantee. “Property of grantee” shall mean all property owned, installed or used by a grantee in the conduct of a CATV business in the City under the authority of a franchise granted pursuant to this Chapter.

(g) CATV. “CATV” shall mean a community antenna television system or cable television system as hereinafter defined. (Ord. 86-737, § 1)

(h) Community Antenna Television System, or Cable Television System, or CATV System. “Community antenna television system,” or “Cable television system,” or “CATV system” shall mean a system composed of, without limitation, antenna, coaxial cables, wires, fiber optics, wave guides, or other conductors, equipment, or facilities designed, constructed, or used for the purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying, or distributing audio and/or visual radio, television, electronic, or electrical signals to and from subscribers by electrical cable, fiber optics, microwave, or other means through its facilities as herein contemplated. (Ord. 86-737, § 1)

(i) Subscriber. “Subscriber” shall mean any person or entity receiving for any purpose the CATV service of a grantee.

(j) Gross Annual Receipts. “Gross annual receipts” shall mean any and all compensation and other consideration in any form whatever and any contributing grant or subsidy received directly or indirectly by a grantee from subscribers or users in payment for television or FM radio signals or service received within the City.

“Gross annual receipts” shall not include installation or line extension charges or any taxes on services furnished by the grantee imposed directly on any subscriber or user by any city, state or other governmental unit and collected by the grantee for such governmental unit. (Ord. 69-75)

6601 Exclusive Use of Telephone Facilities.
When and in the event that the grantee of any franchise granted hereunder constructs, operates and maintains a CATV system exclusively through telephone company facilities constructed, operated and maintained pursuant to a state-granted telephone franchise and offers satisfactory proof that in no event during the life of such franchise shall the grantee make any use of the streets independently of such telephone company facilities, said grantee shall be required to comply with all of the provisions hereof as a “licensee,” and in such event whenever the term “grantee” is used herein, it shall be deemed to mean and include “licensee.” (Ord. 69-75)

6602 Franchise to Operate.
A nonexclusive franchise to construct, operate and maintain a CATV system within all or any portion of the City may be granted by the Council to any person, firm or corporation, whether operating under an existing franchise or not, who or which offers to furnish and provide such system under and pursuant to the terms and provisions of this Chapter.

No provision of this Chapter may be deemed or constructed as to require the granting of a franchise when in the opinion of the Council it is in the public interest to restrict the number of grantees to one (1) or more. (Ord. 69-75)

6603 Uses Permitted by Grantee.
Any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall authorize and permit the grantee to engage in the business of operating and providing a CATV system in the City, and for that purpose to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain, and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across, and along any public street, such poles, wires, cable, conductors, ducts, conduit, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be necessary and appurtenant to the CATV system; and in addition, so to use, operate, and provide similar facilities or properties rented or leased from other persons, firms, or corporations, including but not limited to any public utility or other grantee franchised or permitted to do business in the City.

The grantee may make a charge to subscribers for installation or connection to its CATV system and a fixed monthly charge as filed or approved as herein provided. From the date hereof through December 28, 1986, no increase in the rates and charges to subscribers, as set forth in the schedule filed and approved with grantee’s application, may be made without the prior approval of the Council expressed by resolution.

Throughout the term of any franchise granted hereunder, a current schedule of rates and charges shall be filed with the City. The grantee shall notify the City of any additions or changes to the rate schedule at least thirty (30) days prior to their effective date. Except as provided herein or in the franchise agreement, all charges for services in connection with the grant shall be uniform and nondiscriminatory. However, the grantee may, from time to time, offer promotional rates which may be less than the regular rates then in effect. Charges shall abate pro rata in the event that service to a subscriber is interrupted during any month for more than twenty-four (24) hours for any reason whatsoever except interruption caused by the subscriber. (Ord. 69-75, § 1; Ord. 78-440, § 1; Ord. 86-737, § 2)

6604 Duration of Franchise.
No franchise granted by the Council under this Chapter shall be for a term longer than twenty (20) years following the date of acceptance of such franchise by the grantee or the renewal thereof.

In addition to all other rights, powers, or remedies of the City in connection with a grant of a franchise under this Chapter or otherwise, the City reserves the right to terminate, cancel, and revoke the franchise and all rights and privileges of the grantee under this Chapter in the event that:

(a) The grantee violates, by act or omission, any material provision of federal or state law, any applicable franchise agreement, this Chapter, or any rule, order, or determination of the City made under and pursuant to the foregoing, except where such violation, other than of subsections (b) and (c) below, is without fault of the grantee or through excusable neglect; or

(b) The grantee becomes insolvent, unable, or unwilling to pay its debts, has a receiver placed in charge of its affairs, or is adjudicated bankrupt; or

(c) The grantee fails for a substantial time to provide effective transmission or receiving services or capabilities to subscribers, except for strikes, war, civil commotions, acts of God, or other causes beyond the control of the grantee; or

(d) The grantee attempts to evade any of the provisions of this Chapter or practices any fraud or deceit upon the City or subscribers; or

(e) The City acquires the CATV system property of the grantee pursuant to this Chapter or any franchise granted hereunder.

Any such termination, cancellation, or revocation shall be by ordinance after a hearing before the Council. The City shall give the grantee at least thirty (30) days written notice of the hearing. The grantee shall have an opportunity to be heard before the Council. The Council shall make findings of fact in connection with any termination, cancellation, or revocation. The grantee may be given a reasonable period of time, not to exceed ninety (90) days, to cure such curable defaults, omissions, breaches, or other causes for the termination, cancellation, or revocation. (Ord. 69-75; Ord. 86-737, § 3)

6605 Franchise Payments.
Any grantee granted a franchise under this Chapter shall pay to the City, during the life of such franchise, a percentage of the gross annual receipts of the grantee to be established by the franchise ordinance; provided, however, that such percentage shall not exceed that allowed by regulations of the Federal Communications Commission at the time the franchise ordinance is adopted. Such payment by the grantee to the City shall be made annually, or as otherwise provided in the grantee’s franchise, by delivery of the same to the City Clerk.

The grantee shall file with the City, within thirty (30) days after the expiration of any calendar year or portion thereof during which such franchise is in force, a financial statement prepared by a certified public accountant, or person otherwise satisfactory to the Council, showing in detail the gross annual receipts, as defined herein, of grantee during the preceding calendar year or portion thereof. It shall be the duty of the grantee to pay to the City, within fifteen (15) days after the time for filing such statements, the sum hereinabove prescribed or any unpaid balance thereof for the calendar year or portion thereof covered by such statements.

In any year, or portion thereof, following the first full year service has been provided and during which payments under this Section amount to less than $1,200 per year, grantee shall pay the City as a minimum an amount equal to $1,200 per year so long as that amount does not exceed the franchise fees permissible under the regulations of the Federal Communications Commission.

The City shall have the right to inspect the grantee’s records showing the gross receipts from which its franchise payments are computed and the right of audit and recomputation of any and all amounts paid under this Chapter. No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the City may have for further or additional sums payable under this Chapter or for the performance of any other obligation hereunder.

In the event of any holding over after expiration or other termination of any franchise granted hereunder, without the consent of the City, the grantee shall pay to the City reasonable compensation and damages, of not less than one hundred (100) percent of its total gross profits during said period. (Ord. 69-75, § 1; Ord. 78-440, § 2)

6606 Limitations of Franchise.
(a) Any franchise granted under this Chapter shall be nonexclusive and shall be subject to and operated in accordance with all applicable state and federal laws and regulations, as amended from time to time, including without limitation the provisions of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984.

(b) No privilege or exemption shall be granted or conferred by any franchise granted under this Chapter except those specifically prescribed herein.

(c) Any privilege claimed under any such franchise by the grantee in any street or other public property shall be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy of the streets or other public property.

(d) (1) The following transactions involving any franchise granted hereunder, or involving any grantee of a franchise hereunder, shall require the prior consent of the Council expressed by resolution, and then only under such conditions as may therein be prescribed:

a. The sale, transfer, lease, assignment or other disposition of the franchise, in whole or in part, whether voluntary or involuntary; provided, however, that such consent shall not be required for a transfer in trust, mortgage or other hypothecation for the purpose of securing an indebtedness of the grantee. A transfer, assignment or other disposition hereunder shall be made only by an instrument in writing, a duly executed copy of which shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk within thirty (30) days after such transfer, assignment or other disposition.

b. Any merger, consolidation, reorganization, business combination, or other transaction wherein or whereby fifty (50) percent or more of the ownership interests in the grantee will be affected and control of the grantee will change or be subject to change. As used herein, “control” shall mean the possession, direct or indirect, of the power to direct or cause the direction of the management and policies of the grantee. A duly executed copy of a written instrument evidencing the closing and consummation of any such transaction shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk within thirty (30) days after the closing of such transaction.

(2) The consent of the Council to a transaction specified herein shall not be unreasonably withheld; provided, however, that any entity or person acquiring a franchise by transfer, assignment or other disposition, and any entity or person acquiring, directly or indirectly, fifty (50) percent or more of the ownership interests in a grantee, shall demonstrate financial responsibility and shall agree to comply with all provisions of this Chapter.

(e) Time shall be of the essence of any such franchise granted hereunder. The grantee shall not be relieved of his obligation to comply promptly with any of the provisions of this Chapter or by any failure of the City to enforce prompt compliance.

(f) Any right or power in, or duty impressed upon, any officer, employee, department, or board of the City shall be subject to transfer by the City to any other officer, employee, department or board of the City.

(g) The grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the City for any loss, cost, expense or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of this Chapter or of any franchise issued hereunder or because of its enforcement.

(h) The grantee shall be subject to all requirements of City ordinances, rules, regulations and specifications heretofore or hereafter enacted or established.

(i) Any such franchise granted shall not relieve the grantee of any obligation involved in obtaining pole space from any department of the City, utility company or from others maintaining poles in streets.

(j) Any franchise granted hereunder shall be in lieu of any and all other rights, privileges, powers, immunities and authorities owned, possessed, controlled or exercisable by grantee, or any successor to any interest of grantee, of or pertaining to the construction, operation or maintenance of any CATV system in the City; and the acceptance of any franchise hereunder shall operate, as between grantee and the City, as an abandonment of any and all of such rights, privileges, powers, immunities and authorities within the City, to the effect that, as between grantee and the City, any and all construction, operation and maintenance by any grantee of any CATV system in the City shall be, and shall be deemed and construed in all instances and respects to be, under and pursuant to said franchise, and not under or pursuant to any other right, privilege, power, immunity or authority whatsoever. (Ord. 69-75, § 1; Ord. 86-737, § 4; Ord. 88-831U, § 1)

6607 Rights Reserved to the City.
(a) Nothing herein shall be deemed or construed to impair or affect, in any way or to any extent, the right of the City to acquire the property of the grantee, either by purchase or through the right of eminent domain, with compensation calculated as provided in Title 7, Chapter 9, Article 4 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the State of California, and nothing herein contained shall be construed to contract away, modify, or abridge, either for a term of years or in perpetuity, the City’s right of eminent domain.

(b) There is hereby reserved to the City every right and power which is required to be herein reserved or provided by any ordinance of the City, and the grantee, by its acceptance of any franchise, agrees to be bound thereby and to comply with any action or requirements of the City in its exercise of such rights or power, heretofore or hereafter enacted or established.

(c) Neither the granting of any franchise hereunder nor any of the provisions contained herein shall be construed to prevent the City from granting any identical, or similar, franchise to any other person, firm or corporation, within all or any portion of the City.

(d) There is hereby reserved to the City the power to amend any section or part of this Chapter so as to require additional or greater reasonable standards of construction, operation, maintenance, or otherwise, on the part of the grantee, as may be consistent with applicable federal or state law or regulation.

(e) Neither the granting of any franchise nor any provisions hereof shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power of the City.

(f) The Council may do all things which are necessary and convenient in the exercise of its jurisdiction under this Chapter and may determine any question of fact which may arise during the existence of any franchise granted hereunder, subject to the right of the grantee to present evidence and testimony on its behalf as to any such question of fact. The City Administrator is hereby authorized and empowered to adjust, settle, or compromise any controversy or charge arising from the operations of any grantee under this Chapter, either on behalf of the City, the grantee, or any subscriber, in the best interests of the public. Either the grantee or any member of the public who may be dissatisfied with the decision of the City Administrator may appeal the matter to the Council for hearing and determination. The Council may accept, reject, or modify the decision of the City Administrator, and the Council may adjust, settle, or compromise any controversy or cancel any charge arising from the operations of any grantee or from any provision of this Chapter. (Ord. 69-75, § 1; Ord. 86-737, § 5)

6608 Permits, Installation and Service.
(a) Within sixty (60) days after acceptance of any franchise the grantee shall proceed with due diligence to obtain all necessary permits and authorizations which are required in the conduct of its business, including, but not limited to, any utility joint use attachment agreements, microwave carrier licenses and any other permits, licenses and authorizations to be granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of CATV systems, or their associated microwave transmission facilities.

(b) Within ninety (90) days after obtaining all necessary permits, licenses and authorizations, grantee shall commence construction and installation of the CATV system.

(c) Within ninety (90) days after the commencement of construction and installation of the system, grantee shall proceed to render service to subscribers, and the completion of the construction and installation shall be pursued with reasonable diligence thereafter, so that service to all areas designated on the map accompanying the application for franchise, as provided in CMC 6619, shall be provided within one (1) year from the date that service was first provided.

(d) Failure on the part of the grantee to commence and diligently pursue each of the foregoing requirements and to complete each of the matters set forth herein, shall be grounds for termination of such franchise, under and pursuant to the terms of CMC 6604; provided, however, that the Council in its discretion may extend the time for the commencement and completion of construction and installation for additional periods in the event the grantee, acting in good faith, experiences delays by reason of circumstances beyond his control. (Ord. 69-75, § 1)

6609 Location of Property of Grantee.
(a) Any poles, wires, cable lines, conduits or other properties of the grantee to be constructed or installed in streets shall be so constructed or installed only at such locations and in such manner as shall be approved by the Superintendent of Streets acting in the exercise of his reasonable discretion.

(b) The grantee shall not install or erect any facilities or apparatus in or on other public property, places, or right-of-way, or within any privately owned area within the City which has not yet become a public street but is designated or delineated as a proposed public street on any tentative subdivision map approved by the City, except those installed or erected upon public utility facilities now existing, without obtaining the prior written approval of the Superintendent of Streets.

(c) In those areas and portions of the City where the transmission or distribution facilities of both the public utility provided telephone service and those of the utility providing electric service are underground or hereafter may be placed underground, then the grantee shall likewise construct, operate and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities underground. For the purposes of this subsection, “underground” shall include a partial underground system, e.g., streamlining. Amplifiers in grantee’s transmission and distribution lines may be in appropriate housings upon the surface of the ground as approved by the Superintendent of Streets. (Ord. 69-75, § 1)

6610 Removal and Abandonment of Property of Grantee.
(a) In the event that the use of any part of the CATV system is discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of twelve (12) months, or in the event such system or property has been installed in any street or public place without complying with the requirements of grantee’s franchise or this Chapter, or the franchise has been terminated, cancelled or has expired, the grantee shall promptly, upon being given ten (10) days’ notice, remove from the streets or public places all such property and poles of such system other than any which the Superintendent of Streets may permit to be abandoned in place. In the event of such removal, the grantee shall promptly restore the street or other area from which such property has been removed to a condition satisfactory to the Superintendent of Streets.

(b) Any property of the grantee in place sixty (60) days after the termination or expiration of the franchise shall be considered permanently abandoned. The Superintendent of Streets may extend this time, not to exceed an additional one hundred twenty (120) days.

(c) Any property of the grantee to be abandoned in place shall be abandoned in such manner as the Superintendent of Streets shall prescribe. Upon permanent abandonment of the property of the grantee in place, the property shall become that of the City, and the grantee shall submit to the Superintendent of Streets an instrument in writing, to be approved by the City Attorney, transferring to the City the ownership of such property. (Ord. 69-75, § 1; Ord. 86-737, § 6)

6611 Changes Required by Public Improvements.
The grantee shall, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the same street or other public place, or remove from the street or other public place, any property of the grantee when required by the Superintendent of Streets by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway and street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines, and tracks or any other type of structures or improvements by public agencies; provided, however, that the grantee shall in all such cases have the privileges and be subject to the obligations to abandon any property of the grantee in place, as provided in CMC 6610. (Ord. 69-75, § 1)

6612 Failure to Perform Street Work.
Upon failure of the grantee to commence, pursue, or complete any work required by law or by the provisions of this Chapter or by its franchise to be done in any street or other public place, within the time prescribed, and to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of Streets, the Superintendent of Streets may, at his option, cause such work to be done and the grantee shall pay to the City the cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported by the Superintendent of Streets to the grantee within thirty (30) days after receipt of such itemized report. (Ord. 69-75, § 1)

6613 Faithful Performance Bond.
(a) The grantee shall, concurrently with the filing of and acceptance of award of any franchise granted under this Chapter, file with the City Clerk, and at all times thereafter maintain in full force and effect for the term of such franchise or any renewal thereof, at grantee’s sole expense, a corporate surety bond in a company and in a form approved by the City Attorney, in the amount of $25,000 renewable annually, and conditioned upon the faithful performance of grantee, and upon the further condition that in the event grantee shall fail to comply with any one (1) or more of the provisions of this Chapter, or of any franchise issued to the grantee hereunder, there shall be recoverable jointly and severally from the principal and surety of such bond any damages or loss suffered by the City as a result thereof, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, or cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the grantee as prescribed hereby which may be in default, plus a reasonable allowance for attorneys’ fees and costs, up to the full amount of the bond; said condition to be a continuing obligation for the duration of such franchise and any renewal thereof and thereafter until the grantee has liquidated all of its obligations with the City that may have arisen from the acceptance of said franchise or renewal by the grantee or from its exercise of any privilege therein granted. The bond shall provide that thirty (30) days’ prior written notice of intention not to renew, cancellation, or material change, be given to the City.

(b) Neither the provisions of this Section, nor any bond accepted by the City pursuant hereto, nor any damages recovered by the City thereunder, shall be construed to excuse faithful performance by the grantee or limit the liability of the grantee under any franchise issued hereunder or for damages, either to the full amount of the bond or otherwise. (Ord. 69-75, § 1)

6614 Indemnification of City.
(a) The grantee shall, concurrently with the filing of an acceptance of award of any franchise granted under this Chapter, furnish to the City and file with the City Clerk, and at all times during the existence of any franchise granted hereunder, maintain in full force and effect, at its own cost and expense, a liability insurance policy in the amount of $1,000,000 in a company approved by the City Administrator and in a form satisfactory to the City Attorney, indemnifying and saving harmless the City, its officers and employees from and against any and all claims, demands, actions, suits, and proceedings by others, against all liability to others, including but not limited to any liability for damages by reason of or arising out of any failure by the grantee to secure consents from the owners, authorized distributors or licensees of programs to be delivered by the grantee’s CATV system, and against any loss, cost, expense and damages resulting therefrom, including reasonable attorney’s fees, arising out of the exercise or enjoyment of its franchise, irrespective of the amount of the comprehensive liability insurance policy required hereunder.

(b) The grantee shall, concurrently with the filing of an acceptance of award of any franchise granted under this Chapter, furnish to the City and file with the City Clerk, and at all times during the existence of any franchise granted hereunder, maintain in full force and effect, at its own cost and expense, a general comprehensive liability insurance policy, in protection of the City, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees, in a company approved by the City Administrator and a form satisfactory to the City Attorney, protecting the City and all persons against liability for loss or damage for personal injury, death and property damage, occasioned by the operations of grantee under such franchise, with minimum liability limits of $500,000 for personal injury or death of any one (1) person and $1,000,000 for personal injury or death of two (2) or more persons in any one (1) occurrence, and $50,000 for damage to property resulting from any one (1) occurrence.

(c) The policies mentioned in the foregoing paragraph shall name the City, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees as additional insured and shall contain a provision that a written notice of cancellation or reduction in coverage of said policy shall be delivered to the City ten (10) days in advance of the effective date thereof; if such insurance is provided by a policy which also covers grantee or any other entity or person other than those above named, then such policy shall contain the standard cross-liability endorsement. (Ord. 69-75, § 1)

6615 Inspection of Property and Records.
(a) At all reasonable times, the grantee shall permit any duly authorized representative of the City to examine all property of the grantee, together with any appurtenant property of the grantee situated within or without the City, and to examine and transcribe any and all maps and other records kept or maintained by the grantee or under its control which deal with the operations, affairs, transactions or property of the grantee with respect to its franchise. If any such maps or records are not kept in the City, or upon reasonable request made available in the City, and if the Council shall determine that an examination thereof is necessary or appropriate, then all travel and maintenance expense necessarily incurred in making such examination shall be paid by the grantee.

(b) The grantee shall prepare and furnish to the Superintendent of Streets and the Director of Finance at the times and in the form prescribed by either of said officers, such reports with respect to its operations, affairs, transactions or property, as may be reasonably necessary or appropriate to the performance of any of the rights, functions or duties of the City or any of its officers in connection with the franchise.

(c) The grantee shall at all times make and keep in the City full and complete plans and records showing the exact location of all CATV system equipment installed or in use in streets and other public places in the City.

(d) The grantee shall file with the Superintendent of Streets, on or before the last day in June of each year, a current map or set of maps drawn to scale, showing all CATV system equipment installed and in place in streets and other public places of the City. (Ord. 69-75, § 1)

6616 Operational Standards.
The CATV system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the highest and best accepted standards of the industry to the effect that subscribers shall receive the highest possible service. In determining the satisfactory extent of such standards the following among others shall be considered:

(a) That the system be installed using all band equipment capable of passing the entire VHF and FM spectrum, and that it have the further capability of converting UHF for distribution to subscribers on the VHF band.

(b) That the system, as installed, be capable of passing standard color TV signals without the introduction of material degradation on color fidelity and intelligence.

(c) That the system and all equipment be designed and rated for twenty-four (24) hour per day continuous operation.

(d) That the system provides a nominal signal level of two thousand (2,000) microvolts at the input terminals of each TV receiver.

(e) That the system signal-to-noise ratio is not less than forty (40) decibels.

(f) That hum modulation of the picture signal is less than five (5) percent.

(g) That the system use components having a VSWR of one and four-tenths (1.4) or less. (Ord. 69-75, § 1)

6617 Miscellaneous Provisions.
(a) When not otherwise prescribed herein, all matters herein required to be filed with the City shall be filed with the City Administrator.

(b) The grantee shall pay to the City a sum of money sufficient to reimburse it for all publication expenses incurred by it in connection with the granting of a franchise pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. Such payment shall be made within thirty (30) days after the City furnishes the grantee with a written statement of such expenses by delivery of same to the Director of Finance.

(c) The grantee shall maintain an office within the City limits or at a location which subscribers may call without incurring added message or toll charges so that CATV maintenance service shall be promptly available to subscribers.

(d) No person, firm or corporation in the existing service area of the grantee shall be arbitrarily refused service; provided, however, that the grantee shall not be required to provide service to any subscriber who does not pay the applicable connection fee or monthly service charge. (Ord. 69-75, § 1)

6618 Use of Utility Poles and Facilities – Agreement.
When any portion of the CATV system is to be installed on public utility poles and facilities, certified copies of the agreements for such joint use of poles and facilities shall be filed with the City Administrator. (Ord. 69-75, § 1)

6619 Application for Franchise.
(a) Application for a franchise hereunder shall be in writing, shall be filed with the City Clerk, and shall contain the following information:

(1) The name and address of the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, the name and address of each partner shall also be set forth. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall also state the names and addresses of its directors, main offices, major stockholders and associates, and the names and addresses of parent and subsidiary companies.

(2) A statement and description of a CATV system proposed to be constructed, installed, maintained or operated by the applicant; the proposed location of such system and its various components, the manner in which applicant proposes to construct, install, maintain and operate the same; and, particularly, the extent and manner in which existing or future poles or other facilities of public utilities will be used for such system.

(3) A description, in detail, of the public streets, public places and proposed public streets within which applicant proposes or seeks authority to construct, install or maintain any CATV equipment or facilities; a detailed description of the equipment or facilities proposed to be constructed, installed or maintained therein; and the proposed specific location thereof.

(4) A map specifically showing and delineating the proposed service area or areas within which applicant proposes to provide CATV services and for which a franchise is requested.

(5) A statement or schedule in a form approved by the City Administrator of proposed rates and charges to subscribers for installation and services, and a copy of proposed service agreement between the grantee and its subscribers shall accompany the application. For unusual circumstances, such as underground cable required, or more than one hundred fifty (150) feet of distance from cable to connection of service to subscribers, and additional installation charge over that normally charged for installation as specified in the applicant’s proposal may be charged, with easements to be supplied by subscribers. For remote, relatively inaccessible subscribers within the City, service may be made available on the basis of cost of materials, labor, and easements if required by the grantee.

(6) A copy of any contract, if existing, between the applicant and any public utility providing for the use of facilities of such public utility, such as poles, lines or conduits.

(7) A statement setting forth all agreements and understandings, whether written, oral or implied, existing between the applicant and any person, firm or corporation with respect to the proposed franchise or the proposed CATV operation. If a franchise is granted to a person, firm or corporation posing as a front or as the representative of another person, firm or corporation, and such information is not disclosed in the original application, such franchise shall be deemed void and of no force and effect whatsoever.

(8) A financial statement prepared by a certified public accountant, or person otherwise satisfactory to the Council, showing applicant’s financial status and his financial ability to complete the construction and installation of the proposed CATV system.

(9) The Council may at any time demand, and applicant shall provide, such supplementary, additional or other information as the Council may deem reasonably necessary to determine whether the requested franchise should be granted.

(b) Upon consideration of any such application, the Council may refuse to grant the requested franchise or the Council may by ordinance grant a franchise for a CATV system to any such applicant as may appear from said application to be in its opinion best qualified to render proper and efficient CATV service to television viewers and subscribers in the City. The Council’s decision in the matter shall be final. If favorably considered, the application submitted shall constitute and form part of the franchise as granted.

(c) Any franchise granted pursuant to this Chapter shall include the following condition:

The CATV system herein franchised shall be used and operated solely and exclusively for the purpose expressly authorized by Chapter 6 of Article VI of the Municipal Code of the City of Carson and no other purpose whatsoever.

Inclusion of the foregoing statement in any such franchise shall not be deemed to limit the authority of the City to include any other reasonable condition, limitation or restriction which it may deem necessary to impose in connection with such franchise pursuant to the authority conferred by this Chapter. (Ord. 69-75, § 1)

6620 Franchise Renewal.
(a) Term. A franchise renewal granted hereunder shall be for a term established by the City and commencing on the date of the City’s adoption of the ordinance authorizing the renewal or on the date specified in that ordinance as the renewal date. This term shall not exceed the maximum term specified in CMC 6604.

(b) Renewal Procedures.

(1) A franchise granted hereunder may be renewed upon application by the grantee pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter and applicable federal and state law.

(2) A written application for renewal shall be filed at least twenty-four (24) months prior to the expiration of a franchise.

(3) A renewal application shall be considered at a duly noticed public hearing which shall be held no later than four (4) months after the application is filed. Mailed notice of the hearing shall be given to the grantee at least twenty (20) days prior to the hearing. The City shall make its determination at least twelve (12) months prior to the expiration of the franchise. The determination granting or denying renewal shall be in writing and shall include findings as to the reason for the determination.

(4) The City may condition renewal upon compliance with any amendments to this Chapter and applicable federal and state law. Renewal may be denied upon any of the following grounds provided that the grantee has first been given notice and opportunity to cure any deficiency in operation or violation of the grantee’s obligations under this Chapter or the franchise:

(A) The grantee lacks the financial, legal or technical ability to provide the services set forth in its proposal.

(B) The grantee’s proposal is not adequate or reasonable to meet the future cable-related needs of the community, taking into account the technical and financial feasibility of meeting such needs and interests.

(C) The grantee has not complied with the terms and conditions of the existing franchise, this Chapter, or applicable federal or state law.

(D) The quality of the service provided by the grantee, including signal quality, billing practices, and responses to subscriber complaints, has not been satisfactory or reasonable in light of community needs.

(5) If the grantee does not accept a renewal granted pursuant to this Section within ninety (90) days of the determination granting the renewal, the franchise shall terminate on the date of expiration set forth in the existing franchise.

(6) Failure of a grantee to apply for renewal of a franchise pursuant to this Section shall mean that the grantee intends to dispose of its franchise property at the expiration of the existing franchise in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.

(7) In the event that an application for renewal hereunder is denied by the City, the grantee shall be afforded the procedural protections and right of appeal contained in section 626 of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984. (Ord. 69-75, § 1; Ord. 86-737, § 7)

6621 Acceptance and Effective Date of Franchise.
(a) No franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall become effective unless and until the ordinance granting same has become effective and, in addition, unless and until all things required in this Section and CMC 6613, 6614(a) and 6614(b) are done and completed, all of such things being hereby declared to be conditions precedent to the effectiveness of any such franchise granted hereunder. In the event any of such things are not done and completed in the time and manner required, the Council may declare the franchise null and void.

(b) Within twenty-five (25) days after the effective date of the ordinance awarding a franchise, or within such extended period of time as the Council in its discretion may authorize the grantee shall file with the City Clerk his written acceptance, in form satisfactory to the City Attorney, of the franchise, together with the bond and insurance policies required by CMC 6613, 6614(a) and 6614(b), respectively, and his agreement to be bound by and to comply with and to do all things required of him by the provisions of this Chapter and the franchise. Such acceptance and agreement shall be acknowledged by the grantee before a notary public, and shall in form and content be satisfactory to and approved by the City Attorney. (Ord. 69-75, § 1)

6622 Violations.
(a) From and after the effective date of this Chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate or to carry on the business of distributing to any person in this City any television signals or radio signals by means of a CATV system unless a franchise therefor has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect.

(b) From and after the effective date of this Chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install or maintain within any public street in the City, or within any other public property of the City, or within any privately owned area within the City which has not yet become a public street but is designated or delineated as a proposed public street on any tentative subdivision map approved by the City, any equipment or facilities for distributing any television signals or radio signals through a CATV system, unless a franchise authorizing such use of such street or property or area has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect.

(c) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of a franchised CATV system within this City for the purpose of taking or receiving television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs, or sound.

(d) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of a franchised CATV system within this City for the purpose of enabling himself or others to receive any television signal, radio signal, picture, program or sound, without payment to the owner of said system.

(e) It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner, to willfully tamper with, remove or injure any cables, wires or equipment used for distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs or sound. (Ord. 69-75, § 1)

6623 Preemption and Compliance with Superseding Law.
This Chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable federal and state laws. Whenever the Federal Communications Commission or Public Utilities Commission of the State of California or any other federal or state agency shall now or hereafter exercise any paramount jurisdiction over any specific provisions of this Chapter, such paramount jurisdiction shall preempt or preclude the exercise of like jurisdiction by the City. Any modification of such federal or state law or regulation shall to the extent applicable be considered a part of this Chapter as of the effective date of such modification. (Ord. 86-737, § 8)

Division 2. State Franchises

6624 State Video Service Franchise Fees.
(a) Any holder of a State video service franchise (franchise holder), that offers video service within the City of Carson (the City), shall calculate and remit to the City a franchise fee of five (5) percent of its gross revenues. Such fee shall be remitted within forty-five (45) days after the end of the quarter for that calendar quarter. Each payment shall be accompanied by a summary explaining the basis for the calculation of the franchise fee. If the holder does not pay the franchise fee when due, the holder shall pay a late payment charge at a rate per year equal to the highest prime lending rate during the period of delinquency, plus one (1) percent. If the holder has overpaid the franchise fee, it may deduct the overpayment from its next quarterly payment.

(b) For the purposes of any State video service franchise, “gross revenues” shall be as defined in Section 5860 of the California Public Utilities Code (CPUC).

(c) For the purposes of this Division, “franchise holder” shall mean a “holder of a state franchise” as that term is defined at Section 5830 of the CPUC. (Ord. 08-1398, § 4)

6625 State Video Service Fees for Public, Educational and Governmental (PEG) Access.
(a) As required by Section 5870(n) of the California Public Utilities Code (CPUC), the City establishes a fee of one (1) percent of a franchise holder’s gross revenues to support public, educational and governmental (PEG) channel facilities, to be paid by any franchise holder operating in the City.

(b) The fee shall be payable to the City quarterly no later than June 1st for the quarter ending March 31st, September 1st for the quarter ending June 30th, December 1st for the quarter ending September 30th and March 1st for the quarter ending December 31st.

(c) As permitted by Section 5870(o) of the CPUC, any franchise holder operating in the City may recover the PEG fees required herein as a separate line item on the regular bill of each subscriber.

(d) The City may reduce the fee upon not less than ninety (90) days’ prior written notice from the City Manager to the franchise holder. If the fee has been reduced to less than one (1) percent of gross revenues, subsequent increases, to the maximum fee of one (1) percent of gross revenues, shall be upon not less than ninety (90) days’ prior written notice from the City Manager to the franchise holder.

(e) Notices shall be transmitted by United States Postal Service certified or registered mail, return receipt requested and postage prepaid, or by private commercial delivery or courier service for same day or next business day delivery with delivery and receipt signature required. (Ord. 08-1398, § 4)

6626 Customer Service Penalties.
(a) Any franchise holder shall, at minimum, comply with all applicable State and Federal customer service and protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service.

(b) The City will provide any franchise holder with written notice of any material breach of applicable customer service and protection standards, and will allow the franchise holder at least thirty (30) calendar days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. A material breach that is not remedied by the franchise holder within the remedy period shall subject the franchise holder to the following penalties to be imposed by the City:

(1) For the first occurrence of a material breach, a penalty of not more than $500.00 for each day of each material breach, not to exceed $1,500 for each occurrence of a material breach.

(2) For the second violation of the same nature within twelve (12) months, a penalty of $1,000 for each day of each material breach, not to exceed $3,000 for each occurrence of the material breach.

(3) For a third or further violation of the same nature within twelve (12) months, a penalty of $2,500 for each day of each material breach, not to exceed $7,500 for each occurrence of the material breach.

(c) Any notice and any penalty may be issued or imposed by the City Manager, or the City Manager’s designee. Any notice shall be in writing. Notices shall be transmitted by United States Postal Service certified or registered mail, return receipt requested and postage prepaid, or by private commercial delivery or courier service for same day or next business day delivery with delivery and receipt signature required.

(d) The franchise holder may appeal any finding of material breach or imposition of penalties to the City Council. Any appeal must be made within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt, by the franchise holder, of the finding of material breach or the imposition of penalties, and must be submitted in writing to the City Clerk and the City Manager in order to be placed on a City Council agenda for consideration. Any appeal must contain a detailed explanation of why the applicant believes that the finding of material breach or the imposition of penalties was inconsistent with statutory requirements or authority.

(e) The City and any franchise holder may mutually agree to extend the time periods specified herein. Any such agreement shall be in writing and executed by the City Manager, or the City Manager’s designee, and an authorized representative of the franchise holder.

(f) Any penalty imposed on the franchise holder, pursuant to this section, shall be paid to the City. As provided for in Section 5900(g) of the CPUC, the City shall submit one-half (1/2) of all penalties received from a franchise holder to the Digital Divide Account established in Section 280.5 of the CPUC. (Ord. 08-1398, § 4)

6627 Encroachment Permits.
(a) For the purposes of this Division, an “encroachment permit” means any permit issued by the City relating to installation, construction or operation of facilities relating to the provision of video service under a franchise.

(b) Prior to installing, constructing, or maintaining a network, or any part thereof, within any portion of any City right-of-way, a franchise holder shall obtain an encroachment permit from the City.

(c) As required by Section 5885 of the CPUC, the City shall either approve or deny an application from a franchise holder for an encroachment permit within sixty (60) days of receiving a completed application.

(d) An application for an encroachment permit is considered complete when the applicant has complied with all statutory requirements, including the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) of the Public Resources Code.

(e) Any City denial of an application for an encroachment permit shall be in writing and shall contain a detailed explanation of the reason for the denial.

(f) An applicant whose application for an encroachment permit has been denied may appeal the denial to the City Council. Any appeal must be made within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt by the franchise holder of the denial, and must be submitted in writing to the City Clerk and the City Manager in order to be placed on the City Council agenda for consideration. Any appeal must contain a detailed explanation of why the applicant believes that the denial was inconsistent with statutory requirements or authority. (Ord. 08-1398, § 4)

6628 Undergrounding.
(a) In those areas and portions of the City where the transmission or distribution facilities of both the public utility provided telephone service and those of the utility providing electric service are underground or hereafter may be placed underground, then the franchise holder shall likewise construct, operate and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities underground. For the purposes of this subsection, “underground” shall include a partial underground system, e.g., streamlining. Consistent with State law, amplifiers in the franchise holder’s transmission and distribution lines may be in appropriate housings upon the surface of the ground as approved by the City.

(b) When the franchise holder’s conduits and other facilities are not being installed underground, the franchise holder shall utilize existing poles, conduits or other facilities (collectively, “system”) to the extent feasible, as reasonably determined by the City, and shall remove all portions of the above-ground system which will no longer be utilized. In addition, all facilities which are installed above ground shall utilize anti-graffiti surfaces. Should a franchise holder’s facilities, nevertheless, be painted with graffiti, the franchise holder shall have five (5) days from its receipt of notification of the graffiti by the City to remove the graffiti. Upon the failure, refusal or neglect of the franchise holder to remove the graffiti within said five (5) days, the City Manager may cause the graffiti to be removed and, upon so doing, shall submit to the franchise holder an itemized statement of the costs thereof. The franchise holder shall, within thirty (30) days after receipt of such statement, pay to the City the entire amount thereof. (Ord. 08-1398, § 4)

CHAPTER 7
BINGO FOR CHARITABLE PURPOSES*
Sections:

§ 6700    Definitions.

§ 6701    Organizations Eligible for City License to Conduct Bingo Games.

§ 6702    Application for License.

§ 6703    Applicant Must Be Qualified.

§ 6704    Information for Application for License.

§ 6705    Investigation of Applicant.

§ 6706    Issuance and Contents of License – Posting – Modifications.

§ 6707    Summary Suspension of License Pending Opportunity for Hearing – Misdemeanor to Continue After Suspension – Revocation.

§ 6708    Revocation of License – Alternative Procedure.

§ 6709    Appeal of Revocation to City Council.

§ 6709.1    Appeal of License Issuance to City Council – Revocation.

§ 6710    License Fees.

§ 6711    Renewal.

§ 6712    Maximum Amount of Prize.

§ 6712.1    Complaint Resolution Process.

§ 6713    Accountability for Receipts – Separate Fund or Account.

§ 6714    Financial Interest in Licensee Only.

§ 6715    Exclusive Operation by Licensee.

§ 6716    Bingo Games Open to Public.

§ 6717    Attendance Limitations.

§ 6718    Bingo Games Conducted Only on Licensee’s Property.

§ 6719    Minors Not to Participate.

§ 6720    Intoxicated Persons Not to Participate.

§ 6721    Operation.

§ 6722    Participant Must Be Present.

§ 6723    Receipt of Profit by a Person a Misdemeanor Under State Law.

§ 6724    Determination of Profits by Organizations Exempt From Tax by Section 23701(d) of the Revenue and Taxation Code and Suspension of License for Cessation of Designated Charity.

§ 6725    Use of Proceeds by Other Licensees.

§ 6726    Use for Charitable Purposes.

§ 6727    City May Enjoin Violation.

§ 6728    Any Violation of This Chapter Is a Misdemeanor.

§ 6729    Severability.

*Editor’s Note: Prior ordinance history: Ords. 77-405 and 78-435.

6700 Definitions.
As used in this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

(a) “Bingo” means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conforms to numbers or symbols selected at random. The game of bingo shall include cards having numbers or symbols which are concealed and pre-printed in a manner providing for distribution of prizes. The winning cards shall not be known prior to the game by any person participating in the playing or operation of the bingo game.

(b) “Recreational bingo license” means a license to conduct bingo games issued to a mobile home park association or senior citizens organization subject to the following limitations: (i) attendance shall not exceed one hundred sixty (160) persons, (ii) no bingo session shall exceed a total of five (5) hours, and (iii) the licensee shall not conduct more than two (2) bingo sessions in any seven (7) day period.

(c) “General bingo license” means a license to conduct bingo games with attendance exceeding seventy-five (75) persons; provided, that: (i) no bingo session shall exceed a total of six (6) hours; and (ii) the licensee shall not conduct more than two (2) bingo sessions in any seven (7) day period.

(d) “Temporary bingo license” means a general bingo license which is valid for only one (1) day. (Ord. 87-776, § 1; Ord. 96-1099, § 1; Ord. 97-1118, § 1; Ord. 09-1432, § 1; Ord. 13-1513, § 1)

6701 Organizations Eligible for City License to Conduct Bingo Games.
(a) Corporations, community chests or trusts organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific, testing for public safety, literary or educational purposes or to foster national or international amateur sports competition (but only if no part of the activities involve the provision of athletic facilities or equipment), or for the prevention of cruelty to children or animals, as more particularly described in Section 23701(d) of the California Revenue and Taxation Code, labor, agricultural or horticultural organizations described in Section 23701(a) of said Code, fraternal beneficiary societies, orders or organizations described in Section 23701(b) of said Code, business leagues, chambers of commerce, real estate boards or boards of trade described in Section 23701(e) of said Code, civic leagues or organizations described in Section 23701(f) of said Code, pleasure clubs described in Section 23701(g) of said Code and domestic fraternal societies, orders or associations operating under the lodge system, described in Section 23701(l) of said Code, each of which is exempt by said sections and by Section 23701 of said Code from taxes imposed by Part 11 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and mobile home park associations and senior citizens organizations are eligible to apply to the City for a license to conduct bingo games in the City under the provisions of this Chapter and Section 326.5 of the California Penal Code.

(b) Notwithstanding the foregoing, an organization shall not be eligible to apply to the City for a license to conduct bingo games unless such organization has maintained an office or place for the performance of the purposes for which it was organized in the City of Carson for a period of at least one (1) year immediately preceding the date of application. Mobile home park associations shall consist of members who are residents of a mobile home park in the City of Carson. Senior citizens organizations shall consist of members the majority of whom are residents of the City of Carson.

(c) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, an organization exempt from the payment of taxes pursuant to Revenue and Taxation Code Section 23701(d) which contributes fifty (50) percent or more of the proceeds of bingo games to one (1) charity, shall not be eligible to maintain or renew a license to conduct bingo games unless such charity receives at least twenty-five (25) percent of its total operating revenue from sources other than from the proceeds of bingo games. (Ord. 87-776, § 1; Ord. 94-1028, § 1; Ord. 94-1049, § 1)

6702 Application for License.
Eligible organizations desiring to obtain such license, and licensed organizations desiring to renew such license, shall file an application in writing therefor in the office of the Director of Administrative Services on a form to be provided by the Director of Administrative Services. Such application shall be accompanied by the license fee provided for in CMC 6710(a). The recreational bingo license or general bingo license issued shall be for a term of one (1) calendar year from the date of issuance, subject to renewal as provided for in this Chapter. The temporary bingo license issued shall be valid for one (1) day. If the application is denied one-half (1/2) of the application fee shall be refunded.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, and to the limited extent permitted by Section 326.5 of the Penal Code, the City Council may, by the affirmative vote of three-fifths (3/5) of the members of the City Council, waive in whole or in part the qualifications and requirements of CMC 6701(b), 6701(c), 6706(c), 6710, 6711(a)(2), and 6721, for any applicant which the City Council finds is affiliated with or operates in support of a program or activity which is officially sponsored, sanctioned, or conducted by the City of Carson. A license granted pursuant to this paragraph will also be subject to any special limits or conditions imposed in the sole discretion of the City Council which are consistent with Section 326.5 of the Penal Code. (Ord. 87-776, § 11; Ord. 94-1049, § 2; Ord. 96-1099, § 2; Ord. 13-1513, § 2; Ord. 14-1533, § 1)

6703 Applicant Must Be Qualified.
No license shall be issued to any organization unless such applicant is an eligible organization under CMC 6701 and its application conforms to the requirements, terms and conditions of this Chapter. (Ord. 87-776, § 1)

6704 Information for Application for License.
An application for a license shall contain the following:

(a) The name of the applicant organization and a statement that the applicant is an eligible organization under CMC 6701.

(b) A statement as to whether the applicant is applying for a recreational bingo license, a general bingo license, or a temporary bingo license.

(c) The names and signatures of at least two (2) officers, including the presiding officer of a corporation or community chest and the trustee of any trust and the chairperson or presiding officer of any other organization.

(d) The particular property within the City, including the street number, where bingo games will be conducted, together with the occupancy capacity of such place. Said property must be used by the applicant for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the applicant is organized and must be either owned or leased by the applicant or be property the use of which is donated to applicant. Property used to conduct bingo games under a temporary bingo license must be property which has previously been inspected and approved by the City for the conduct of bingo games.

(e) Proposed days of week and hours of day for the conduct of bingo games.

(f) A statement that the applicant agrees to conduct bingo games in strict adherence to the provisions of Section 326.5 of the California Penal Code, this Chapter and all applicable regulations approved by the City Council, as they may be amended from time to time, and agrees that the license to conduct bingo games may be revoked by the Director of Administrative Services upon violation of any such provisions.

(g) A supplement to the application for bingo permit – the organization disclosure statement – in the form prescribed by the Director of Administrative Services.

(h) If applicable to the applicant, a certificate of Determination of Exemption or a letter of good standing from the Exemption Division of the Franchise Tax Board in Sacramento, showing exemption under said Section 23701(a), (b), (d), (e), (f), (g), or (l).

(i) If applicable to the applicant, copies of applicant’s IRS Form 990 as filed with the IRS for the preceding three (3) years shall also be submitted for review. The copies of the IRS forms shall be returned to the applicant upon approval or withdrawal of the application.

(j) If the application is for a recreational bingo license or a temporary bingo license, a statement whether the applicant seeks to conduct bingo games on City property pursuant to CMC 6718(b).

(k) If the applicant is exempt from the payment of taxes pursuant to Section 23701(d) of the Revenue and Taxation Code and intends to contribute, or in the case of a renewal application has contributed, fifty (50) percent or more of the proceeds of bingo games to one (1) charity, after deducting authorized overhead expenses, prizes, and other lawful expenses, the applicant shall specify the name and address of that charity.

(l) The signature under penalty of perjury of a duly authorized officer (or trustee if applicant is a trust) of the applicant on both the application and the supplement to the application for the bingo permit – organization disclosure statement. The submission of any false or materially misleading statement or information as part of the application or supplemental organization disclosure statement is a violation of this Chapter and shall subject the license to summary suspension and revocation. (Ord. 87-776, § 1; Ord. 94-1028, § 2; Ord. 96-1099, § 3; Ord. 13-1513, § 3)

6705 Investigation of Applicant.
Upon receipt of the completed application and of the license fee, the Director of Administrative Services shall refer the application to interested departments of the City, including, but not limited to, the City Manager, City Attorney, Department of Community Services, and the Department of Community Development, for investigation to determine whether all the statements in the application are true and whether the property of the applicant, if used to conduct bingo games, would satisfy all fire, building, occupancy, zoning, and other applicable restrictions. (Ord. 87-776, § 1; Ord. 13-1513, § 4)

6706 Issuance and Contents of License – Posting – Modifications.
(a) Subject to the provisions of subsection (c) of this Section, if the Director of Administrative Services determines that the applicant is legally qualified to conduct bingo games in the City, and if the investigating City departments submit to the Director of Administrative Services their written findings that the property whereon the applicant proposes to conduct bingo games fully satisfies all applicable requirements, the Director of Administrative Services shall take one (1) of the following actions: (1) if the application is for a recreational bingo license, the Director of Administrative Services shall issue a license to said applicant; (2) if the application is for a general bingo license or a temporary bingo license, the Director of Administrative Services shall forward the application to the City Council for approval in accordance with subsection (b) of this Section.

(b) The City Council shall hold a hearing on an application for a general bingo license or a temporary bingo license within thirty (30) days after the application is forwarded by the Director of Administrative Services and shall cause the applicant to be given at least ten (10) days’ written notice of such hearing. At the hearing any person, including the applicant, shall have the right to present evidence and written or oral argument, or both, with respect to the merits of the application. The determination of the City Council shall be final.

(c) The City Council has determined that excessive proliferation or concentration of bingo games in the City of Carson is contrary to the public peace, health, safety and welfare. Therefore, licenses to conduct bingo games in the City shall be issued in accordance with the following standards:

(1) Not more than fifteen (15) recreational bingo licenses shall be issued, and not more than six (6) general bingo licenses shall be issued. There is no limit on the number of temporary bingo licenses which may be issued.

(2) Not more than one (1) recreational bingo license or general bingo license shall be issued per organization.

(3) Not more than one (1) temporary bingo license shall be issued per organization per calendar year.

(4) A license shall not be granted or renewed if the applicant is affiliated with an organization which is either: (i) in possession of a valid recreational bingo license or general bingo license, or (ii) which has been issued a temporary bingo license within twelve (12) months prior to the application.

(5) After April 1, 1994, a license shall not be granted or renewed (or, if already in effect, shall be revoked) if the applicant is operating bingo in another jurisdiction.

(6) Not more than one (1) general bingo license shall be issued per location.

(d) All bingo licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter shall contain the following information:

(1) The name and nature of the organization to whom the license is issued.

(2) The address where bingo games are authorized to be conducted.

(3) The occupancy capacity of the room in which bingo games are to be conducted as determined by the Fire Department in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.

(4) The hours during which bingo may be played.

(5) The date of expiration of such license.

(6) Any restrictions on the number of players which may attend any bingo game.

(7) Any restrictions on the value of prizes which may be awarded and/or the time and frequency of bingo sessions.

(8) If the applicant is exempt from the payment of taxes pursuant to Section 23701(d) of the Revenue and Taxation Code and intends to contribute fifty (50) percent or more of the proceeds of bingo games to one (1) charity, after deducting authorized overhead expenses, prizes and other lawful expenses, the license shall specify the name of that charity.

(9) Such other information including conditions as may be necessary or desirable for the enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter.

(e) The bingo license, a copy of the rules and regulations provided by the Director of Administrative Services and Licensee’s rules and regulations shall at all times be conspicuously posted at the public entrance to the room in which bingo is played. The posted rules shall be legible and accessible to all participants.

(f) In determining whether to grant a request for a change in days or hours of operation, the Director of Administrative Services shall consider whether the change will adversely impact other operators or the City and whether it will impair the City’s ability to enforce this Chapter; provided, however, that the ultimate decision of whether to grant the request will be left to the sole discretion of the Director of Administrative Services.

(g) Should the licensee find that any information which he provided to the City pursuant to CMC 6704 was incorrect, or should such information subsequently change, the licensee shall notify the Director of Administrative Services within ten (10) calendar days of such finding or date of change. Requests for changes in days or hours of operation must be submitted in writing.

(h) An applicant shall be presumed to be affiliated with an organization within the meaning of subsection (c) of this Section if there is evidence of any one (1) of the following: any common employees; any common memberships on boards of directors or other governing bodies; any common partners or shareholders; any common use of office space; any common ownership; or any subsidiary or parent organizational relationship. As used in this subsection, “employees” includes, without limitation, secretarial, administrative, and managerial employees, whether employed directly, as independent contractors, but shall not include the use of common volunteers provided such volunteers, and the organization(s) with whom such volunteers are associated, receive no compensation, in cash or in kind, from the bingo operator. An applicant may rebut the presumption that it is affiliated with another organization only by the presentation of clear and convincing evidence establishing that the application of these presumptive tests to the applicant results in a clearly erroneous determination.

(i) An applicant shall be presumed to be operating a bingo game in another jurisdiction within the meaning of subsection (c) of this Section if any of the following circumstances exist:

(1) The applicant directly or indirectly operates a bingo game in another jurisdiction.

(2) The applicant directly or indirectly receives a significant amount of money which is directly or indirectly derived from the operation of a bingo game in another jurisdiction, whether or not the applicant operates the bingo game in the other jurisdiction.

(3) The applicant is affiliated with an organization which operates a bingo game in another jurisdiction as evidenced by any one (1) of the following: any common employees; any common memberships on boards of directors or other governing bodies; any common partners or shareholders; any common use of office space; any common ownership; or any subsidiary or parent organizational relationship. As used in this subsection, “employees” includes, without limitation, secretarial, administrative, and managerial employees, whether employed directly, as independent contractors, or as volunteers.

An applicant may rebut the presumption that it is operating a bingo game in another jurisdiction only by the presentation of clear and convincing evidence establishing that the application of these presumptive tests to the applicant results in a clearly erroneous determination.

(j) As a condition of issuance of a bingo license, every applicant must procure and maintain in full force and effect during the term of the license a policy (or policies) of insurance from an insurance company licensed to do business in California, which policy (or policies) names the City, its officers, volunteers, employees and agents as additional insureds insuring against any and all liability of applicant in connection with bingo activities and applicant’s obligations and liability under its bingo license, any other regulations contained in this Code and its indemnities, including, but not limited to, commercial general liability insurance on an “occurrence” basis against claims for personal injury, including death, bodily injury or property damage liability and in an amount not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence and in the aggregate for general liability, or other amounts the Director deems necessary to provide adequate coverage under the circumstances. Proof of insurance in a form acceptable to the City’s Risk Manager shall be submitted to the City in advance of the issuance of the license. (Ord. 87-776, § 1; Ord. 93-1004, § 1; Ord. 94-1028, § 3; Ord. 94-1049, § 3; Ord. 96-1099, § 4; Ord. 10-1450, §§ 1, 2; Ord. 13-1513, § 5; Ord. 14-1533, § 2)

6707 Summary Suspension of License Pending Opportunity for Hearing – Misdemeanor to Continue After Suspension – Revocation.
(a) Whenever it appears to the Director of Administrative Services that the licensee is conducting a bingo game in violation of any of the provisions of California Penal Code Section 326.5, the provisions of this Chapter, any rules or regulations approved or promulgated by the City Council, or any condition of the license, or that the license was obtained by fraudulent representations, the Director of Administrative Services shall have the authority to summarily suspend the license and order the licensee to immediately cease and desist any further operation of any bingo game.

(b) The order issued under subsection (a) of this Section shall also notify the licensee that it shall have ten (10) days from the date of such order to request a hearing before the Director of Administrative Services to determine whether such license shall be revoked. Failure to request, in writing, such hearing before the Director of Administrative Services within said ten (10) day period shall result in a revocation of the license. Requests by mail shall be made by certified letter deposited in the United States mail within ten (10) days of such order.

(c) Upon such request by the licensee whose license has been suspended under subsection (a) of this Section for a hearing to determine whether such license shall be revoked, the Director of Administrative Services shall provide such hearing within ten (10) days after receipt of such request at which hearing the suspended licensee may appear before the Director of Administrative Services for the purpose of presenting evidence why the license should not be revoked. No license shall be revoked under this Section unless notice of the time and place of such hearing shall have first been given at least five (5) days before the hearing thereof by depositing in the United States mail a notice directed to said suspended licensee at the address given in the application. The notice shall set forth a summary of the ground advanced as the basis of the suspension and revocation.

(d) Not later than five (5) days following the hearing, the Director of Administrative Services shall render a decision. Written notice of the decision of the Director of Administrative Services shall be given to the licensee within five (5) days of such decision.

(e) Any person who conducts, manages, or participates in the running of any bingo game for any organization after the summary suspension of that organization’s bingo license under subsection (a) of this Section, or the revocation of its bingo license under subsection (c) of this Section, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or by imprisonment in the County jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 87-776, § 1; Ord. 13-1513, § 6)

6708 Revocation of License – Alternative Procedure.
(a) Subject to the procedures set forth in this Section, the Director of Administrative Services may revoke the license whenever it appears to the Director of Administrative Services that any of the following is taking or has taken place:

(1) The licensee is conducting bingo games in violation of any of the provisions of the California Penal Code, the provisions of this Chapter, any rules or regulations approved or promulgated by the City Council;

(2) The license was obtained by fraudulent representation and no summary suspension is ordered under CMC 6707;

(3) The manner in which the bingo games are being operated interferes with the use and enjoyment of adjacent or nearby properties;

(4) The licensee fails to account for or pay the additional fees provided for in CMC 6710(b);

(5) The manner in which the bingo games, or other activities conducted in connection with the bingo games, are being operated creates a public nuisance or is an endangerment to the public; or

(6) The manner in which activities conducted, by the licensee or anyone else, on the same premises as the bingo games are being operated creates a public nuisance or is an endangerment to the public; provided, however, that in instances when such activities create imminent danger to the public health or safety, the Director of Administrative Services may suspend the bingo license pending the hearing provided pursuant to this Section 6708.

(b) The licensee may appear before the Director of Administrative Services at the time fixed by the Director of Administrative Services for the purpose of presenting evidence why the license should not be revoked. No license shall be revoked under this Section unless written notice shall have first been given at least five (5) days before the hearing thereof by depositing in the United States mail, registered and postage prepaid, a notice directed to said licensee and addressed to the address given in the application. The notice shall set forth a summary of the basis of the revocation. The Director of Administrative Services may attach conditions to the license to make the conduct of the bingo games compatible with the adjacent and nearby properties as an alternative to revocation.

(c) Not later than five (5) days following the hearing, the Director of Administrative Services shall render a decision. Written notice of the decision of the Director of Administrative Services shall be given to the licensee within five (5) days of such decision.

(d) Any person who conducts, manages, or participates in the running of any bingo game for any organization after the revocation of that organization’s bingo license under subsection (a) of this Section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or by imprisonment in the County jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 87-776, § 1; Ord. 93-1004, § 2; Ord. 13-1513, § 7)

6709 Appeal of Revocation to City Council.
(a) Any holder of a license whose license is revoked or conditioned under this Chapter shall have the right, within ten (10) days after receiving notice in writing of the revocation or conditions, to file a written appeal to the City Council. Such appeal shall set forth the specific ground or grounds on which it is based. The City Council shall hold a hearing on the appeal within thirty (30) days after its receipt by the City, or at a time hereafter agreed upon and shall cause the appellant to be given at least ten (10) days’ written notice of such hearing. At the hearing the appellant or its authorized representative shall have the right to present evidence and written or oral argument, or both, in support of its appeal. The determination of the City Council on the appeal shall be final. In the event that the City Council’s determination is anything other than a complete reversal of the decision to suspend or revoke the license, the licensee shall reimburse the City for all direct and indirect costs incurred in connection with processing the appeal.

(b) Any organization whose license is finally revoked may not apply for a license to conduct bingo games in the City for a period of one (1) year from the date of such revocation; provided, however, if the ground for revocation is cancellation of the exemption granted under Section 23701 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, such organization may again apply for a license upon proof of reinstatement of said exemption. (Ord. 87-776, § 1; Ord. 93-1004, § 3)

6709.1 Appeal of License Issuance to City Council – Revocation.
(a) Any person shall have the right, within thirty (30) days after the issuance of a Recreational Bingo License under CMC 6706, to file a written appeal to the City Council with the City Clerk. Such appeal shall set forth the specific ground or grounds on which it is based. The City Council shall hold a hearing on the appeal within thirty (30) days after its receipt by the City Clerk and shall cause the licensee and the appellant to be given at least ten (10) days’ written notice of such hearing. The license shall continue in full force and effect, subject to the provisions of this Chapter, during the pendency of the appeal.

(b) At the hearing any person, including the appellant and the licensee, shall have the right to present evidence and written or oral argument, or both, with respect to the merits of the appeal. If the City Council rejects the appeal, the license shall continue in full force and effect subject to the provisions of this Chapter. If the City Council upholds the appeal, the license is thereupon revoked effective immediately unless otherwise provided by the City Council. The determination of the City Council on the appeal shall be final.

(c) Any organization whose license is revoked pursuant to this Section may not apply for a license to conduct bingo games in the City for a period of one (1) year from the date of such revocation; provided, however, if the sole ground for revocation is failure of the organization to hold one (1) of the required exemptions under Section 23701 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, such organization may again apply for a license upon proof of the granting of a required exemption to the organization. (Ord. 94-1049, § 4; Ord. 96-1099, § 5)

6710 License Fees.
(a) Except as hereinafter provided, a license fee of $50.00 is hereby fixed and imposed upon each applicant upon application for a General Bingo License or a Temporary Bingo License. Such license fee shall not be apportioned or prorated for any period of less than a year. A license fee shall not be required in connection with an application for a Recreational Bingo License.

(b) Commencing January 1, 1997, an additional fee for law enforcement and public safety costs incurred by the City that are directly related to bingo activities is hereby fixed and imposed on each licensee for each month or portion thereof during which a license shall be effective pursuant to this Chapter. The amount of such fee shall be determined by resolution of the City Council but shall not exceed the actual costs incurred in providing the service. Said additional fee shall be paid monthly to the City on or before the fifteenth day of each month, as part of the written statement required by CMC 6713(f). Failure to pay such fee with the written statement shall subject the licensee to the penalties provided by CMC 6713(g).

(c) If any additional fee accruing to the City pursuant to subsection (b) is not paid when due, it shall become delinquent and a penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount due shall be added thereto. For each calendar month’s delinquency thereafter an additional penalty of ten (10) percent of the additional fee shall be added in the same manner; provided however that not more than fifty (50) percent of the original amount of the fee shall be added as penalty. The amount of any license fee and penalty imposed by this Chapter shall be a debt to the City, for which the licensee shall be liable in an action brought by the City in any court of competent jurisdiction. Nonpayment shall also constitute grounds for the revocation of the license. (Ord. 87-776, § 1; Ord. 96-1099, § 6; Ord. 97-1118, § 2)

6711 Renewal.
(a) A recreational bingo license or a general bingo license issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be renewable, in the absence of revocation or grounds for revocation, during the period October 1st through October 31st, for the next calendar year. The licensee shall apply for renewal as follows:

(1) Submit a completed recreational bingo license or general bingo license application form provided by the Director of Administrative Services pursuant to CMC 6702 during the period October 1st through October 31st.

(2) Submit an audit prepared by a certified public accountant on a standard form prepared by the Director of Administrative Services for the twelve (12) calendar month period or portion thereof on or before March 1st of the following year. If March 1st shall fall on a weekend or holiday, the audit shall be due on the next business day. Such audit shall include examination of all receipts, evidence of disbursements and other documents which relate to and account for all aspects of the licensee’s administrative and other costs, and all receipts, evidence of disbursements and other documents, including the forms submitted pursuant to CMC 6726(b), which relate to and document the licensee’s charitable contributions. If such audit is not submitted or, if submitted, is incomplete or is otherwise unacceptable, the license will be automatically canceled and no further license will be issued unless and until the licensee applies for a new license and furnishes an acceptable audit for the required period. The audit required of any organization that operates its bingo games under a recreational bingo license may be prepared by an accountant or the financial officer of the organization. The exception set forth in the previous sentence does not apply to organizations that meet the requirements of Revenue and Taxation Code Section 23701(d).

Upon receipt of the completed renewal application and the audit, the Director of Administrative Services shall refer the application to interested departments of the City as provided in CMC 6705 and 6706. This Section does not apply to a temporary bingo license.

(b) If the Director of Administrative Services finds that there are grounds to revoke the license other than the failure to furnish an audit as required in subsection (a)(2) of this Section, the Director of Administrative Services may deny renewal of the license; provided, however, that the procedure for such denial shall be the revocation procedures specified in CMC 6708. A license not so renewed shall expire automatically at the end of its annual term. (Ord. 87-776, § 1; Ord. 93-1004, § 4; Ord. 96-1099, § 7; Ord. 09-1432, § 1; Ord. 13-1513, § 8; Ord. 14-1533, § 3)

6712 Maximum Amount of Prize.
The total value of prizes awarded for any separate bingo game conducted pursuant to a recreational bingo license shall not exceed $160.00 in cash or kind, or both. The total value of prizes awarded for any separate bingo game conducted pursuant to a general bingo license or a temporary bingo license shall not exceed $500.00 in cash or kind, or both. The prize awarded for any separate bingo game shall be disbursed prior to the commencement of any subsequent game during that bingo session, as that term is used in CMC 6721. In no event shall the total value of prizes awarded during each bingo session exceed ninety (90) percent of gross revenues from that session. (Ord. 87-776, § 1; Ord. 93-1004, § 5; Ord. 94-1028, § 4; Ord. 96-1099, § 8; Ord. 09-1432, § 1; Ord. 10-1449, § 1)

6712.1 Complaint Resolution Process.
If, at any time, a complaint or dispute arises that has not been resolved, the complainant must immediately notify the bingo manager to document their concern. If the complaint is not resolved to the complainant’s satisfaction by the bingo manager, the complainant may file a completed bingo complaint form with the Revenue Division within five (5) business days of the dispute. In addition to the bingo complaint, the complainant is required to pay $250.00. After the Revenue Manager reviews the complaint and finds it properly completed, an administrative hearing shall be scheduled within fourteen (14) business days to provide the complainant an opportunity to present oral and witness testimony regarding the facts of the claim. Eyewitness testimony is encouraged. The bingo manager will be required to submit a written statement describing how their decision was reached.

Within fourteen (14) business days of the hearing, an appeal panel comprised of the Revenue Manager and two other City employees designated by the City Manager shall issue a written decision. If the appeal panel upheld, the City shall refund $250.00 to the complainant, and the bingo organization shall pay the prize amount claimed to the bingo complainant. All decisions of the appeal panel and shall be sent to the complainant and the bingo organization. (Ord. 14-1533, § 4)

6713 Accountability for Receipts – Separate Fund or Account.
(a) At least two (2) members or officers of the licensee shall jointly count all bingo proceeds. Such proceeds shall be deposited in a bank in a special bingo fund or account the next banking day.

(b) Licensees which are exempt from payment of the bank and corporation tax by Section 23701(d) of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall keep all profits derived from bingo games in a special fund or account and such profits shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such profits shall be used only for charitable purposes.

(c) All other licensees, including organizations exempt from payment of the bank and corporation tax by Section 23701(a), (b), (e), (f), (g) or (l) of the Revenue and Taxation Code, mobile home park associations and senior citizens organizations shall keep all proceeds derived from bingo games in a special fund or account and such proceeds shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. “Proceeds” means all receipts of bingo games conducted by such organizations.

(d) The licensee shall keep full and accurate records of the income and expenses received and disbursed in connection with its operation, conduct, promotion, supervision and any other phase of bingo games which are authorized by this Chapter. The records shall include, for each winner (including multiple winners of a shared prize) of $100.00 or more in cash or in kind, the amount or value of the prize, what the prize consists of (if other than cash), the date of the prize, the name of the winner and the signature of the winner. The City, by and through its authorized officers, shall have the right to examine and audit such records at any reasonable time and the licensee shall fully cooperate with the City by making such records available.

(e) All disbursements from the special bingo fund or bank account shall be by consecutively numbered checks signed by two (2) authorized officers of the licensee and shall be payable to a specific individual or organization. There shall be written on each check the nature of the expenditure for which the check is drawn. No check shall be drawn to “cash” other than for the purpose of depositing such cash in a petty cash fund established and maintained for the payment of incidental bingo expenses. Such checks shall in that event be marked “for the petty cash fund.” Such petty cash fund shall not at any time contain more than $25.00 and a receipt shall be obtained for each disbursement, indicating the amount of cash disbursed, the individual or organization receiving the cash disbursement and the purpose for which the disbursement is made.

(f) On or before the fifteenth day of each month, a licensee which has held one (1) or more bingo games during the preceding calendar month shall submit a written statement showing the gross receipts derived by the licensee from all bingo games held during the preceding calendar month. Such statement shall be verified by an officer of the licensee. The City Manager may prescribe the form for such written statements.

(g) If any statement required to be submitted by this Chapter is not filed when due, it shall become delinquent and a penalty of $200.00 shall incur to the licensee. For each calendar month’s delinquency thereafter an additional penalty of $200.00 shall be added in the same manner; provided, however, that not more than $1,000 shall be added as a penalty. The amount of any penalty imposed by this Chapter shall be a debt to the City, for which the licensee shall be liable in an action brought by the City in any court of competent jurisdiction. Nonpayment shall also constitute grounds for the revocation of the license.

(h) The Director of Administrative Services shall have the authority to adopt and enforce any additional rules and regulations pertaining to the financial record keeping of licensees which the Director deems to be helpful or necessary in implementing the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 87-776, § 1; Ord. 93-1004, § 6; Ord. 96-1099, § 9; Ord. 13-1513, § 9)

6714 Financial Interest in Licensee Only.
No individual, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity except the licensee shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of any bingo game conducted by the licensee. (Ord. 87-776, § 1)

6715 Exclusive Operation by Licensee.
Except as provided below in this Section 6715, a bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members or officers of the licensee. Such members or officers shall not receive a profit, wage, or salary from any bingo game. Only the licensee shall operate such game or participate in the promotion, supervision or any other phase of such game. The licensee shall designate a member or officer of the licensee as a “bingo manager” and two (2) other members or officers of the licensee as “alternates.” The licensee shall notify the City in writing of the name of each bingo manager and alternate so designated and shall notify the City in writing of any criminal history that each such person may have. No person may begin serving in such a capacity without the Director of Administrative Service’s prior, written approval. The Director of Administrative Services may consider any relevant criminal history in determining whether or not to give such approval. The bingo manager or, in the event of the bingo manager’s absence, one (1) of the alternates, shall be responsible for the conduct and operation of each bingo game and for compliance with California Penal Code Section 326.5, the provisions of this Chapter 7 and all rules and regulations promulgated thereunder. The bingo manager or one (1) of the alternates shall be present at all times during the playing of any bingo games and the licensee shall maintain a record of each bingo manager and alternate (as well as any other volunteer personnel) in attendance on each date of operation. Bingo managers and alternates shall not serve in that capacity for more than one (1) organization.

Notwithstanding the foregoing, the licensee may employ security personnel who are not members of the licensee. (Ord. 87-776, § 1; Ord. 93-1004, § 7; Ord. 13-1513, § 10)

6716 Bingo Games Open to Public.
All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the members of the licensed organization. (Ord. 87-776, § 1)

6717 Attendance Limitations.
Notwithstanding that bingo games are open to the public, attendance at any bingo game shall not exceed the occupancy capacity of the room in which such game is to be conducted as set forth in the license pursuant to CMC 6706(d)(3). Additionally, attendance at any bingo game conducted pursuant to a recreational bingo permit shall not exceed one hundred sixty (160) persons. (Ord. 87-776, § 1; Ord. 96-1099, § 10; Ord. 97-1118, § 3; Ord. 09-1432, § 1)

6718 Bingo Games Conducted Only on Licensee’s Property.
(a) Except as hereinafter provided, a licensee shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, or on property whose use is donated to licensee and which property is used by such organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. The license issued under this Chapter shall authorize the holder thereof to conduct bingo games only on such property, the address of which is stated in the application. In the event the described property ceases to be used as an office or as a place for performance of the purposes for which the license is organized, the license shall be summarily suspended pursuant to CMC 6707(a) until such time as the licensee obtains the lawful right to utilize a new location and the license is amended to reflect the new location. If the licensee does not obtain the lawful right to utilize a new location within ninety (90) days from the date the property described on the license ceases to be used by licensee, the licensee shall be deemed to be in violation of this Chapter and the license shall be subject to revocation pursuant to the provisions of CMC 6708. In the event of revocation, the former licensee may reapply for a license, in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter, when the former licensee obtains the right to use property for the purposes for which the organization is organized. However, the former licensee’s new application will be acted upon only after any other applications that have been submitted prior to such new application have been considered and acted upon.

(b) A licensee operating pursuant to a Recreational Bingo License or a Temporary Bingo License may be permitted to conduct a bingo game on City property. (Ord. 87-776, § 1; Ord. 94-1028, § 5; Ord. 96-1099, § 11)

6719 Minors Not to Participate.
No person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game, nor shall any person under eighteen (18) years of age be present during the time that bingo games are being conducted, except that persons under the age of eighteen (18) years may sell or serve food and beverages within the same room where bingo is being played. (Ord. 87-776, § 1)

6720 Intoxicated Persons Not to Participate.
No person who is obviously intoxicated shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game, nor shall any alcoholic beverages be sold, dispensed or consumed in the room or space where a bingo game is being conducted. (Ord. 87-776, § 1)

6721 Operation.
No bingo games operated under a general bingo license shall be conducted between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. No more than one (1) bingo session per day shall be conducted at the authorized location, and bingo sessions shall not be conducted at any single licensed location in excess of twelve (12) hours per week. Such twelve (12) hours shall consist of no more than two (2) bingo sessions per calendar week, neither one of which shall exceed six (6) hours. No bingo games operated under a recreational bingo license shall be conducted between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. No more than one (1) bingo session per day shall be conducted at the authorized location, and bingo sessions shall not be conducted at any single licensed location in excess of thirty-five (35) hours per week. Such thirty-five (35) hours shall consist of no more than one (1) bingo session per day, with no individual bingo session exceeding five (5) hours.

A bingo session begins upon the earlier of the selling of bingo cards or other materials associated with the playing of bingo, or the actual running of a bingo game. Intermissions between bingo games, up to one (1) hour in the aggregate, shall not be included when calculating the length of a bingo session; any intermission times which exceed one (1) hour in the aggregate shall be deemed to be part of a bingo session. (Ord. 87-776, § 1; Ord. 96-1099, § 12; Ord. 09-1432, § 1; Ord. 13-1513, § 11)

6722 Participant Must Be Present.
No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted. (Ord. 87-776, § 1)

6723 Receipt of Profit by a Person a Misdemeanor Under State Law.
It is a misdemeanor under Section 326.5(b) of the Penal Code of the State of California for any person to receive or pay a profit, wage, or salary from any bingo game authorized under this Chapter, a violation of which is punishable by a fine not to exceed $10,000. This Section does not preclude the payment of compensation to security personnel within the limitations provided in this Chapter. (Ord. 87-776, § 1)

6724 Determination of Profits by Organizations Exempt From Tax by Section 23701(d) of the Revenue and Taxation Code and Suspension of License for Cessation of Designated Charity.
(a) In determining profits a licensee exempt from tax by Section 23701(d) of the Revenue and Taxation Code may deduct from gross receipts, expenditures for prizes within the limits provided in CMC 6712, rental of property, overhead, the purchase of equipment and materials related to the conduct of a bingo game, administrative expenses, security equipment and security personnel, provided, however, that no expenditure shall be deducted that is not authorized by this Chapter or that is not directly related to and necessary for the conduct of bingo games, and further provided that in no event shall all such expenditures for all purposes related to the conducting of bingo games (excluding expenditures for prizes) exceed a sum equal to twenty (20) percent of the remainder of the gross receipts from bingo operations after deducting from gross receipts a sum equal to the amount of prizes. Said limitation shall be applicable to each month, quarter and year of operation by the licensee. In addition, in no event shall expenditures for bingo operations in any one (1) month, including payment of the City’s one (1) percent monthly gross receipts fee and prizes awarded, exceed the gross receipts from bingo games in that same month.

(b) In the event the charity designated by the licensee to receive fifty (50) percent or more of the proceeds of bingo games, after deducting authorized overhead expenses, prizes and other lawful expenses, ceases to be operational or is dissolved, the license shall be summarily suspended pursuant CMC 6707. If such charity’s operations were suspended by an enforcement action of a Federal, State, County or local government agency, the license of the bingo operator shall be suspended until such time as the enforcement agency determines to permanently order termination of the charity’s operations or to allow the charity to recommence operations. If such charity is permanently precluded from recommencing operations by action of the enforcement agency, the license of the bingo operator shall be subject to revocation pursuant the provisions of CMC 6708. If the designated charity ceases to be operational or is dissolved for reasons other than a governmental enforcement action, the license of the bingo operator shall be summarily suspended pursuant to CMC 6707 until such time as the licensee designates another charity or charities to receive contributions and, if one (1) of the new charities will be receiving fifty (50) percent or more of such proceeds, the license is modified to reflect that new charity. If the licensee does not designate another charity or charities to receive the contributions formerly given to the charity designated on the license within ninety (90) days from the date the formerly designated charity ceased to exist, the licensee shall be deemed to be in violation of this Chapter and the license shall be subject to revocation pursuant to the provisions of CMC 6708. (Ord. 87-776, § 1; Ord. 94-1028, § 6)

6725 Use of Proceeds by Other Licensees.
All proceeds from bingo conducted by all licensees other than those exempt from tax under Section 23701(d) of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall be used only for charitable purposes, except as follows:

(a) The proceeds may be used for prizes.

(b) A portion of such proceeds, not to exceed twenty (20) percent of the gross proceeds before the deduction for prizes, or $2,000 per month, whichever is less, may be used for the rental of property and for overhead, including the purchase of bingo equipment, administrative expenses, security equipment and security personnel.

(c) Such proceeds may be used to pay the license fees required by CMC 6710. (Ord. 87-776, § 1; Ord. 94-1049, § 5)

6726 Use for Charitable Purposes.
(a) All funds used for charitable purposes shall be utilized to benefit the residents of the City of Carson. This requirement is not satisfied by contribution of such funds to, or use by, a charitable organization which is established in Carson unless such funds are actually used for charitable purposes inside the City.

(b) A financial report form prepared by the Director of Administrative Services shall be submitted by the licensee to the beneficiary of such funds on each occasion that such a donation is made which form shall be completed by the beneficiary and copies returned to the licensee and to the Director of Administrative Services. The form shall contain the following:

(1) The name and address of the beneficiary.

(2) The amount of the contribution and the date on which it was received.

(3) A statement of the beneficiary’s purpose, goal, nature or other consideration which justifies characterizing a donation to the beneficiary as charitable.

(4) A statement of the beneficiary’s intended use of the donation; provided, further, that the form shall instruct the beneficiary to give written notification to the Director of Administrative Services if any disposition of the donation varies materially from the intended use. (Ord. 87-776, § 1; Ord. 13-1513, § 12)

6727 City May Enjoin Violation.
Licensee’s premises may be inspected by the City at any time and from time to time for compliance with Section 326.5 of the California Penal Code, with this Chapter and with any rules and regulations approved or promulgated by the City Council. The City may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin a violation of Section 326.5 of the California Penal Code or of this Chapter in addition to any other remedy available to City hereunder or pursuant to law. (Ord. 87-776, § 1)

6728 Any Violation of This Chapter Is a Misdemeanor.
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter or of any rules and regulations approved or promulgated by the City Council is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction of an offense other than that specified in CMC 6723, shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or by imprisonment in the County jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 87-776, § 1)

6729 Severability.
If any section, subsection or portion of this Chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of this Chapter. The City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted this Chapter and each section, subsection or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more sections, subsections or portion may be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 87-776, § 1)

CHAPTER 8
PIPELINE FRANCHISES
Sections:

Part 1. General Provisions and Definitions

§ 6800    Short Title.

§ 6801    General Conditions.

§ 6802    Pole Lines.

§ 6803    Definitions.

§ 6804    Term.

§ 6805    Acceptance of Franchise.

§ 6806    Nonexclusive Franchise.

§ 6807    Change in Status.

§ 6808    Maps.

§ 6809    Insurance.

§ 6810    Faithful Performance Bond.

§ 6811    Alternate Security.

§ 6813    Forfeiture.

§ 6814    Value of Franchise.

§ 6815    State Highways.

§ 6816    Eminent Domain.

§ 6817    Publication Costs.

§ 6818    Assignment.

§ 6819    Prior Franchises.

§ 6820    City Officers.

§ 6821    Hold Harmless.

§ 6822    Standards.

§ 6823    Conflicting Improvements.

§ 6824    Relocation.

§ 6825    Defective Facilities.

§ 6826    Hazardous Substances.

§ 6827    Council Approval of Location of Facilities.

§ 6828    Damage to Public Property Generally.

Part 2. Compensation

§ 6830    Public Utilities Transmitting Oil or Products of Oil.

§ 6831    Public Utilities Transmitting Substances Other than Oil or Products of Oil.

§ 6832    Nonpublic Utility.

§ 6833    Proration of Payments.

§ 6834    Records.

Part 3. Construction

§ 6840    Construction Requirements.

§ 6841    New Installation or Replacement.

§ 6842    Permits.

§ 6843    Work on and Restoration of Streets.

§ 6844    Failure to Timely Comply.

§ 6845    Completion Statement.

§ 6846    Responsibility.

§ 6847    Appurtenances.

§ 6848    Ordinary Repair.

§ 6849    Relocation of Pipelines and Appurtenances.

§ 6850    Breaks or Leaks.

§ 6851    Emergency Equipment.

§ 6852    Removal or Abandonment of Facilities.

§ 6853    Failure to Comply.

§ 6854    Abandonment “In Place” Conditions.

Part 4. Special Provisions for Oil Pipelines

§ 6860    Rights Granted.

§ 6861    Materials Used.

§ 6862    Approvals.

§ 6863    Reports.

§ 6864    Payments Due.

§ 6865    Nonapplicability.

Part 5. Special Provisions for Water and Other Public Utility Pipelines

§ 6870    Rights Granted.

§ 6871    Plan Approval.

§ 6872    Condition of Approval.

§ 6873    Exception.

§ 6874    Fire Hydrants.

§ 6875    Supervisor.

§ 6876    Report to Supervisor.

§ 6877    Payments.

Part 6. Special Provisions for Gas Pipelines

§ 6880    Rights Granted.

§ 6881    Approval.

Part 1. General Provisions and Definitions

6800 Short Title.
This Chapter shall be known and cited as “The Pipeline Franchise Ordinance.” (Ord. 78-428, § 1)

6801 General Conditions.
Every franchise hereafter granted by the City to lay or construct from time to time, and to maintain, operate, renew, repair, change the size of, remove or abandon in place pipes and pipelines for the collection, transportation or distribution of oil, gas, gasoline, petroleum, wet gas, hydrocarbon substances, water, waste water, mud, steam and other liquid substances which are not more hazardous than the aforementioned substances, together with all manholes, valves, appurtenances and service connections necessary or convenient for the operation of said pipes or pipelines including conduits, cathodic protection devices, wires, cables and other appurtenances necessary or convenient for the exercise of the Franchisee’s business, in, under, along or across any and all streets within the City of Carson, except as otherwise provided in the ordinance granting the franchise, shall be granted upon and be subject to the rules, regulations, restrictions and terms and conditions of this Chapter, in addition to those rules, regulations, restrictions, terms and conditions set forth in the ordinance granting the franchise. (Ord. 78-428, § 1; Ord. 79-495, § 1)

6802 Pole Lines.
Nothing in this Chapter or in any ordinance granting such a franchise shall be construed to permit the grantee to construct new poles or other facilities aboveground. (Ord. 78-428, § 1)

6803 Definitions.
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number.

a. “Council” shall mean City Council of the City of Carson.

b. “Code” shall mean the Municipal Code of the City of Carson.

c. “Chief Engineer” shall mean the Chief Engineer of the Los Angeles County Consolidated and Dominquez Fire Protection Districts.

d. “Department” shall mean the Public Works Department of the City of Carson.

e. “Director” shall mean Public Works Director of the City of Carson.

f. “Franchisee” or “Grantee” shall mean the person to whom the franchise is granted, and any person to whom it is lawfully assigned.

g. “Facilities” or “Appurtenances” shall mean all property of the Franchisee, including, but not limited to, pipelines, pump stations, and service connection with the Franchisee’s facilities, whether installed by the Franchisee or not, erected, constructed, laid, operated or maintained in, upon, over, under, along or across any street pursuant to any right or privilege granted by the franchise.

h. “Franchise payment period” shall mean the time period between the effective date of the ordinance granting the franchise and June 30th or December 31st of the same calendar year, whichever is sooner; and the period between January 1st and June 30th, and July 1st and December 31st of each calendar year thereafter during the life of the franchise.

i. “Franchise report period” shall mean the time period between the effective date of the ordinance granting the franchise through and including June 30th or December 31st of that calendar year, whichever is sooner; and the period between January 1st and June 30th, and July 1st and December 31st of each calendar year thereafter during the life of the franchise.

j. “Highway Permit Ordinance” shall mean County of Los Angeles Ordinance No. 3597, as adopted by reference in the City pursuant to CMC 7100.

k. “Main” shall mean any pipeline or conduit laid in, along, or approximately parallel with any street for the collection, transmission or distribution of any substance or commodity.

l. “Major street” shall mean any street or portion thereof designated as a major Secondary Highway in the Circulation Element of the General Plan.

m. “Minor street” shall mean all streets in the City other than those designated as “Major” or “Secondary Highways” in the Circulation Element of the Carson General Plan.

n. “Person” shall mean any individual, person, firm, partnership or corporation.

o. “Section” shall mean a section of the Carson Municipal Code, unless some other Code or statute is mentioned.

p. “Service connection” shall mean the wire, pipes, or conduits connecting the building or place where the service or commodity supplied by the Franchisee is used or delivered, or is made available for use or delivery, with the supply line or supply main in the highway or with such supply line or supply main on private property.

q. “Shall” is mandatory; “May” is permissive.

r. “Street” shall mean any street, road, highway, alley, land or court or other public easement or public place, and above and below the same, which now or may hereafter exist in the City of Carson and in which the City has the authority to grant a franchise.

s. “Supervisor” shall mean the Business License Supervisor of the City of Carson. (Ord. 78-428, § 1; Ord. 91-955, § 1)

6804 Term.
Unless the ordinance granting the franchise provides otherwise, the term of the franchise shall be twenty-five (25) years. (Ord. 78-428, § 1)

6805 Acceptance of Franchise.
The Franchisee shall, within thirty (30) days after the passage of the ordinance granting the franchise, file with the City Clerk of the City of Carson and with the Supervisor a written acceptance of the terms and conditions of said ordinance. (Ord. 78-428, § 1)

6806 Nonexclusive Franchise.
The granting of the franchise shall not be construed to prevent the City from granting any identical or similar franchise to any person other than the Franchisee. Nothing herein contained shall ever be construed so as to exempt the Franchisee from compliance with all ordinances, rules or regulations of the City now in effect or which may be hereafter adopted which are not inconsistent with the terms of the franchise. (Ord. 78-428, § 1)

6807 Change in Status.
If, after the granting of a franchise to other than a public utility, the Franchisee qualifies before the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California as a common carrier, the Franchisee shall then have no right to continue to operate hereunder after the date of such qualification, except with the consent of the Council, granted upon such additional terms and conditions as the Council may deem proper. Such additional terms and conditions shall be expressed by ordinance. (Ord. 78-428, § 1)

6808 Maps.
Within ninety (90) days following the date in which any facilities or appurtenances have been laid, removed or abandoned under the franchise, the Franchisee shall file a map or maps with the Department showing the accurate “as built” location, depth, and size of the facilities or appurtenances so laid, removed or abandoned. (Ord. 78-428, § 1)

6809 Insurance.
On or before commencement of any franchise operations, Franchisee shall obtain or provide satisfactory evidence of having policies of liability and worker’s compensation insurance from companies authorized to transact business in the State of California by the Insurance Commissioner of California.

A. The policy of liability insurance shall:

1. Be issued to Franchisee and name the City, and its officers, agents, and employees, as additional insured.

2. Indemnify for all liability for personal and bodily injury, death and damage to property arising from activities conducted pursuant to this franchise by providing coverage therefor, including but not limited to coverage for:

a. Negligent acts or omissions of Franchisee and the agents, servants and employees thereof, committed in the conduct of franchise operations;

b. Provide a combined single limit liability insurance in the amount of $10,000,000.

3. Be noncancellable without thirty (30) days’ written notice thereof directed to the Supervisor.

B. The policy of worker’s compensation insurance shall:

1. Have been previously approved as to substance and form by the California Insurance Commissioner.

2. Cover all employees of Franchisee who in the course and scope of their employment are to conduct or do work pursuant to the franchise operations.

3. Provide for every benefit and payment presently or hereinafter conferred by Division 4 of the Labor Code of the State of California upon an injured employee, including the vocational rehabilitation and death benefits.

4. Be noncancellable without thirty (30) days’ written notice thereof directed to the Supervisor. Franchisee shall file with the Supervisor prior to commencement of any franchise operations either certified copies of said policies or a certificate of insurance for each of the required policies executed by the company issuing the policy, certifying that the policy is in force and providing the following information with respect to said policy:

a. The policy number.

b. The date upon which the policy will become effective and the date upon which it will expire.

c. The names of the named insured and any additional insured.

d. Subject of the insurance.

e. The type of coverage provided by the insurance.

f. Amount of limit of coverage provided by the insurance.

g. A description of all endorsements that form a part of the policy.

Any franchise operations shall not commence until Franchisee has complied with the aforementioned provisions of this Section, and any such operations shall be suspended during any period that Franchisee fails to maintain said policies in full force and effect. (Ord. 78-428, § 1; Ord. 86-739, § 1)

6810 Faithful Performance Bond.
On or before the effective date of the ordinance granting the franchise, Franchisee shall file and thereafter at all times during the life of the franchise keep on file with the Supervisor a corporate surety bond approved by the City Attorney running to the City in the penal sum of $100,000, with a surety to be approved by the Supervisor, conditioned that Franchisee shall well and truly observe, fulfill and perform each condition of the franchise and that in case of any breach of condition of the bond the whole amount of the penal sum shall be deemed to be liquidated damages and shall be recoverable from the principal and sureties of the bond. If said bond is not filed prior to the effective date of the ordinance granting the franchise, the award of the franchise may be set aside and the ordinance granting the franchise repealed at any time prior to the filing of said bond and any money paid in consideration for said award of franchise shall be deemed forfeited. In the event that said bond, after it has been so filed, shall at any time during the life of the franchise become insufficient, Franchisee agrees to renew said bond, subject to the approval of the City Attorney, within ten (10) days after written notice to do so from the Supervisor. (Ord. 78-428, § 1; Ord. 86-739, § 2)

6811 Alternate Security.
In lieu of the bond required pursuant to CMC 6810, the Franchise may file alternate security provided in CMC 1400. (Ord. 78-428, § 1)

6813 Forfeiture.
The franchise is granted and shall be held and enjoyed upon each and every condition contained in the ordinance granting the franchise, including such conditions contained herein as are incorporated by reference in said franchise ordinance, and shall ever be strictly construed against the grantee. Nothing shall pass thereby unless it be granted in plain and unambiguous terms. Any neglect, failure or refusal to comply with any of the conditions of the franchise shall constitute grounds for the suspension or forfeiture thereof. The Council, prior to any suspension or forfeiture of the franchise, shall give to the grantee not less than thirty (30) days’ notice in writing of any default thereunder. If the grantee does not, within the noticed period, begin the work of compliance or after such beginning does not prosecute the work with due diligence to completion, the Council may hold a hearing, at which the grantee shall have the right to appear and be heard, and thereupon the Council may determine whether such conditions are material and essential to the franchise and whether the grantee is in default with respect thereto and may declare the franchise suspended or forfeited. Notice of said hearing shall be given to the grantee by certified mail not less than five (5) days before said hearing. (Ord. 78-428, § 1)

6814 Value of Franchise.
The grantee of any franchise awarded to a public utility, by accepting the terms and conditions thereof, stipulates and agrees that in any proceeding for the purpose of adjusting the rates of the grantee, no greater value shall be placed upon the franchise than the actual cash paid therefor by the grantee. (Ord. 78-428, § 1)

6815 State Highways.
If any street or portion thereof becomes a state highway, except for the right to continue to collect franchise payments in such other rights as by law remain with the City, the state shall succeed to all rights reserved to the City by the franchise; but this provision shall not preclude the grantee from receiving reimbursement for the relocation of its facilities if and to the extent otherwise lawfully entitled to.

This Section applies to any street or portion thereof which becomes a state highway in which the grantee maintains its facilities under the authorization of the franchise at the time such street or such portion thereof becomes a state highway, whether at such time it is under the jurisdiction of the City, or any other public entity.

This Section does not require any change of location in a state highway for a temporary purpose. (Ord. 78-428, § 1)

6816 Eminent Domain.
No franchise granted by the City shall in any way impair or affect the right of the City or any successor in authority to acquire the property of the grantee by purchase or condemnation, and nothing contained in such a franchise shall be construed to contract away, modify or abridge either for a term or in perpetuity the City’s right of eminent domain in respect to any public utility. (Ord. 78-428, § 1)

6817 Publication Costs.
The grantee shall pay to the City within thirty (30) days after receiving a statement therefor, all advertising and publishing costs, including the cost of publishing the ordinance, if necessary, incurred in connection with the granting of the franchise. (Ord. 78-428, § 1)

6818 Assignment.
The grantee shall not sell, transfer, assign or lease the franchise or any part thereof, except with the consent of the Council. Such sale, transfer, assignment or lease shall be made only by filing with the Council a copy of the duly executed instrument of such sale, transfer, assignment or lease and a written request for the consent of the Council to such sale, transfer, assignment or lease. If such duly executed instrument and such written request, is not filed with the Council before the expiration of sixty (60) days after the effective date of such sale, transfer, assignment or lease, then, upon the expiration of said sixty (60) days, the franchise shall be subject to forfeiture and the Council may, without notice, by ordinance, repeal the franchise. As a condition to the granting of consent to such sale, transfer, assignment or lease, the Council may impose such additional terms and conditions upon the franchise and upon the grantee or assignee, which the Council may deem to be in the public interest. Such additional terms and conditions shall be expressed by ordinance. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to grant to the grantee the right to sell, transfer, assign or lease the franchise, or any part thereof, except in the manner aforesaid. This section applies to any assignment, whether by operation of law, by a voluntary act of the grantee or otherwise. (Ord. 78-428, § 1)

6819 Prior Franchises.
All facilities erected, constructed, laid, operated or maintained by the grantee in the streets, including services connected with the grantee’s facilities, whether installed by the grantee or not, in the area described in and by virtue of the authority provided by the ordinance granting the franchise, prior to the effective date of said ordinance, except those maintained under prior right other than franchise, shall become subject to all the terms and conditions of such ordinance upon such effective date. (Ord. 78-428, § 1)

6820 City Officers.
Any right or power conferred, or duty imposed upon any officer, employee or department of the City shall be subject to transfer to any other officer, employee, or department of the City. (Ord. 78-428, § 1)

6821 Hold Harmless.
The grantee shall be responsible to the City and save the City and its officers and employees free and harmless from all damages or liability arising from the use, operation or possession of the franchise, and from the use, operation or maintenance of the facilities erected, constructed, laid, operated or maintained thereunder. (Ord. 78-428, § 1)

6822 Standards.
All facilities erected, constructed, laid, operated or maintained under the provisions of the franchise shall be erected, constructed, laid, operated or maintained in accordance with and conforming to all the ordinances, codes, rules and regulations now and hereafter adopted or prescribed by the Council. (Ord. 78-428, § 1)

6823 Conflicting Improvements.
If the City or any other public entity constructs or maintains any storm drain, sewer structure, or other facility or improvement under or across any facility of the grantee maintained pursuant to the ordinance, the grantee shall provide at no expense to the City or other public entity such support as shall be reasonably required to support, maintain and protect grantee’s facility. (Ord. 78-428, § 1)

6824 Relocation.
If the grantee after reasonable notice, fails or refuses to relocate permanently or temporarily its facilities located in, on, upon, along, under, over, across or above any highway or to pave, surface, grade, repave, resurface or regrade as required, pursuant to any provision of the franchise, the City or other public entity may cause the work to be done and shall keep an itemized account of the entire cost thereof, and the grantee shall hold harmless the City, its officers and employees from any liability which may arise or be claimed to arise from the moving, cutting, or alteration of any of the grantee’s facilities, or the turning on or off of water, oil, or other liquid, gas, or electricity.

The grantee agrees to, and shall, reimburse the City or other public entity for such cost within thirty (30) days after presentation to said grantee of an itemized account of such costs. (Ord. 78-428, § 1)

6825 Defective Facilities.
If any portion of any street shall be damaged by reason of defective facilities laid or constructed under the franchise, the grantee shall, at its own expense, repair any such defect and put such street in as good condition as it was before such damage was incurred, to the satisfaction of the City. If the grantee, within ten (10) days after receipt of written notice from the City, instructing it to repair such damage, shall fail to commence to comply with such instructions, or, thereafter, shall fail diligently to prosecute such work to completion, then the City immediately may do whatever work is necessary to carry out said instructions at the cost and expense of the grantee, which cost and expense, by the acceptance of the franchise, the grantee agrees to pay upon demand. If such damage constitutes an immediate danger to the public health or safety requiring the immediate repair thereof, the City without notice may repair such damage and the grantee agrees to pay the reasonable cost thereof upon demand. (Ord. 78-428, § 1)

6826 Hazardous Substances.
Prior to the issuance of any excavation permit for the construction or installation of any pipelines for the transmission of flammable liquids or gases, which are heavier than air, approval shall be obtained from the chief engineer. Such approval should be based on the determination that no undue fire hazard will be created to life or property in the areas through which the proposed pipeline will be located. To make such determination, consideration shall be given to:

(A) Type of commodity to be transmitted.

(B) Density of population or structural development in the area through which the pipeline will be located.

(C) Adequacy of water supplies for fire control purposes.

(D) Extent of available public fire protection facilities.

(E) Number and location of shut-off valves in line. (Ord. 78-428, § 1)

6827 Council Approval of Location of Facilities.
A franchise may not install or operate any facilities in any public street, highway, road, alley or other public place without first obtaining the prior approval of the City Council by Resolution. (Ord. 89-887, § 2)

6828 Damage to Public Property Generally.
Any damage done directly or indirectly to any public property by grantee, in exercising directly or indirectly any right, power, or privilege under this franchise, or in performing any duty under or pursuant to the provisions of this Section, shall be promptly repaired by grantee at its sole cost and expense. (Ord. 89-887, § 3)

Part 2. Compensation*

* Editor’s Note: Prior ordinance history: Ordinance Nos. 78-428, 83-639, 89-887, 91-955, 95-1054.

6830 Public Utilities Transmitting Oil or Products of Oil.
As consideration for the franchise granted, the Franchisee of any franchise awarded to a public utility for a pipeline system transmitting oil or products of oil, including the extension, renewal, or continuation of a previously granted franchise, shall pay to the City the following fees:

A. Base Annual Fee. A base annual fee shall be paid within sixty (60) days after the end of each calendar year and during the life of the franchise for each and every year, including the year of granting the franchise, according to the “franchise payment period” as defined in this Chapter, by multiplying the pipe length expressed in feet by the applicable base rate as follows:

Pipe Size (Internal) Diameter in Inches

Base Rate Per Lineal Foot

0 – 4

$0.088

6

0.132

8

0.176

10

0.220

12

0.264

14

0.308

16

0.352

18

0.396

20

0.440

22

0.484

24

0.528

26

0.572

28

0.616

30

0.660

For pipelines with an internal diameter not listed above, the fees shall be in the same proportion to the fees of a twelve (12) inch diameter pipe as the diameter of the unlisted pipe is to twelve (12) inches. The formula used in arriving at the annual fee shall apply to any existing, replacement, modification or extension of the pipeline.

B. Adjustments.

1. The amount of the fee provided for in subsection A of this Section shall be adjusted at the time payment is due by multiplying the base fee by the Consumer Price Index, All Urban Consumers for the Los Angeles-Anaheim-Riverside Area as published by the United States Department of Labor, Office of Information for the month of September immediately preceding the month in which payment is due and payable, and divided by the Consumer Price Index for June 30, 1989 (June 30, 1989 = 100.0).

2. In no event shall an annual fee be charged which is less than the base annual fee amount established by subsection A of this Section.

3. The indices specified in subsection (B)(1) of this Section are calculated and published by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. If the Bureau discontinues the calculation or publication of the Consumer Price Index, All Urban Consumers for the Los Angeles-Anaheim-Riverside area (June 30, 1989 = 100), and no transposition table is available to convert to another index, then the amount of each annual adjustment in base fees shall be computed by using a comparable governmental index.

C. Conversion on Nonpublic Utility to Public Utility. Upon expiration of a nonpublic utility pipeline transmitting oil or products of oil which franchise was effective on December 30, 1989, if the operator of such franchise has converted or seeks to convert to public utility status, all of the following must be established to the satisfaction of the City Council in accordance with Public Utilities Code Section 6231.5(f):

1. Its property is dedicated to the service of the public;

2. Its rates for transportation are established pursuant to tariffs filed with the Public Utilities Commission;

3. Its accounts and records are established pursuant to rules and regulations adopted by the Public Utilities Commission;

4. It has filed an appropriate annual report with the Public Utilities Commission; and

5. Its rates for transportation are just, reasonable, and nondiscriminatory, as evidenced either by an order of the Commission approving those rates, or an application for approval of its rates that is pending with the Commission. (Ord. 95-1054, § 1)

6831 Public Utilities Transmitting Substances Other than Oil or Products of Oil.
As consideration for the award of any franchise to a public utility for a pipeline system transmitting substances other than oil or products of oil, including the extension, renewal, or continuation of a previously granted franchise, the Franchisee must pay to the City the following fees:

A. Base Annual Fee. As provided in California Public Utilities Code Section 6231(c), the Franchisee shall pay to the City during the term of the franchise two (2) percent of the gross annual receipts of the Franchisee arising from the use, operation or possession of the franchise; but this annual payment may not be less than one (1) percent of the gross annual receipts of the franchise derived from the sale within the boundaries of the City of the utility service for which the franchise is awarded.

B. Adjustments. The City reserves the right to change the fees imposed by this Section at five (5) year intervals from the effective date of the ordinance granting the franchise, if, following a public hearing, that action is not in conflict with the laws of the State of California. (Ord. 95-1054, § 1)

6832 Nonpublic Utility.
The Franchisee of any franchise awarded to any entity other than a public utility, as further consideration for such franchise including the extension, renewal, or continuation of a previously granted franchise, shall pay to the City the following fees:

A. Base Granting Fee. In the case of an initial grant of franchise, or franchises which extend, renew, or continue previously granted franchises, a base granting fee of $7,500 for pipelines with a total length of one-quarter (1/4) mile or more or $1,600 for pipelines with a total length of less than one-quarter (1/4) mile shall be paid within thirty (30) days after the Council adopts the ordinance granting the franchise and prior to signing the written acceptance of the franchise pursuant to CMC 6805. If at any time during the first five (5) years following the grant of a franchise additional pipeline is added which will result in a total length of pipeline of one-quarter (1/4) mile or more, the $7,500 granting fee shall be required at the same time said footage is added.

B. Base Franchise Fee.

1. A base franchise fee shall be paid by the holder of the franchise to the City for the pipeline area occupied by the pipelines at an annual rate of $1.68 per cubic foot. The franchise fee shall be due and payable semi-annually, at the end of each franchise payment period, as defined in CMC 6803(h), during the life of the franchise, including the year of granting the franchise. Said franchise fee shall accrue at the end of each semi-annual period for the pipeline area occupied by the greatest number of feet of pipeline covered by the franchise during the franchise payment period. For purposes of this subsection the pipeline area occupied by a pipeline or conduit including protective covering, pipe connections, cathodic protection facilities, pipe casings and other minor appurtenances shall be taken as equivalent to the volume occupied by a cylinder of equal length having a diameter of one (1) inch (for metal pipe) or two (2) inches (for plastic pipe) greater than the nominal internal diameter of the pipe or conduit but in no case with an equivalent cylinder diameter less than four (4) inches, and the payment rate therefor shall be computed to the nearest tenth of a cent per lineal foot of pipe. Pipeline area occupied by any appurtenances such as manholes or vaults shall be computed from the outside dimensions of the structure. The semi-annual fee shall be paid no later than January 1st and July 1st of each calendar year. A penalty at the rate of ten (10) percent per month or fraction thereof beyond thirty (30) days after the payment due date shall be charged, but in no event shall said penalty exceed fifty (50) percent.

2. The City reserves the right to adjust the base fees established hereunder at any time after the effective date of the ordinance granting a franchise, but the base fees applicable to any one (1) franchise may only be changed five (5) times during the life of that particular franchise, and may only be changed in accordance with the provisions of California Public Utilities Code Section 6231.5(e).

C. Base Construction Charges. The holder of the franchise shall pay at the time of commencement of installation, relocation, or replacement of any pipeline or other facility covered by the franchise, a base construction charge of $3,384 for each one-half (1/2) mile of trench or fractional part thereof installed, replaced or relocated on major streets and $2,232 per one-half (1/2) mile of trench or fractional part thereof, on minor streets or actual cost of inspection, whichever is greater. The City reserves the right to change the base fees established hereunder at any time after the effective date of the ordinance granting a franchise, but the base fees applicable to any one (1) franchise may only be changed five (5) times during the life of that particular franchise.

D. Adjustments.

1. The amount of each base fee specified in subsections A, B and C of this Section shall be adjusted at the time payment is due by the percentage change in the Consumer Price Index, all Urban Consumers for the Los Angeles-Anaheim-Riverside area (1982-84 = 100), for the period July 1, 1991 to the date which is sixty (60) days prior to the due date of the fee.

2. In no event shall any base fee be charged which is less than the base fee amount established by subsections B and C of this Section.

3. The indices specified in paragraph 1 of this subsection D are calculated and published by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. If the Bureau discontinues the calculation or publication of the Consumer Price Index, all Urban Consumers for the Los Angeles-Anaheim-Riverside area (1982-84 = 100), and no transposition table is available to convert to another index, then the amount of each annual adjustment in base fees shall be computed by using a comparable governmental index. (Ord. 95-1054, § 1)

6833 Proration of Payments.
In the event of abandonment of facilities with the approval of the City as elsewhere in this Chapter provided, or in the event of removal of such facilities by the Franchisee, or in the event of the grant of a franchise with an initial franchise payment period of less than one (1) year, the annual franchise fee required under CMC 6830(a) and (b) shall be prorated for the calendar year in which such removal or abandonment or grant occurs as of the end of the calendar month in which removed, abandoned or granted. (Ord. 95-1054, § 1)

6834 Records.
Franchisee shall keep and preserve for a period of five (5) years subsequent to the date of the most recent franchise fee determination all the records necessary to determine the amount of such franchise fee.

At all reasonable times, the Franchisee shall permit the City or its duly authorized representative to examine all property of the Franchisee erected, constructed, laid, operated or maintained pursuant to the franchise, together with any appurtenant property of the Franchisee, and to examine and transcribe any and all books, accounts, papers, maps, and other records kept or maintained by the Franchisee or under its control which concern the operations, affairs, transactions, property or financial condition of the Franchisee with respect thereto. Said records shall be made available to the City at a location in the County of Los Angeles. (Ord. 95-1054, § 1)

Part 3. Construction

6840 Construction Requirements.
Pipelines and appurtenances shall be constructed and maintained in good workmanlike manner in conformity with the terms and conditions of the Highway Permit Ordinance, or any other ordinance, rule or regulation, now, or as hereafter amended, adopted or prescribed by the City. All pipes laid under the franchise shall be of first class material. All pipelines and appurtenances will be installed in accordance with the latest revision of the “American Standard Code of Pressure Piping ASA B31.4” and the Highway Permit Ordinance. (Ord. 78-428, § 1)

6841 New Installation or Replacement.
New installation or replacements of pipelines and appurtenances and all other facilities necessary for the installation, operation, maintenance, and safety of pipelines and conduits shall be laid and maintained only pursuant to permit issued by the Department. All such installations or replacements shall be reviewed by the Director as to the most desirable location in the streets of the City and his decision shall be final and binding on the Franchisee. (Ord. 78-428, § 1)

6842 Permits.
Where the provisions of the Highway Permit Ordinance, or the provisions of any other ordinance, rule or regulation, which shall be in force at the time, require the issuance of an excavation, encroachment or other type of permit, the Franchisee shall not commence any excavation or encroachment work under the franchise until it shall have obtained such permit from the Department except in cases of emergency affecting public health, safety or welfare or the preservation of life or property, in which case the Franchisee shall apply for such permit not later than the next business day.

The application of the Franchisee for such permit shall show the following facts: the length and proposed location of the pipeline and/or appurtenance intended to be used, and such other facts as the Department may require. The Franchisee shall pay any and all permit inspection fees to the Department. (Ord. 78-428, § 1)

6843 Work on and Restoration of Streets.
The work of constructing, laying, replacing, maintaining, repairing or removing all pipelines and appurtenances authorized under the provisions of this Chapter in, over, under, along or across any street shall be conducted with the least possible hindrance to the use of the street for purposes of travel, and as soon as such work is completed, all portions of the street which have been excavated or otherwise damaged thereby shall promptly and in a workmanlike manner be repaired, replaced or restored and placed in as good condition as the same was before the commencement of such work. Such restoration, repair or replacement work may, as determined by the Director, require the resurfacing, slurry scaling or other treatment of the street or streets to a minimum of one (1) driving lane, and all such work shall be done to the satisfaction of the Director at the expense of the Franchisee, in accordance with the terms and conditions of the Highway Permit Ordinance.

In the event that the Franchisee shall fail or neglect to make such highway repair, replacement, or restoration work, then ten (10) days after notice therefor has been given Franchisee by the Director, the City may repair, replace or restore said highway at the expense of Franchisee. Franchisee agrees to pay to the City the cost of performing such work. The amount so chargeable shall be the direct cost of such work plus the current rate of overhead being charged by the City for reimbursement work. (Ord. 78-428, § 1; Ord. 86-739, § 3)

6844 Failure to Timely Comply.
In the event that the Franchisee fails to complete the work within the time specified in the permit, the City may require the Franchisee to pay to the City not more than $200.00 per day as liquidated damages for each day construction extends beyond the time specified in the permit.

Whenever the Franchisee fails to complete any work required by the terms and conditions of the Franchise, and the permits issued thereunder, within the time limits required thereby, the City may complete or cause to be completed any and all such work at the expense of the Franchisee. The Franchisee agrees to pay to the City the cost of performing such work. The amount so chargeable to Franchisee shall be the direct cost of such work plus the current rate of overhead being charged by the City for reimbursable work. (Ord. 78-428, § 1)

6845 Completion Statement.
Upon the completion of the construction of any pipelines or appurtenances constructed pursuant to said franchise, the Franchisee shall submit a statement of the Supervisor, identifying the permit or permits issued by the Department, the total length of pipeline, the construction of which was authorized under such permit or permits, and the total length of pipeline or appurtenance actually laid. (Ord. 78-428, § 1)

6846 Responsibility.
The Franchisee shall be responsible to the City and shall save the City, its officers, agents, and employees, free and harmless from all damages or liability arising from any damage or injury suffered by any person by reason of any excavation or obstruction being improperly guarded during any work authorized pursuant to the franchise or the failure or neglect of the Franchisee to properly perform, maintain, or protect any phase of such work. (Ord. 78-428, § 1)

6847 Appurtenances.
The Franchisee shall have the right to construct, maintain and repair such traps, manholes, conduits, valves, appliances, attachments and appurtenances (hereinafter collectively referred to as “appurtenances”) as may be necessary or convenient for the proper maintenance and operation of the pipelines under said franchise, and said appurtenances shall be kept flush with the surface of the street and so located as to conform to any ordinance, rule or regulation of the City, or of any permit issued by the Department in regard thereto and shall not interfere with the use of the street for travel. The Franchisee shall have the right subject to such ordinances, rules or regulations as are now or may hereafter be in force, to make all necessary excavations in said streets for the construction, maintenance and repair of said appurtenances; provided, however, that the Franchisee shall first obtain an excavation permit from the Department for doing of any such work. (Ord. 78-428, § 1)

6848 Ordinary Repair.
The Franchisee shall be privileged to excavate in the road or street for line repair for the number of days agreed upon by the Franchisee and the Department; provided, however, that the Franchisee shall first obtain an excavation permit from the Department for the doing of any such work. (Ord. 78-428, § 1)

6849 Relocation of Pipelines and Appurtenances.
A. The City reserves the right to change the grade, to change the width or to alter or change the location of any street over which the franchise is granted. If any of the pipelines, facilities or appurtenances heretofore or hereafter constructed, installed or maintained by the Franchisee pursuant to the franchise on, along, under, over, in, upon or across any street are located in a manner which prevents or interferes with the change of grade, traffic needs, operation, maintenance, improvements, repair, construction, reconstruction, widening, alteration or relocation of the street, the Franchisee shall relocate permanently or temporarily any such facility at no expense to the City upon receipt of a written request from the Director to do so, and shall commence such work on or before the day specified in such written request which date shall be not less than thirty (30) days from receipt of such written request. Franchisee shall thereafter diligently prosecute such work to completion.

B. The City reserves the right for itself, and all other public entities which are now or may later be established, to lay, construct, repair, alter, relocate and maintain subsurface or other facilities or improvements of any type or description in a governmental but not proprietary capacity within the streets over which the franchise is granted. If the City or any other public entity finds that the location or relocation of such facilities or improvements conflicts with the facilities laid, constructed or maintained under the franchise, whether such facilities were laid before or after the facilities of the City or such other public entity were laid, the Franchisee of such franchise shall at no expense to the City or public entity, on or before the date specified in a written request from the Director, which date shall be not less than thirty (30) days after the receipt of such notice and request to do so, commence work to change the location either permanently or temporarily of all facilities so conflicting with such improvements to a permanent or temporary location in said streets to be approved by the Director and thereafter diligently prosecute such work to completion. If such street be subsequently constituted a state highway, while it remains a state highway the rights of the State of California shall be as provided in Section 680 of the Streets and Highways Code of the State of California. (Ord. 78-428, § 1)

6850 Breaks or Leaks.
If any portion of the street shall be damaged by reason of breaks or leaks in any pipe, conduit, or appurtenance constructed or maintained under the franchise, the Franchisee thereof shall, at its own expense, immediately following written or oral notification thereof, promptly repair any such damage and put such street in as good condition as it was in before such damage or leak, all to the satisfaction of the Department. The Franchisee shall obtain an excavation permit from the Department for the doing of any such work. (Ord. 78-428, § 1)

6851 Emergency Equipment.
At all times during the term of this franchise, the Franchisee shall maintain or arrange for, on a twenty-four (24) hour a day basis, adequate emergency equipment and a properly trained emergency crew within a radius of twenty-five (25) miles from any facilities installed or maintained pursuant hereto for the purpose of shutting off the pressure and the flow of contents of such facilities in the event of an emergency resulting from an earthquake, act of war, civil disturbance, fire, flood, or any other cause or nature whatsoever. (Ord. 78-428, § 1)

6852 Removal or Abandonment of Facilities.
A. At the expiration, revocation or termination of this franchise or upon the permanent discontinuance of the use of all or a portion of its facilities, the Franchisee shall, within thirty (30) days thereafter, make written application to the Director for authority, as determined by the Franchisee, either: (1) to abandon all or a portion of such facilities in place; or (2) to remove all or a portion of such facilities. Such application shall describe the facilities desired to be abandoned or removed by reference to the map or maps required by CMC 6808 and shall also describe with reasonable accuracy the physical condition of such facilities.

B. The Director shall determine whether the abandonment or removal which is thereby proposed may be effected without detriment to the public interest and under what conditions such proposed abandonment or removal may be safely effected. The Director shall then notify the Franchisee of his determination. The Franchisee shall pay to the City the cost of all tests required to determine the disposition of the application for abandonment or removal.

C. Within thirty (30) days after receipt of such notice, the Franchisee shall apply for a permit from the Department to abandon or remove all or a portion of the facilities and shall pay all fees and costs related thereto. Said permit shall contain such conditions of abandonment or removal as may be prescribed by the Director. Any abandonment shall be conditioned, in part, upon Franchisee’s compliance with the provisions of CMC 6849(A) and (B).

D. The Franchisee shall, within ninety (90) days after obtaining such permit, commence and diligently prosecute to completion the work authorized by the permit.

E. If the Franchisee applies for authority to abandon all or a portion of its facilities in place, and the Director determines that abandonment in place of all or part of the facilities may be effected without detriment to the public interest, the Franchisee shall pay to the City a fee which shall be computed as follows:

Pipelines with an Internal Diameter of

Amount Per Lineal Foot

0 – 12 inches

$15.00

14 – 18 inches

22.00

20 – 30 inches

28.00

(Ord. 78-428, § 1; Ord. 87-777, § 1)

6853 Failure to Comply.
A. If any facilities to be abandoned “in place” subject to prescribed conditions shall not be abandoned in accordance with all such conditions the Director may make additional appropriate orders, including an order that the Franchisee shall remove any or all such facilities. The Franchisee shall comply with such additional orders.

B. In the event that the Franchisee shall fail to comply with the terms and conditions of abandonment or removal as may be required by this Chapter and within such time as may be prescribed by the Director, then the City may remove or cause to be removed such facilities at the Franchisee’s expense. The Franchisee shall pay to the City the cost of such work plus the current rate of overhead being charged by the City for reimbursable work.

C. If, at the expiration, revocation or termination of this franchise, or of the permanent discontinuance of the use of all or a portion of its facilities, the Franchisee shall, within thirty (30) days thereafter, fail or refuse to make written application for the abovementioned authority, the Director shall make the determination as to whether the facilities shall be abandoned in place or removed. The Director shall then notify the Franchisee of his determination. The Franchisee shall thereafter comply with the provisions of CMC 6852(C) and (D). (Ord. 78-428, § 1; Ord. 87-777, § 2)

6854 Abandonment “In Place” Conditions.
Facilities abandoned “in place” shall be subject to the condition that if, at any time after the effective date of the abandonment, the Director determines that the facility may interfere with any public project, Franchisee or its successor in interest must remove the facility at its expense when requested to do so by the City or to pay City for the cost of such removal. (Ord. 78-428, § 1)

Part 4. Special Provisions for Oil Pipelines

6860 Rights Granted.
The Franchisee granted an oil pipeline franchise shall have the right during the life thereof to transport oil, gas, gasoline, petroleum, wet gas, hydrocarbon substances, water, waste water, mud and other liquid substances through the pipelines maintained under the franchise. If the Franchisee or assignee later qualifies before the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California as a common carrier, the Franchisee or assignee shall then have no right to continue to operate hereunder after the date of such qualification except with the consent of the Council, granted upon such additional terms and conditions as the Council may deem proper. Such additional terms and conditions shall be expressed by ordinance. (Ord. 78-428, § 1)

6861 Materials Used.
All pipelines used or to be used for the transportation of oil, gas, gasoline, petroleum, wet gas, hydrocarbon substances or other flammable liquid shall be first class and standard material as set forth by current American Petroleum Institute pipeline specifications. (Ord. 78-428, § 1)

6862 Approvals.
On all pipelines laid pursuant to the franchise, the Chief Engineer shall approve where flush-valve connections shall be placed in the line. The availability of adequate water supplies, the commodity transmitted in the line, and the location of control valves shall be considered when making such determination. Such flush-valve connections shall be installed in the manner prescribed by the Chief Engineer. (Ord. 78-428, § 1)

6863 Reports.
The Franchisee during the life of the franchise, within ninety (90) days after the expiration of each franchise payment period, shall:

A. File with the Supervisor two (2) copies of a report verified by the oath of the Franchisee or by the oath of a duly authorized representative of the Franchisee showing for the immediately preceding franchise period, the length of lines in streets, the internal diameter of such lines, the rate per foot per year and the total amount due the City.

B. File with the Supervisor a report in triplicate, showing the permit number of each permit obtained for the installation of new mains during the immediately preceding franchise payment period, together with the length and size of said mains. On this report the Franchisee shall show any change in franchise footage since the last franchise payment period segregating such footage as to new mains laid, old mains removed, old mains abandoned in place, and the footage of mains in territory annexed or incorporated since the last franchise payment period. (Ord. 78-428, § 1)

6864 Payments Due.
Except for pipelines lawfully maintained other than by the authority granted by the franchise, the semi-annual payments shall accrue from the respective dates of installation, whether before or after the effective date of the ordinance granting the franchise, and such payments shall be due and payable semi-annually. (Ord. 78-428, § 1; Ord. 91-955, § 5)

6865 Nonapplicability.
CMC 6860, 6863, and 6864 do not apply to public utilities. (Ord. 78-428, § 1)

Part 5. Special Provisions for Water and Other Public Utility Pipelines

6870 Rights Granted.
The Franchisee granted a franchise for domestic water service shall have the right, during the term of period covered by the franchise and subject to the terms thereof, to make service connections with all property adjoining streets and to furnish and distribute water through said pipes and pipelines to all the City territory in the City adjacent to said pipes and pipelines for any purpose. (Ord. 79-495, § 1)

6871 Plan Approval.
All new pipelines, replacements, and extensions for domestic water service shall be constructed, laid, and designed according to plans approved by the Chief Engineer. (Ord. 79-495, § 1)

6872 Condition of Approval.
The Chief Engineer shall approve such plans if the pipelines to be laid, extended or replaced are so designed in conjunction with related facilities, and the location of fire hydrants comply with required domestic demand and fire flows indicated by the Board of Fire Underwriters. (Ord. 79-495, § 1)

6873 Exception.
The Chief Engineer may grant an exception to the requirements of CMC 6872 where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of said section, and in the granting of such exception the spirit of said section will be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. (Ord. 79-495, § 1)

6874 Fire Hydrants.
As further consideration for the granting of the franchise, the Franchisee shall, at the request of the Chief Engineer, install at no cost to the City (except a reasonable monthly rental), or to any County fire protection district, fire hydrants at such places along the Franchisee’s water mains covered by the Franchise as may be designated by the Chief Engineer. (Ord. 79-495, § 1)

6875 Supervisor.
The Franchisee of any franchise awarded to a public utility or a mutual water company shall file with the Supervisor for each franchise payment period, within ninety (90) days after such period, two (2) copies of a report verified by the oath of the manager, or any responsible officer of the Franchisee (except where the Franchisee is an individual, in which case the report shall be verified the oath of the Franchisee) showing the total gross receipts of the Franchisee for the franchise payment period, received or accrued in connection with the furnishing of the commodity or service arising from the use or operation of the franchise, together with such additional data as is necessary in the opinion of the Supervisor to calculate or verify the calculation of the annual payment required by CMC 6830(A) (or the pro rata portion thereof for the first period if less than one (1) year) and which payment shall be paid concurrently with the filing of the statement. In the event the amount paid is incorrect in the judgment of the City, it may order the payment of such additional sum as it may find thereunder; and if not paid, or if paid under protest the same may be determined by suit. (Ord. 79-495, § 1)

6876 Report to Supervisor.
Within ninety (90) days after the expiration of each franchise report period, the Franchisee shall file with the Director a report in triplicate, showing the permit number of each permit obtained for the installation of new mains during the immediately preceding franchise report period, together with the length and size of said mains. On this report the Franchisee shall show any change in franchise footage since the last franchise report period, segregating such footage as to new mains laid, old mains removed, old mains abandoned in place, and the footage of mains in territory annexed or incorporated since the last franchise. (Ord. 79-495, § 1)

6877 Payments.
The Franchisee, during the life of the franchise, shall make annual payments to the City as provided in CMC 6830(A), (C), and (D). (Ord. 79-495, § 1)

Part 6. Special Provisions
for Gas Pipelines

6880 Rights Granted.
The Franchisee shall have the right, during the period covered by the franchise and subject to the terms and conditions thereof, to make service connections with all property in the City adjoining streets and to furnish and distribute gas through said pipes and pipelines to all territory in the City adjacent to said pipelines for any purpose. (Ord. 78-428, § 1)

6881 Approval.
On all pipelines carrying gas heavier than air laid pursuant to the franchise, the Chief Engineer shall approve where flush-valve connections shall be placed in the line. The availability of adequate water supplies, the commodities transmitted in the line, and the location of control valves shall be considered when making such determination. Such flush-valve connections shall be installed in the manner prescribed by the Chief Engineer. (Ord. 78-428, § 1)

CHAPTER 9
SPUR TRACK FRANCHISES
Sections:

Part 1. Definitions

§ 6900    Short Title.

§ 6901    Definitions.

Part 2. General Provisions

§ 6902    General Conditions.

§ 6903    Application for Franchise.

§ 6904    Acceptance of Franchise.

§ 6905    Term.

§ 6906    Publication Costs.

§ 6907    Rates.

§ 6908    City Officers.

§ 6909    Permits.

§ 6910    Completion Statement.

§ 6911    Responsibility.

§ 6912    Renewals of Existing Franchises for Spur Tracks.

§ 6913    Conflicting Improvements.

§ 6914    Damage to Streets.

§ 6915    Work on and Restoration of Streets.

§ 6916    Severability.

Part 1. Definitions

6900 Short Title.
This Chapter shall be known and cited as “the Spur Track Franchise Ordinance.” (Ord. 79-488, § 1)

6901 Definitions.
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number.

a. “City” shall mean the City of Carson.

b. “Council” shall mean City Council of the City.

c. “Code” shall mean the Municipal Code of the City.

d. “Department” shall mean the Public Works Department of the City.

e. “Director” shall mean Public Works Director of the City.

f. “Franchisee” or “Grantee” shall mean the person to whom the franchise is granted, and any person to whom it is lawfully assigned.

g. “Facilities” or “Appurtenances” shall mean all property of the Franchisee, whether installed by the Franchisee or not, erected, constructed, laid, operated or maintained in, upon, over, under, along or across any street pursuant to any right or privilege granted by the franchise.

h. “Highway Permit Ordinance” shall mean County of Los Angeles Ordinance No. 3597, as adopted by reference in the City pursuant to CMC 7100.

i. “Person” shall mean any individual, person, firm, partnership or corporation.

j. “Section” shall mean a section of the Carson Municipal Code, unless some other Code or statute is mentioned.

k. “Shall” is mandatory, “may” is permissive.

l. “Street” shall mean any street, road, highway, alley, lane, or court or other public easement, and above and below the same, in which the City has the authority to grant a franchise.

m. “Spur Track” shall mean any railroad track which branches off a lead track from the purpose of serving particular industrial or business enterprises.

n. “Supervisor” shall mean the Business License Supervisor of the City. (Ord. 79-488, § 1)

Part 2. General Provisions

6902 General Conditions.
Franchises for the construction, reconstruction, operation, maintenance, repair and removal of railroad spur tracks upon, on, along or across any highways, except as otherwise provided in the ordinance granting the franchise, shall be granted by the City in the manner, for the term or time, subject to and upon the terms, conditions, rules, regulations and restrictions contained in this Chapter, in addition to those terms, conditions, rules, regulations and restrictions set forth in the ordinance granting the franchise. (Ord. 79-488, § 1)

6903 Application for Franchise.
The person, firm or corporation desiring such franchise shall file with the City Clerk an application therefor in writing, in quadruplicate, signed by said applicant, fully, completely and definitely describing the center line of said spur track between the termini thereof, and accompanied by a plat or diagram showing in detail the location of such spur track with relation to all public streets, lanes, alleys, ways or other public places, and to all parts or portions thereof, along, over or across which it is proposed to construct such track. (Ord. 79-488, § 1)

6904 Acceptance of Franchise.
The Franchisee shall, within ninety (90) days after the passage of the ordinance granting the franchise, file with the City Clerk of the City and with the Supervisor a written acceptance of the terms and conditions of said ordinance. (Ord. 79-488, § 1)

6905 Term.
Unless the ordinance granting the franchise provides otherwise, the term of the franchise shall be for a period of twenty-five (25) years from and after the date of the passage of the ordinance granting said franchise. (Ord. 79-488, § 1)

6906 Publication Costs.
The Franchisee shall pay to the City at the time it files an application for a franchise, an amount to be determined by the City Clerk which is sufficient to cover all advertising and publishing costs, including the cost of publishing the ordinance, if necessary, incurred in connection with the granting of the franchise. (Ord. 79-488, § 1)

6907 Rates.
As consideration for the franchise granted, the Franchisee shall pay to the City in lawful money of the United States the following:

a. Base Annual Fee. A base annual fee in the amount of $75.00.

b. Adjustments. The amount of each payment under paragraph (a) shall be revised annually based upon the increase or decrease in the level of the Consumer Price Index, All Urban Consumers (L.A.-L.B.-Anaheim, CA.) (1967=100) as of May, 1979 (Index = 211.0), prepared by the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics.

c. Delinquency Date and Penalty for Nonpayment. All annual fees (base annual fee and any adjustments) shall be due and payable on January 1st of each calendar year. If any annual fee is not paid on or before the last day of February of the year in which due, there shall, on March 1st, attach a penalty of one hundred (100) percent of the total annual fee. (Ord. 79-488, § 1; Ord. 86-750, § 1)

6908 City Officers.
Any right or power conferred, or duty imposed upon any officer, employee or department of the City shall be subject to transfer to any other officer, employee, or department of the City. (Ord. 79-488, § 1)

6909 Permits.
Where the provisions of the Highway Permit Ordinance, or the provisions of any other ordinance, rule or regulation which shall be in force at that time, require the issuance of an excavation, encroachment or other type of permit, the Franchisee shall not commence any excavation or encroachment work under the franchise until it shall have obtained such permit from the Department except in cases of emergency affecting public health, safety or welfare or the preservation of life or property, in which case the Franchisee shall apply for such permit not later than the next business day.

The application of the Franchisee for such permit shall show the following facts: the length and proposed location of the track and/or appurtenance intended to be used, and such other facts as the Department may require. The Franchisee shall pay any and all permit inspection fees to the Department. (Ord. 79-488, § 1)

6910 Completion Statement.
Upon the completion of the construction of any track or appurtenances constructed pursuant to the franchise, the Franchisee shall submit a statement to the Supervisor, identifying the permit or permits issued by the Department, the total length of track, the construction of which was authorized under such permit or permits, and the total length of track or appurtenance actually laid. (Ord. 79-488, § 1)

6911 Responsibility.
The Franchisee shall be responsible to the City and shall save the City, its officers, agents, and employees, free and harmless from all claims, damages or liability arising from the use, operation or possession of the franchise, the use, operation or maintenance of the facilities erected, constructed, laid, operated or maintained thereunder, and any damage or injury suffered by any person by reason of any excavation or obstruction being improperly guarded during any work authorized pursuant to the franchise or the failure or neglect of the Franchisee to properly perform, maintain, or protect any phase of such work. This Section shall not apply to damages caused by intentional or negligent acts or omissions of the City. (Ord. 79-488, § 1)

6912 Renewals of Existing Franchises for Spur Tracks.
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to renewals of existing franchises for spur tracks. When an application is made for renewal of existing spur track permit or permits authorizing track or tracks constructed and in place at the time of the application for renewal thereof, then the fee for such renewal or renewals shall be a sum equal to that provided for in CMC 6909. Each such application filed for the purpose of renewing expiring franchise or franchises and ordinances granting same may include renewal of permits for as many tracks as may be expiring within one (1) calendar year. No notice of such application for renewal need be given except such as may be deemed necessary by the Department. (Ord. 79-488, § 1)

6913 Conflicting Improvements.
The City expressly reserves the right to relocate, change the grade of, pave, macadamize, sewer, or repave, remacadamize or resewer the street upon which the permit to construct said spur track is hereby granted, and to construct or lay storm drains, gas, water and other utility facilities and improvements under, across and in such street, such work to be done so as to injure said railroad as little as possible. (Ord. 79-488, § 1)

6914 Damage to Streets.
If any portion of any street shall be damaged by reason of facilities laid or constructed by the Franchisee under the franchise, the Franchisee shall, at its own expense, repair any such defect and put such street in as good condition as it was before such damage was incurred, and in accordance with the terms and conditions of the Highway Permit Ordinance and the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction (Building News, Inc.) in effect at that time. If such damage constitutes an immediate danger to the public health or safety requiring the immediate repair thereof, the City without notice may repair such damage and the Franchisee agrees to pay the reasonable cost thereof upon demand. This Section shall not apply to damage to the street caused by the construction work of the City or any other entity other than the Franchisee. (Ord. 79-488, § 1)

6915 Work on and Restoration of Streets.
The work of constructing, laying, replacing, maintaining, repairing or removing all tracks and appurtenances authorized under the provisions of this Chapter in, over, under, along or across any street shall be conducted with the least possible hindrance to the use of the street for purposes of travel, and as soon as such work is completed, all portions of the street which have been excavated or otherwise damaged thereby shall promptly and in a workmanlike manner be repaired, replaced or restored and placed in as good condition as the same was before the commencement of such work. Such restoration, repair or replacement work shall be done at the expense of the Franchisee, and in accordance with the terms and conditions of the Highway Permit Ordinance and the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction (Building News, Inc.) in effect at that time.

In the event that the Franchisee shall fail or neglect to make such highway repair, replacement, or restoration work, then ten (10) days after notice therefor has been given Franchisee by the Director, the City may repair, replace or restore said highway at the expense of Franchisee. Franchisee agrees to pay to the City the cost of performing such work. The amount so chargeable shall be the direct cost of such work plus the current rate of overhead being charged by the City for reimbursable work. (Ord. 79-488, § 1)

6916 Severability.
If any provision of this Chapter, and the application thereof, to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this Chapter shall not be affected thereby. If any provision of this Chapter is held invalid or beyond the scope of the authority of the City to impose, such provision shall be deemed ineffective. (Ord. 79-488, § 1)

CHAPTER 11
UTILITY USERS TAX
Sections:

§ 61101    Findings.

§ 61102    Purpose.

§ 61103    Definitions.

§ 61104    Exemptions – Limitations.

§ 61105    Electricity Users Tax.

§ 61106    Gas Users Tax.

§ 61107    Service Users Receiving Direct Purchase of Electricity or Gas.

§ 61108    Remittance of Tax.

§ 61109    Actions to Collect.

§ 61110    Duty to Collect – Procedures.

§ 61111    Additional Power and Duties of Tax Administrator.

§ 61112    Assessment – Service User Administrative Remedy.

§ 61113    Records.

§ 61114    Refunds.

§ 61115    Severability.

§ 61116    Amendment.

§ 61117    Operative Date.

§ 61118    Sunset Date.

§ 61119    Oversight Committee.

61101 Findings.
The City Council of the City of Carson finds and declares:

a. The City is facing a current budget crisis and must reduce law enforcement services, maintenance of the streets, sidewalks, alleys, trees and other property open to the public, as well as other community services vital to the preservation of the public peace, health, and safety.

b. The cost of supplies, materials and other services required to provide necessary City services increases each year, yet at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this Chapter, the State of California is proposing to reduce the level of funding allocated to local government.

c. It is the intention and understanding of the people that this measure shall be deemed a “general tax” and that it is not a “special tax” within the meaning of Section 4 of Article XIII A of the California Constitution by virtue of the fact that the proceeds of this tax are to be deposited in the General Fund of the City and are to be available to be used for any general governmental purpose that the City Council shall determine.

d. As soon as practical after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this Chapter, the City Council shall appoint a Citizens Oversight Committee which shall receive reports from the Tax Administrator at least annually on the implementation of this Chapter, the funds collected, and how funds collected are spent. The Citizens Oversight Committee, which may make recommendations to the City Council on any matter relating to this Chapter, shall hold all meetings in compliance with the Ralph M. Brown Act (California Government Code Section 54950, et seq.). (Ord. 09-1423, § 1; Ord. 16-1580, § 2)

61102 Purpose.
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish the methods for calculating a utility users tax on users of electric and gas utility services in the City and to establish standards for administration of the taxes. (Ord. 09-1423, § 1; Ord. 16-1580, § 2)

61103 Definitions.
The following words and phrases whenever used in this Chapter shall be construed as defined in this Section:

a. “Person” shall mean any domestic or foreign corporation, firm, association, syndicate, joint stock company, partnership of any kind, joint venture, club, business or common law trust, society, or individuals.

b. “City” shall mean the City of Carson.

c. “Gas” shall mean natural or manufactured gas or any alternate hydrocarbon fuel that may be substituted therefor.

d. “Electrical corporation” and “gas corporation” shall have the same meanings as defined in the California Public Utilities Code, except, “electrical corporation” and “gas corporation” shall also be construed to include any municipality, public agency or person engaged in the selling or supplying of electrical power or gas to a service user.

e. “Tax Administrator” shall mean the person designated by the City Manager to implement this Chapter.

f. “Service supplier” shall mean any entity required to collect or self-impose and remit a tax as imposed by this Chapter.

g. “Service user” shall mean a person required to pay a tax imposed by this Chapter.

h. “Month” shall mean a calendar month.

i. “Nonutility supplier” shall mean: (1) a service supplier, other than an electrical corporation serving within the City, which generates electrical energy in capacities of at least fifty (50) kilowatts for its own use or for sale to others; or (2) a gas supplier, other than a gas corporation, that sells or supplies gas to users within the City.

j. “Lower-income households” means persons and families whose incomes do not exceed the qualifying limits for lower-income families as determined and published by the California Department of Housing and Community Development. (See California Health and Safety Code Section 50079.5.) (Ord. 09-1423, § 1; Ord. 16-1580, § 2)

61104 Exemptions – Limitations.
a. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as imposing a tax upon any person when imposition of such tax upon that person would be in violation of the Constitution of the United States or that of the State of California.

b. The City Council may, by minute order or resolution, establish one or more classes of persons or one or more classes of utility service otherwise subject to payment of a tax imposed by this Chapter and provide that such classes of persons or service shall be exempt, in whole or in part, from such tax.

c. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, residential customers shall be exempt from the payment of any utility users tax if the household qualifies as any of the following: (1) households where the household resident whose name appears on the utility bill is age sixty-two (62) years and older or (2) lower-income households as defined in CMC 61103.

d. The Tax Administrator shall prepare a list of the persons exempt from the provisions of this Chapter by virtue of this Section and furnish a copy thereof to each service supplier. The Tax Administrator shall make the final determination as to the eligibility for any exemption.

e. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, no service user shall be required to pay more than $1,000,000 in electricity users tax, or gas users tax, or both combined, for service provided in any one (1) calendar year; provided, however, that the City Council may, by resolution duly adopted at a noticed public meeting, suspend this subsection for a period of twelve (12) consecutive calendar months commencing the day after the effective date of the resolution, upon making written finding(s) that the City of Carson will be required to lay off employees, and/or furlough employees, and/or be unable to fill allocated employee positions due to any fiscal crises as determined by the City Council in its sole discretion. (Ord. 09-1423, § 1; Ord. 10-1448-A, § 1; Ord. 16-1580, § 2)

61105 Electricity Users Tax.
a. There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person other than an electric or gas corporation using electrical energy in the City. The tax imposed by this Section shall be at the rate of not more than two (2) percent of the charges made for such energy by an electrical corporation providing service in the City and shall be billed to and paid by the person using the energy. The tax applicable to electrical energy provided by a nonutility supplier shall be determined by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charge the service user would have incurred if the energy used had been provided by the electrical corporation serving the residents of the City. Rate schedules for this purpose shall be available from the City. Nonutility suppliers shall install, maintain and use an appropriate utility-type metering system which will enable compliance with this Section. “Charges,” as used in this Section, shall include charges made for: (1) metered energy and (2) minimum charges for service, including customer charges, service charges, demand charges, standby charges, and all other annual and monthly charges, fuel or other costs adjustments, authorized by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.

b. As used in this Section, the term “using electrical energy” shall not be construed to mean the storage of such energy by a person in a battery owned or possessed by him or her for use in an automobile or other machinery device apart from the premises upon which the energy was received; provided, however, that the term shall include the receiving of such energy for the purpose of using it in the charging of batteries; nor shall the term include electricity used and consumed by an electric utility supplier in the conduct of its business; nor shall the term include the mere receiving of such energy by an electric corporation or governmental agency at a point within the City of Carson for resale; nor shall the term include the use of such energy in the production or distribution of water by a water utility or a governmental agency.

c. The tax imposed in this Section shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier or nonutility supplier. The tax imposed in this Section on use supplied by self-generation or from a nonutility supplier not subject to the jurisdiction of this Section, shall be collected and remitted to the Tax Administrator in the manner set forth in this Chapter or by order of the Tax Administrator. The amount of tax collected by a service supplier or a nonutility supplier in one (1) month shall be remitted by U.S. mail to the Tax Administrator, postmarked on or before the last day of the following month. (Ord. 09-1423, § 1; Ord. 16-1580, § 2)

61106 Gas Users Tax.
a. There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person in the City other than a gas corporation or electrical corporation, using, in the City, gas which is transported through mains or pipes or by mobile transport. The tax imposed by this Section shall be at the rate of not more than two (2) percent of the charges made for the gas and shall be billed to and paid by the person using the gas. The tax applicable to gas or gas transportation provided by nonutility suppliers shall be determined by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charges the service user would have incurred if the gas or gas transportation has been provided by the gas corporation franchised by the City. “Charges” as used in this Section shall include: (1) that billed for gas, which is delivered through mains or pipes; (2) gas transportation charges; and (3) demand charges, service charges, customer charges, minimum charges, annual and monthly charges, and any other charge authorized by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.

b. The tax otherwise imposed by this Section is not applicable to: (1) charges made for gas which is to be resold and delivered through mains and pipes; (2) charges made for gas used and consumed by a public utility or governmental agency in the conduct of its business; or (3) charges made by a gas public utility or gas used and consumed in the course of its public utility business; and (4) charges made for gas used in the propulsion of a motor vehicle, as authorized in the Vehicle Code of the State of California.

c. The tax imposed in this Section shall be collected from the service user by the person selling or transporting the gas. A person selling only transportation services to a user for delivery of gas through mains or pipes shall collect the tax from the service user based on the transportation charges. The person selling or transporting the gas shall, on or before the twentieth of each month after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Section, make a return to the Tax Administrator stating the amount of taxes billed during the preceding calendar month. At the time such returns are filed, the person selling or transporting the gas shall remit tax payments to the Tax Administrator in accordance with schedules established or approved by the Tax Administrator. The tax imposed in this Section on use supplied by self-production or a nonutility supplier not subject to the jurisdiction of this Chapter shall be collected and remitted to the Tax Administrator in the manner set forth in this Chapter or by order of the Tax Administrator. (Ord. 09-1423, § 1; Ord. 16-1580, § 2)

61107 Service Users Receiving Direct Purchase of Electricity or Gas.
a. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, a service user receiving gas or electricity directly from a nonutility supplier not under the jurisdiction of this Chapter, or otherwise not having the full tax due on the use of electricity or gas in the City directly billed and collected by the service supplier, shall report said fact to the Tax Administrator within thirty (30) days of said use and shall directly remit to the City the amount of tax due.

b. The Tax Administrator may require said service user to provide, subject to audit, filed tax returns or other satisfactory evidence documenting the quantity of electricity or gas used and the price thereof. (Ord. 09-1423, § 1; Ord. 16-1580, § 2)

61108 Remittance of Tax.
Taxes collected from a service user which are not remitted to the Tax Administrator on or before the due dates provided in this Chapter are delinquent. Should the due date occur on a weekend or legal holiday, the return may be postmarked on the first regular working day following a Saturday, Sunday, or a legal holiday. (Ord. 09-1423, § 1; Ord. 16-1580, § 2)

61109 Actions to Collect.
Any tax required to be paid by a service user under the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the service user to the City. Any such tax collected from a service user which has willfully been withheld from the Tax Administrator shall be deemed a debt owed to the City by the person required to collect and remit. Any person owing money to the City under the provisions of this Chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the City for the recovery of such amount. (Ord. 09-1423, § 1; Ord. 16-1580, § 2)

61110 Duty to Collect – Procedures.
The duty to collect and remit the taxes imposed by this Chapter shall be performed as follows:

a. Notwithstanding any other provision, the tax shall be collected insofar as practicable at the same time as and along with the charges made in accordance with the regular billing practices of the service supplier. Where the amount paid by a service user to a service supplier is less than the full amount of the service charge and tax which has accrued for the billing period, such amount and any subsequent payments by a service user shall be applied to the utility charge first until such charge has been fully satisfied. Any remaining balance shall be applied to taxes due.

b. The duty to collect tax from a service user shall commence with the beginning of the first full regular billing period applicable to the service user where all charges normally included in such regular billing are subject to the provisions of this Chapter. Where a person receives more than one billing, one or more being for different periods than another, the duty to collect shall arise separately for each billing. (Ord. 09-1423, § 1; Ord. 16-1580, § 2)

61111 Additional Power and Duties of Tax Administrator.
a. The Tax Administrator shall have the power and duty, and is hereby directed to enforce each and all of the provisions of this Chapter.

b. The Tax Administrator shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with provisions of this Chapter for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the taxes herein imposed. A copy of such rules and regulations shall be on file in the Tax Administrator’s office.

c. The Tax Administrator may make administrative agreements to vary the strict requirements of this Chapter so that collection of any tax imposed here may be made in conformance with the billing procedures of particular service supplier so long as said agreements result in collection of the tax in conformance with the general purpose and scope of this Chapter. A copy of each such agreement shall be on file in the Tax Administrator’s office.

d. The Tax Administrator shall determine the eligibility of any person who asserts a right to exemption from the tax imposed by this Chapter. The Tax Administrator shall provide the service supplier with the name of any person who the Tax Administrator determines is exempt from the tax imposed hereby, together with the address and account number to which service is supplied to any such exempt person. The Tax Administrator shall notify the service supplier of termination of any person’s right to exemption hereunder, or the change of any address to which service is supplied to any exempt person.

e. The Tax Administrator shall provide notice to all service suppliers, at least ninety (90) days prior to any annexation or other change in the City’s boundaries. Said notice shall set forth the revised boundaries by street and address, along with a copy of the final annexation order from LAFCO. (Ord. 09-1423, § 1; Ord. 16-1580, § 2)

61112 Assessment – Service User Administrative Remedy.
a. Whenever the Tax Administrator determines that a service user has deliberately withheld from the service supplier the amount of the tax owed by him or her, or that a service user has refused to pay the amount of tax, the service supplier may be relieved of the obligation to collect taxes due under this Chapter from certain named service users for specified billing periods as set forth below. The notice shall be served on the service user by handing it to him or her personally or by deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the service user at the address to which billing was mailed by the person required to collect the tax.

b. The service supplier shall provide the City with amounts refused and/or unpaid along with the names and addresses of the service users neglecting to pay the tax imposed under provisions of this Chapter. Whenever the service user has failed to pay the amount of tax for a period of two (2) or more billing periods, the service supplier may be relieved of the obligation to collect taxes due.

c. The Tax Administrator shall notify the service user that the Tax Administrator assumed responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods and demand payment of such taxes. The notice shall be served on the service user by handing it to him or her personally or by deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the service user at the address to which billing was mailed by the person required to collect the tax; or, should the service user’s address change, to the last known address. If a service user fails to remit the tax to the Tax Administrator within fifteen (15) days from the date of the service of the notice upon him or her, which shall be the date of mailing if service is not accomplished in person, a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the tax set forth in the notice shall be imposed. The penalty shall become part of the tax herein required to be paid. (Ord. 09-1423, § 1; Ord. 16-1580, § 2)

61113 Records.
It shall be the duty of every person required to collect and remit to the City any tax imposed by this Chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three (3) years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the remittance to the Tax Administrator, which records the Tax Administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. (Ord. 09-1423, § 1; Ord. 16-1580, § 2)

61114 Refunds.
a. Written Claim Required. Whenever the amount of any tax, interest, or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the Tax Administrator under this Chapter, it may be refunded as provided in this Section. However, any claim must be in writing, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, and filed with the Tax Administrator within fifteen (15) days of the day the claimed amount was paid. The claim shall be made on a form furnished by the Tax Administrator.

b. Refund or Credit. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this Section, a service supplier may claim a refund; or take as credit against taxes remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established that the service user from whom the tax has been collected did not owe the tax; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax erroneously or illegally collected has either been refunded to the service user or credited to charges subsequently payable by the service user to the person required to collect and remit. A service supplier that has collected any amount of tax in excess of the amount of tax imposed by this Chapter may refund such amount to the service user and may, with the prior written approval of the Tax Administrator, claim credit for such overpayment against the amount of tax that is due to the City; provided, that a claim for such credit is presented within the time and in the manner prescribed by this Code.

c. Taxes Refunded. Notwithstanding other provisions of this Section, whenever a service supplier, pursuant to an order of the California Public Utilities Commission or a court of competent jurisdiction, makes a refund to service users of charges for past utility services, the taxes paid pursuant to this Chapter on the amount of such refunded charges shall also be refunded to service users, and the service supplier shall be entitled to claim a credit for such refunded taxes against the amount of tax which is due upon the next monthly returns. In the event this Chapter is repealed, the amounts of any refundable taxes will be borne by the City. (Ord. 09-1423, § 1; Ord. 16-1580, § 2)

61115 Severability.
If any subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Chapter or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of this Chapter or any part thereof. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed each subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase be declared unconstitutional. (Ord. 09-1423, § 1; Ord. 16-1580, § 2)

61116 Amendment.
The tax rate set forth in this Chapter may only be amended by a vote of the people of the City of Carson; provided, however, that the City Council may otherwise amend this Chapter to achieve the purpose or intent of this Chapter. (Ord. 09-1423, § 1; Ord. 16-1580, § 2)

61117 Operative Date.
Under the provisions of Government Code Section 36937, this Chapter shall become effective immediately upon passage of the enacting ordinance. The tax imposed under this Chapter shall apply to bills rendered on or after ninety (90) days or as soon thereafter as the respective utilities are physically and mechanically able to get on line for the imposition of charges (not more than sixty (60) days). (Ord. 09-1423, § 1; Ord. 16-1580, § 2)

61118 Sunset Date.
The utility users tax described in this Chapter shall no longer be effective on July 1, 2023, and at such time this Chapter shall be repealed without further action, except that the provisions of this Chapter shall remain in effect as to any tax due and owing, but unpaid, as of July 1, 2023. (Ord. 09-1423, § 1; Ord. 16-1580, § 2)

61119 Oversight Committee.
As soon as practical after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this Chapter, the City Council shall appoint a Citizens Oversight Committee which shall receive reports from the Tax Administrator at least annually on the implementation of this Chapter, the funds collected, and how funds collected are spent. The Citizens Oversight Committee, which may make recommendations to the City Council on any matter relating to this Chapter, shall hold all meetings in compliance with the Ralph M. Brown Act. (California Government Code Section 54950, et seq.) (Ord. 09-1423, § 1; Ord. 16-1580, § 2)

CHAPTER 13
CANNABIS TAX
Sections:

§ 61300    Definitions.

§ 61310    Tax.

§ 61320    Operation.

§ 61330    Returns and Remittances.

§ 61340    Failure to Pay Tax.

§ 61350    Refunds.

§ 61360    Enforcement.

§ 61370    Debts – Deficiencies – Determinations – Hearings.

61300 Definitions.
The following definitions apply to this Chapter unless the context clearly denotes otherwise.

A. “Cannabis” has the same definition as provided for in Business and Professions Code Section 19300.5(f) for the term “cannabis,” and as may be amended.

B. “Cannabis products” means cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but not limited to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing cannabis or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients.

C. “Cultivation” means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis.

D. “Cultivation site” means any facility or location where cannabis is planted, grown, harvested, dried, cured, graded, or trimmed, or that does all or any combination of those activities.

E. “Director” means the Carson Director of Community and Economic Development, including his or her designee, or such person as may be appointed by the City Council.

F. “Finance Director” shall mean the Director of Finance of the City of Carson and her/his designee.

G. “Location” means any parcel of land, whether vacant or occupied by a building, group of buildings, or accessory buildings, and includes the buildings, structures, yards, open spaces, lot width, and lot area. Where contiguous parcels are under common ownership or control, such contiguous parcels shall be counted as a single “location.” For purposes of this Chapter, “premises” shall have the same meaning as “location.”

H. “Manufacturer” means a person that conducts the production, preparation, propagation, or compounding of cannabis or cannabis products either directly or indirectly or by extraction methods, or independently by means of chemical synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis at a fixed location that packages or repackages cannabis or cannabis products or labels or relabels its container.

I. “Manufacturer 1” means a manufacturer who manufactures cannabis products using nonvolatile solvents, or no solvents.

J. “Manufacturer 2” means a manufacturer who manufactures cannabis products using volatile solvents.

K. “Marijuana” has the same definition as provided in this Chapter for the term “cannabis.”

L. “Medical cannabis” means cannabis used for medical purposes in accordance with the Compassionate Use Act (Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5), the Medical Marijuana Program Act (Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.7 et seq.), and the Medical Marijuana Regulation and Safety Act of 2015.

M. “Medical cannabis dispensary” shall have the same meaning as Business and Professions Code Section 19300.5(n).

N. “Minor” means a person under eighteen (18) years of age.

O. “Nursery” means an operation that produces only clones, immature plants, seeds, and other agricultural products used specifically for the planting, propagation, and cultivation of cannabis.

P. “Operation” means an activity permitted by this Chapter, including the retail distribution, cultivation, manufacture, or testing of cannabis and cannabis products.

Q. “Permit” means a regulatory license issued pursuant to this Chapter, and such permit constitutes a “local permit, license, or other authorization” as used in Business and Professions Code Section 19320(a).

R. “Person” means any natural person, firm, corporation, partnership, club, or any association or combination of natural persons, whether acting by themselves or through any servant, agent or employee.

S. “Proceeds” means total revenue and/or money received through the sale of goods and/or services before any deductions or allowances (e.g., rent, cost of goods sold, taxes).

T. “Retailer” means an operation for the retail sale and delivery of cannabis or cannabis products to customers.

U. “Space utilized as cultivation area” shall mean any space or ground, floor or other surface area (whether horizontal or vertical) which is used during the cannabis germination, seedling, vegetative, pre-flowering, flowering and harvesting phases, including without limitation any space used for activities such as growing, planting, seeding, germinating, lighting, warming, cooling, aerating, fertilizing, watering, irrigating, topping, pinching, cropping, curing or drying cannabis or any such space used for storing any products, supplies or equipment related to any such activities, no matter where such storage may take place or such storage space may be located.

V. “Term” means a calendar month in regard to the monthly taxation of proceeds from an operation for the manufacture or testing of cannabis; and means the fiscal year in regard to the annual taxation of the space utilized as cultivation area for cannabis.

W. “Testing” means to perform tests on cannabis or cannabis products pursuant to a valid certificate of accreditation from the State of California for such operations. (Ord. 16-1599, § 1)

61310 Tax.
A. Cannabis Cultivation Tax. Every person cultivating cannabis in the City, either pursuant to this Code or otherwise, and regardless of whether such operation has a valid permit pursuant to this Code, shall pay an annual maximum tax of $25.00 per square foot for space utilized as cultivation area. Taxes imposed on cultivation area shall be adjusted annually on July 1st after the date of imposition, and then July 1st of each succeeding year based on the Consumer Price Index (“CPI”) for all urban consumers in the Los Angeles-Riverside-Orange County areas as published by the United States Government Bureau of Labor Statistics; however, no adjustment shall decrease any tax imposed by this Chapter, unless approved by the City Council.

B. Cannabis Operations Tax. Every person engaged in conducting an operation for the retail or wholesale distribution, cultivation, manufacture, transportation (including delivery), or testing of cannabis, either pursuant to the Carson Municipal Code or otherwise, and regardless of whether such operation has a valid permit pursuant to the Carson Municipal Code, shall pay a maximum cannabis tax of eighteen (18) percent of proceeds or fractional part thereof. (Ord. 16-1599, § 1)

61320 Operation.
A. Failure to pay the taxes set forth in this Chapter shall be subject to penalties, interest charges, and determinations of tax due as the City Council may establish and the City may use any or all other enforcement remedies provided for in this Code, or pursuant to State law.

B. The City Council may impose the tax authorized by this Chapter at a lower rate and may establish exemptions, incentives, or other reductions, and penalties and interest charges or determinations of tax due for failure to pay the tax in a timely manner, as otherwise allowed by Code or California law. No action by the Council under this Section shall prevent it from later increasing the tax or removing any exemption, incentive, or reduction, and restoring the maximum tax specified in this Chapter.

C. The payment of the tax required pursuant to this Chapter shall not be construed as authorizing the conduct or continuance of any illegal business or of a legal business in an illegal manner. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to authorize cannabis operations.

D. Taxes provided for hereunder are not sales or use taxes and shall not be calculated or assessed as such. The taxes shall not be separately identified or otherwise specifically assessed or charged to any individual member, consumer or customer; rather, the taxes are imposed upon the cannabis operation.

E. The Finance Director shall promulgate rules, regulations, and procedures to implement and administer this Chapter to ensure the efficient and timely collection of the tax imposed by this Chapter, including, without limitation, formulation and implementation of penalties and interest to be assessed for failure to pay the tax as provided. (Ord. 16-1599, § 1)

61330 Returns and Remittances.
The tax shall be due and payable as follows:

A. Each person owing tax, on or before the last business day of each term as established by the Finance Director, shall prepare a tax return to the Finance Director of the total proceeds, and the amount of tax owed for the preceding term. At the time the tax return is filed, the full amount of the tax owed for the preceding term shall be remitted to the City.

B. All tax returns shall be completed on forms provided by the Finance Director.

C. Tax returns and payments for all outstanding taxes owed the City are immediately due the Finance Director upon cessation of business for any reason.

D. Whenever any payment, statement, report, request or other communication received by the Finance Director is received after the time prescribed by this Section for the receipt thereof, but is in an envelope bearing a postmark showing that it was mailed on or prior to the date prescribed in this Section for the receipt thereof, or whenever the Finance Director is furnished substantial proof that the payment, statement, report, request, or other communication was in fact deposited in the United States mail on or prior to the date prescribed for receipt thereof, the Finance Director may regard such payment, statement, report, request, or other communication as having been timely received. If the due day falls on Friday, Saturday, Sunday, or a Federal holiday, the due day shall be the last regular business day on which the City Hall is open to the public prior to the due date.

E. Unless otherwise specifically provided under other provisions of this Chapter, the taxes required to be paid pursuant to this Chapter shall be deemed delinquent if not paid on or before the due date specified by this Section.

F. The Finance Director is not required to send a delinquency or other notice or bill to any person subject to the provisions of this Chapter, and failure to send such notice or bill shall not affect the validity of any tax or penalty due under the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 16-1599, § 1)

61340 Failure to Pay Tax.
Any person who fails or refuses to pay any tax required to be paid pursuant to this Chapter on or before the due date shall pay penalties and interest as follows:

A. A penalty equal to twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax, plus interest on the unpaid tax calculated from the due date of the tax at a rate established by resolution of the City Council; and an additional penalty equal to twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the tax if the tax remains unpaid for a period exceeding one (1) calendar month beyond the due date, plus interest on the unpaid tax and interest on the unpaid penalties calculated at the rate established by resolution of the City Council.

B. Whenever a check is submitted in payment of a tax and the check is subsequently returned unpaid by the bank upon which the check is drawn, and the check is not redeemed prior to the due date, the taxpayer will be liable for the tax amount due plus penalties and interest as provided for in this Section plus any amount allowed under State law.

C. The tax due shall be that amount due and payable from the operative date of this Chapter.

D. The Finance Director may waive the first and second penalties of twenty-five (25) percent each imposed upon any person if:

1. The person provides evidence satisfactory to the Finance Director that failure to pay timely was due to circumstances beyond the control of the person and occurred notwithstanding the exercise of ordinary care and the absence of willful neglect, and the person paid the delinquent business tax and accrued interest owed the City prior to applying to the Finance Director for a waiver.

2. The waiver provisions specified in this subsection shall not apply to interest accrued on the delinquent tax and a waiver shall be granted only once during any twenty-four (24) month period for taxation of proceeds, and only once during any five (5) year period for taxation of space utilized as cultivation area for cultivation of cannabis. (Ord. 16-1599, § 1)

61350 Refunds.
A. No refund shall be made of any tax collected pursuant to this Chapter, except as provided in this Section.

B. No refund of any tax collected pursuant to this Chapter shall be made because of the discontinuation, dissolution, or other termination of an operation.

C. Any person entitled to a refund of taxes paid pursuant to this Chapter may elect in writing to have such refund applied as a credit against cannabis taxes for the next term.

D. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty, or interest has been overpaid, paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City under this Chapter, such amount may be refunded to the claimant who paid the tax; provided, that a written claim for refund is filed with the Finance Director.

E. The Finance Director shall have the right to examine and audit all the books and business records of the claimant in order to determine the eligibility of the claimant to the claimed refund. No claim for refund shall be allowed if the claimant therefor refuses to allow such examination of claimant’s books and business records after request by the Finance Director to do so.

F. In the event that the tax was erroneously paid and the error is attributable to the City, the entire amount of the tax erroneously paid shall be refunded to the claimant. If the error is attributable to the claimant, the City shall retain the amount set forth in this Chapter from the amount to be refunded to cover expenses.

G. The Finance Director shall initiate a refund of any tax which has been overpaid or erroneously collected whenever the overpayment or erroneous collection is uncovered by a City audit of tax receipts. In the event that the tax was erroneously paid and the error is attributable to the City, the entire amount of the tax erroneously paid shall be refunded to the claimant. If the error is attributable to the claimant, the City shall retain the amount set forth in this Chapter from the amount to be refunded to cover expenses. (Ord. 16-1599, § 1)

61360 Enforcement.
A. It shall be the duty of the Finance Director to enforce each and all of the provisions of this Chapter.

B. For purposes of administration and enforcement of this Chapter generally, the Finance Director, with the assistance of the City Attorney, may from time to time promulgate administrative rules and regulations.

C. The Finance Director shall have the power to audit and examine all books and records of operations as well as persons engaged in the conducting of an operation, including both State and Federal income tax returns, California sales tax returns, logs, receipts, bank records, or other evidence documenting the gross receipts of the operation, or persons engaged in the conduct of an operation, for the purpose of ascertaining the amount of tax, if any, required to be paid by the provisions of this Chapter, and for the purpose of verifying any statements or any item thereof when filed by any person pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. If such operations or person, after written demand by the Finance Director, refuses to make available for audit, examination or verification such books, records, or equipment as the Finance Director requests, the Finance Director may, after full consideration of all information within the Finance Director’s knowledge concerning the operation and activities of the person so refusing, make a determination of tax due in the manner provided in CMC 61370.

D. The conviction and punishment of any person for failure to pay the required tax shall not excuse or exempt such person from any civil action for the tax debt unpaid at the time of such conviction. No civil action shall prevent a criminal prosecution for any violation of the provisions of this Chapter or of any State law requiring the payment of all taxes.

E. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter or any regulation or rule passed in accordance herewith, or knowingly or intentionally misrepresenting to any officer or employee of the City any material fact in procuring permits from the City as provided for in this Chapter, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 16-1599, § 1)

61370 Debts – Deficiencies – Determinations – Hearings.
A. The amount of any tax, penalties, and interest imposed by the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed a debt to the City and any person conducting an operation without also making payment to the City of the taxes imposed by this Chapter shall be liable in an action in the name of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of the tax, and penalties and interest imposed on such operation.

B. If the Finance Director is not satisfied that any statement filed as required under the provisions of this Chapter is correct, or that the amount of tax is correctly computed, the Finance Director may compute and determine the amount to be paid and make a deficiency determination upon the basis of the facts contained in the statement or upon the basis of any information in his or her possession or that may come into his or her possession. One (1) or more deficiency determinations of the amount of tax due for a period or periods may be made. When a person discontinues engaging in an operation, a deficiency determination may be made at any time within three (3) years thereafter as to any liability arising from engaging in such business, whether or not a deficiency determination is issued prior to the date the tax would otherwise be due.

C. Under any of the following circumstances, the Finance Director may make and give notice of a determination of the amount of tax owed by a person under this Chapter:

1. If the person has not filed any statement or return required under the provisions of this Chapter.

2. If the person has not paid any tax due under the provisions of this Chapter.

3. If the person has not, after demand by the Finance Director, filed a corrected statement or return, or furnished to the Finance Director adequate substantiation of the information contained in a statement or return already filed, or paid any additional amount of tax due under the provisions of this Chapter.

4. If the Finance Director determines that the nonpayment of any tax due under this Chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to penalties and interest otherwise stated in this Chapter.

5. The notice of determination shall separately set forth the amount of any tax known by the Finance Director to be due or estimated by the Finance Director, after consideration of all information within the Finance Director’s knowledge concerning the business and activities of the person assessed, to be due under each applicable section of this Chapter, and shall include the amount of any penalties or interest accrued on each amount to the date of the notice of determination.

6. The notice of determination shall be served upon the person either by handing it to him or her personally, or by a deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the person at the address of the location of the business appearing on the face of the business tax certificate issued under this Code or to such other address as he or she shall register with the Finance Director for the purpose of receiving notices provided under this Chapter; or, should the person have no business tax certificate issued and should the person have no address registered with the Finance Director for such purpose, then to such person’s last known address. For the purposes of this Section, a service by mail is complete at the time of deposit in the United States mail.

D. Within ten (10) days after the date of service of a determination of the amount of tax owed by a person under this Chapter, the person may apply in writing to the Finance Director for a hearing on the determination. If application for a hearing before the City is not timely made, the tax assessed by the Finance Director shall become final. The procedures for such a hearing shall be conducted as required by law and as follows:

1. The City Council delegates its authority to conduct such a hearing on the determination to an independent hearing officer. The compensation of the hearing officer shall not depend on any particular outcome of the appeal. The hearing officer shall have full authority and duty to preside over the hearing on the determination in the manner set forth herein and as required by law.

2. Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of any such application for hearing, the Finance Director shall cause the matter to be set for hearing before the independent hearing officer, unless a later date is agreed to by the Finance Director and the person requesting the hearing.

3. Notice of the hearing shall be given by the Finance Director to the person requesting the hearing not later than five (5) days prior to the date of the hearing. For good cause, the hearing officer may continue the administrative hearing from time to time. At the hearing, the applicant may appear and offer evidence to show why the determination as made by the Finance Director should not be confirmed and fixed as the tax due. In conducting the hearing, the hearing officer shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. Failure of the person who applied for a hearing on the determination to appear shall not affect the validity of the proceedings or order issued thereon.

4. Upon conclusion of the hearing, or no later than ten (10) days after the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall determine and reassess the proper tax to be charged and shall give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed in this Chapter for giving notice of determination, and the hearing officer shall submit its decision and the record to the City Clerk. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. (Ord. 16-1599, § 1)

CHAPTER 15
COMMERCIAL CANNABIS OPERATIONS REGULATORY PROGRAM
Sections:

615010    Purpose and Intent.

615020    Commercial Cannabis Operation Prohibited without City Permit.

615030    Definitions.

615040    Prohibited Commercial Cannabis Operations.

615050    Permitted Commercial Cannabis Operations.

615060    Commercial Cannabis Operation Permit.

615070    Applications for Commercial Cannabis Operation Permit.

615080    Review of Commercial Cannabis Operation Permit Application.

615090    Issuance of Commercial Cannabis Operation Permit.

615100    Development Agreement.

615110    Renewal of Commercial Cannabis Operation Permit.

615120    General Operating Standards and Restrictions.

615130    Cultivation Operating Standards and Restrictions.

615140    Testing Operating Standards and Restrictions.

615150    Wholesale Distribution Operating Standards and Restrictions.

615160    Manufacturing Operating Standards and Restrictions.

615170    Delivery Operating Standards and Restrictions.

615180    Administration.

615190    Fees.

615200    Suspension and Revocation.

615210    Violations and Penalties – Public Nuisance.

615220    Service of Notices.

615230    Prohibitions.

615240    Nonconforming Use.

615250    Severability.

615010 Purpose and Intent.
A. The purpose of this Chapter is to establish a comprehensive set of regulations with an attendant regulatory permit applicable to the operation of certain types of commercial cannabis operations, while simultaneously establishing an express prohibition on certain other types of commercial cannabis operations.

B. The regulations for, and prohibitions on, specific types of commercial cannabis operations are enacted to preserve the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents and visitors of the City of Carson, consistent with California’s Compassionate Use Act of 1996, California’s Medical Marijuana Program Act of 2003, the Adult Use of Marijuana Act of 2016 (AUMA) (Proposition 64), the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act of 2017 (MAUCRSA) and all applicable State laws governing commercial cannabis activities.

C. The issuance of a commercial cannabis operation permit shall constitute a revocable privilege and shall not create or establish any vested rights for the development or use of a property.

D. This Chapter is not intended to permit activities that are otherwise illegal under Federal, State or local law. This Chapter is not intended to conflict with Federal or State law.

E. This Chapter and its regulations shall be known as the “Commercial Cannabis Operations Regulatory Program.” (Ord. 17-1637, § 2)

615020 Commercial Cannabis Operation Prohibited without City Permit.
It shall be unlawful to own, establish, operate, use, or permit the establishment or activity of a commercial cannabis operation, or to participate in commercial cannabis operations as an employee, contractor, agent, volunteer, or in any manner or capacity, other than as provided in this Chapter and pursuant to both a current and valid City of Carson commercial cannabis operation permit and other requirements under this Chapter, as well as the equivalent State license for such commercial cannabis operation as provided for by Business and Professions Code Section 26050, and as amended. The prohibition contained in this Section shall include renting, leasing, or otherwise permitting a commercial cannabis operation to occupy or use a location, vehicle, or other mode of transportation. (Ord. 17-1637, § 2)

615030 Definitions.
As used in this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:

A. “Adult use” (i.e., “recreational” or “non-medical”) refers to activity involving cannabis or cannabis products, which is restricted to adults twenty-one (21) years of age and older and who do not possess a physician’s recommendation, in contrast to an activity involving medical cannabis or medical cannabis products.

B. “Applicant” means a person who files an application for a permit under this Chapter.

C. “Batch” means a specific quantity of homogeneous cannabis or cannabis product that is one (1) of the following types: (1) Harvest batch. “Harvest batch” means a specifically identified quantity of dried flower or trim, leaves, and other cannabis plant matter that is uniform in strain, harvested at the same time, and, if applicable, cultivated using the same pesticides and other agricultural chemicals, and harvested at the same time. (2) Manufactured cannabis batch. “Manufactured cannabis batch” means either of the following: (A) An amount of cannabis concentrate or extract that is produced in one (1) production cycle using the same extraction methods and standard operating procedures. (B) An amount of a type of manufactured cannabis produced in one production cycle using the same formulation and standard operating procedures.

D. “Cannabis” means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. “Cannabis” also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. “Cannabis” does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination.

E. “Cannabis concentrate” means cannabis that has undergone a process to concentrate one (1) or more active cannabinoids, thereby increasing the product’s potency. Resin from granular trichomes from a cannabis plant is a concentrate for purposes of this Chapter. A cannabis concentrate is not considered food, as defined by Health and Safety Code Section 109935, or a drug, as defined by Health and Safety Code Section 109925.

F. “Cannabis Permit Committee” is composed of the Director of Community Development (Director), the Police Captain, the Fire Captain, the Finance Director, the City Manager, a medical cannabis specialist, a community member, and a representative from the Los Angeles County Public Health Department (or an equivalent member if no such representative is available).

G. “Cannabis products” means cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including but not limited to concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing cannabis or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients.

H. “City Attorney” means the City of Carson City Attorney, and includes his/her designee(s).

I. “City Manager” means the City of Carson City Manager, and includes his/her designee(s).

J. “City Prosecutor” means the City of Carson City Prosecutor, and includes his/her designee(s).

K. “Commercial cannabis operation” includes the cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, packaging, labeling, transportation, delivery, or sale (including retail and wholesale) of cannabis and cannabis products; except, as applicable, as set forth in Chapter 17 (Personal Cultivation of Cannabis) of Article VI or as preempted by State law.

L. “Commercial cannabis operation permit” shall mean a City of Carson permit issued pursuant to the procedures provided for in this Chapter and which shall allow the permit holder to operate a specific type of commercial cannabis operation in the City of Carson subject to the requirements of this Chapter, State law, and the specific permit.

M. “Cultivation” means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis.

N. “Day care center” means, as the term is understood by Business and Professions Code Section 26001(o), and as may be amended, any child day care facility other than a family day care home, and includes infant centers, preschools, extended day care facilities, and school-age child care centers.

O. “Delivery” means the commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products to a customer, and includes the use of any technology platform owned and controlled by the same person making such use.

P. “Director” means the City of Carson Community Development Director, and includes his/her designee(s).

Q. “Distribution” means the procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis and cannabis products between entities licensed for and/or engaged in commercial cannabis activities.

R. “Distributor” means a person engaged in distribution.

S. “Edible” means cannabis product that is intended to be used, in whole or in part, for human consumption, including, but not limited to, chewing gum, but excluding products set forth in Food and Agricultural Code Division 15 (commencing with Section 32501). An edible cannabis product is not considered food, as defined by Health and Safety Code Section 109935, or a drug, as defined by Health and Safety Code Section 109925.

T. “Employee” means any person (whether paid or unpaid) who provides regular labor or regular services for a commercial cannabis operation, including, but not limited to, at the location of a commercial cannabis operation. The term “employee” includes managers and owners as used in this Chapter.

U. “Extraction” means the process of obtaining cannabis concentrates from cannabis plants, including but not limited to through the use of solvents like butane, alcohol or carbon dioxide.

V. “Finance Director” means the City of Carson Finance Director, and includes his/her designees.

W. “Fire Captain” means the individual designated by the Los Angeles County Fire Department to oversee Fire Department operations in the City of Carson, and includes his/her designee(s).

X. “Fire Department” means the Los Angeles County Fire Department which is under contract with the City of Carson for fire services, as provided for through various stations of the Los Angeles County Fire Department.

Y. “Hotel” means an establishment providing accommodations, restaurants, and other services for travelers and tourists and which has a substantial presence, capacity and service (e.g., the Carson Hilton Doubletree) so as to distinguish it from a motel which does not provide the same features.

Z. “Identification card” has the same definition as provided for in Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7(g), and as may be amended, defined as “a document issued by the [State Department of Health Services] that identifies a person authorized to engage in the medical use of cannabis and the person’s designated primary caregiver, if any.”

AA. “Indoor” in the context of commercial cultivation refers to cultivation using exclusively artificial lighting and no natural lighting.

BB. “Labeling” means any label or other written, printed, or graphic matter upon cannabis or a cannabis product, upon its container or wrapper, or that accompanies any cannabis or cannabis product.

CC. “Library” means a place open to the general public in which literary, musical, artistic, or reference materials (such as books, manuscripts, recordings, or films) are kept for use by, and lending to, the general public, but not for sale to the general public.

DD. “Lighting” means the act of illuminating as well as the effect achieved by the arrangement of lights.

EE. “Live scan” means a system for inkless electronic fingerprinting and the automated background check developed by the California Department of Justice (DOJ) which involves digitizing fingerprints and electronically transmitting the fingerprint image data along with personal descriptor information to computers at the DOJ for completion of a criminal record check; or such other comparable inkless electronic fingerprinting and automated background check process as determined by the City Council.

FF. “Location” means any parcel of land, whether vacant or occupied by a building, group of buildings, or accessory buildings, and includes the buildings, structures, yards, open spaces, lot width, and lot area.

GG. “Manager” means an employee responsible for management and/or supervision of a commercial cannabis operation.

HH. “Manufacture” or “manufacturing” means to compound, blend, extract, infuse, or otherwise make or prepare a cannabis product; includes the activities of a manufacturer.

II. “Manufacturer” means a person that conducts the production, preparation, propagation, or compounding of cannabis or cannabis products either directly or indirectly or by extraction methods, or independently by means of chemical synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis at a fixed location that packages or repackages cannabis or cannabis products or labels or relabels its container; includes the activity of manufacturing.

JJ. “Marijuana” has the same definition as provided for “cannabis” in this Chapter.

KK. “Medical” refers to activity involving medical cannabis or medical cannabis products, in contrast to an activity involving adult-use cannabis or adult-use cannabis products.

LL. “Medical cannabis” or “medical cannabis product” means cannabis or a cannabis product used in compliance with State law for medical purposes, pursuant to the Compassionate Use Act (Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5), the Medical Marijuana Program Act (Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7, et seq.), and the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act (Business and Professions Code Section 26000, et seq.).

MM. “Merit List” shall refer to the criteria listed in CMC 615080(G).

NN. “Microbusiness” shall have the same definition as provided for in Business and Professions Code Section 26070, and as may be amended.

OO. “Minor” means a person under twenty-one (21) years of age.

PP. “Mixed-light” in the context of commercial cultivation refers to cultivation using a combination of natural and supplemental artificial lighting.

QQ. “Nursery” means a person that produces indoors or mixed-light (not outdoors) only clones, immature plants, seeds, and other agricultural products used specifically for the planting, propagation, and cultivation of cannabis.

RR. “Operations Officer(s)” shall refer to the Director, the Fire Captain, the Police Captain, the Finance Director, the City Manager, the City Prosecutor and the Public Safety Manager, individually or collectively.

SS. “Outdoor” in the context of commercial cultivation refers to cultivation using exclusively natural lighting and no artificial lighting.

TT. “Owner” means the owner of a commercial cannabis operation.

UU. “Package” means any container or receptacle used for holding cannabis or cannabis products.

VV. “Packaging” or “packages” means an activity involved with placing cannabis or cannabis products in a package.

WW. “Park” means public land which has been designated for park or recreational activities by the City of Carson or the County of Los Angeles.

XX. “Permittee” means a person issued a Commercial Cannabis Operation Permit by the City of Carson.

YY. “Person” means any individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

ZZ. “Person with an identification card” has the same definition as provided for in Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7(c), and as may be amended, defined as “an individual who is a qualified patient who has applied for and received a valid identification card pursuant to this article.”

AAA. “Physician’s recommendation” means a determination from a physician that a patient’s medical cannabis use is deemed appropriate and is recommended by the physician on the basis of the physician has determined that the patient’s health would benefit from the use of cannabis in the treatment of cancer, anorexia, AIDS, chronic pain, spasticity, glaucoma, arthritis, migraine, or any other illness for which cannabis provides relief, in strict accordance with the Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (Proposition 215), and as understood by Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5.

BBB. “Police Captain” means the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department Captain in command of the Carson Station of the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department, and includes his/her designee(s).

CCC. “Police Department” means the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department which is under contract with the City of Carson for police services, as provided for through the Carson Station of the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department.

DDD. “Premises” means a single parcel of property. Where contiguous parcels are under common ownership or control, such contiguous parcels shall be counted as a single “premises.”

EEE. “Primary caregiver” has the same definition as provided for in Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7(d), and as may be amended, including being “the individual, designated by a qualified patient or by a person with an identification card, who has consistently assumed responsibility for the housing, health, or safety of that patient or person.” A “primary caregiver” shall also meet the requirements of Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7(e), and as may be amended, which provide that a “primary caregiver shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age, unless the primary caregiver is the parent of a minor child who is a qualified patient or a person with an identification card or the primary caregiver is a person otherwise entitled to make medical decisions under State law pursuant to Sections 6922, 7002, 7050, or 7120 of the Family Code.”

FFF. “Public Safety Manager” means the City of Carson Public Safety Manager and includes his/her designee(s).

GGG. “Qualified patient” has the same definition as provided for in Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7(f), and as may be amended, defined as “a person who is entitled to the protections of Section 11362.5, but who does not have an identification card issued pursuant to this Article.”

HHH. “Regional shopping mall” means a commercial retail center with a regional customer base in which multiple buildings form a complex of retail businesses with interconnecting pedestrian walkways, including the SouthBay Pavilion regional shopping mall.

III. “Retailer” means a person engaged in the retail sale or delivery of cannabis or cannabis products to a customer.

JJJ. “School” means, as the term is understood by Business and Professions Code Section 26054(b), and as may be amended, as a place of instruction in kindergarten or any grades one (1) through twelve (12).

KKK. “Site” means the premises and actual physical location of a commercial cannabis operation, as well as its accessory structures and parking areas.

LLL. “Testing laboratory” or “testing” refers to a laboratory, facility, or entity that offers or performs tests on cannabis or cannabis products; includes the activity of laboratory testing.

MMM. “Youth center” means, as the term is understood by Business and Professions Code Section 26001(av), and as may be amended, any public or private facility that is primarily used to host recreational or social activities for minors, including, but not limited to, private youth membership organizations or clubs, social service teenage club facilities, video arcades, or similar amusement park facilities. (Ord. 17-1637, § 2)

615040 Prohibited Commercial Cannabis Operations.
A. Commercial cannabis operations (including nonprofit operations) within the City which involve the activities of outdoor cultivation, retailer, or microbusiness are prohibited, including but not limited to commercial cannabis activities licensed by the State license classifications listed below as provided in Business and Professions Code Section 26050:

1. Type 1 = Cultivation; Specialty outdoor; Small.

2. Type 1C = Cultivation; Specialty cottage; Small.

3. Type 2 = Cultivation; Outdoor; Small.

4. Type 3 = Cultivation; Outdoor; Medium.

5. Type 5 = Cultivation; Outdoor; Large.

6. Type 10 = Retailer.

7. Type 12 = Microbusiness.

B. The prohibition provided by subsection (A) of this Section includes any similar activities authorized under new or revised State licenses, or any other State authorization, to allow any type, category or classification of cannabis commercial activities which involve the aforementioned activities or similar operations (including nonprofit, collective or cooperative operations). (Ord. 17-1637, § 2)

615050 Permitted Commercial Cannabis Operations.
A. Commercial cannabis operations (including nonprofit operations) within the City, at four (4) California-licensed cannabis centers, which comprise the activities of indoor cultivation, mixed-light cultivation, manufacturer, testing or distributor, are allowed subject to issuance and maintenance of a valid and current City commercial cannabis operation permit, other requirements under this Chapter, continuing adherence to this entire Chapter and all applicable City and State regulations and laws, and issuance and maintenance of a valid and current equivalent State license type listed below, as provided for in Business and Professions Code Section 26050:

1. Type 1A = Cultivation; Specialty indoor; Small.

2. Type 1B = Cultivation; Specialty mixed-light; Small.

3. Type 2A = Cultivation; Indoor; Small.

4. Type 2B = Cultivation; Mixed-light; Small.

5. Type 3A = Cultivation; Indoor; Medium.

6. Type 3B = Cultivation; Mixed-light; Medium.

7. Type 4 = Cultivation; Nursery.

8. Type 5A = Cultivation; Indoor; Large.

9. Type 5B = Cultivation; Mixed-light; Large.

10. Type 6 = Manufacturer 1.

11. Type 7 = Manufacturer 2.

12. Type 8 = Testing.

13. Type 11 = Distributor.

B. The requirements provided by subsection (A) of this Section apply to any similar activities authorized under new or revised State licenses, or any other State authorization, to allow any type, category or classification of cannabis commercial activities which involve the aforementioned activities, or similar operations (including nonprofit, collective or cooperative operations).

C. The California-licensed cannabis centers shall be limited to four (4) in total, with two (2) centers available for entitlements under this Code immediately, and then two (2) centers available for entitlements under this Code within six (6) months thereafter. (Ord. 17-1637, § 2)

615060 Commercial Cannabis Operation Permit.
A. Prior to initiating operation as a commercial cannabis operation and as a continuing requisite to conducting operations, the owner of a commercial cannabis operation shall obtain a regulatory permit from the City under the terms and conditions set forth in this Chapter.

B. Issuance of a commercial cannabis operation permit is governed by a two (2) step procedure (as provided for in more detail in CMC 615080 and 615090).

1. The first step (as provided for in CMC 615080) is as follows:

a. Review by the Director to determine whether an applicant meets the minimum qualifications for a commercial cannabis operation permit, such minimum qualifications being the requirements of this Chapter, the Carson Municipal Code, and applicable State law.

b. If the Director makes a positive determination, then the application will be deemed compliant, and the Cannabis Permit Committee will review the thoroughness of applicant’s adherence to Merit List criteria specified in CMC 615080(G). Upon conclusion of this review, the Cannabis Permit Committee shall make a recommendation to the City Council as to whether or not a permit should be issued. The recommendation shall articulate in writing reasons for the recommendation and refer to Merit List criteria.

2. The second step (as provided for in CMC 615090) is review by the City Council of Cannabis Permit Committee recommendations at a properly noticed public meeting of the City Council, and then a decision on whether a permit will or will not be issued. The reasons for the decision shall be articulated in writing and refer to Merit List criteria specified in CMC 615080(G). The decision shall be final and nonappealable.

C. Commercial cannabis operation permits issued pursuant to this Chapter shall automatically expire one (1) year from the date of issuance, unless provided for otherwise.

D. Conditions necessary for the continuing validity of a commercial cannabis operation permit include:

1. Strict adherence to each and every requirement of this Chapter, as well as any requirements, including administrative regulations, adopted by the City pursuant to the authority of this Chapter.

2. Maintaining a current and valid State license pursuant to Business and Professions Code Division 10, and as amended. Revocation, suspension or expiration of the State license shall automatically invalidate the equivalent City commercial cannabis operation permit.

3. Allowing Operations Officers to conduct reasonable random inspections of the location of the commercial cannabis operation at the discretion of the City, including but not limited to inspection of security, inventory, and written records and files pertaining to the commercial cannabis operation, for the purposes of ensuring compliance with local and State law.

4. Maintaining with the City current and valid contact information of the owner(s) and manager(s) of the commercial cannabis operation.

5. Maintaining with the City current and valid contact information of a legal representative of the commercial cannabis operation.

6. Transferable only if transferee successfully completes all of the requirements that a new applicant for a commercial cannabis operation permit would otherwise need to meet. (Ord. 17-1637, § 2)

615070 Applications for Commercial Cannabis Operation Permit.
A. The owner of a proposed commercial cannabis operation shall file an application with the Director upon a form provided by the City and shall pay a filing fee as established by resolution adopted by the City Council, as may be amended from time to time.

B. An application for a commercial cannabis operation permit shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:

1. Business.

a. Activities. A general description of the proposed operation, including how the proposed operation will operate in compliance with this Code and State law, plans for handling cash and transporting cannabis and cannabis products to and from the premises, and the proposed use of all areas on the premises, including but not limited to specific activities, storage, lighting and signage.

b. Security. A security plan detailing measures to the satisfaction of the Director that all applicable security-related requirements under State or local law, including but not limited to the requirements of CMC 615120(B), are and will be met.

c. Odor Control. An odor control plan detailing odor control measures in accordance with CMC 615120(C), to the satisfaction of the Director.

d. Ownership. A description of the statutory entity or business form that will serve as the legal structure for the applicant, the ownership structure of the applicant as filed with the California Secretary of State (e.g., limited liability company, joint partnership, S-Corporation) (an applicant that is a foreign corporation shall include in its application the certificate of qualification issued by the Secretary of State of California), and a copy of the entity’s formation and organizing documents, including, but not limited to, articles of incorporation, certificate of amendment, statement of information, articles of association, bylaws, partnership agreement, operating agreement, and fictitious business name statement.

e. Seller’s Permit. The seller’s permit number issued by the Board of Equalization or evidence that the applicant has applied for a seller’s permit from the Board of Equalization, as applicable.

f. Other Licenses and Permits. Identification of any other licenses or permits for commercial cannabis operations, whether for the City of Carson or for any other licensing or permitting authority:

i. Held currently by the applicant;

ii. Pending approval for the applicant; or

iii. Denied to, revoked from or suspended for the applicant.

g. Physical. A general description of the proposed operation, including the street address, parcel number, the total square footage of the site, and the characteristics of the surrounding area.

h. Floor Plan. A scaled floor plan for each level of each building that is part of the business site, including the entrances, exits, walls, and operating areas. The floor plan must be professionally prepared by a licensed civil engineer or architect.

i. Site Plan. A scaled site plan of the business site, that will include at a minimum all buildings, structures, driveways, parking lots, landscape areas, and boundaries. The site plan must be professionally prepared by a licensed civil engineer or architect.

j. Hours of Operation. Proposed hours and days of operation for business operations involving activity from, to or outside of the site, including but not limited to transport of items into and out of the site. Maximum allowed hours are from 9:00 a.m. through 6:00 p.m.

2. Individuals.

a. Managers. The name, address, email and phone number of any person who is managing or responsible for the commercial cannabis operation’s activities.

b. Community Outreach Manager. The name, email and phone number of an employee designated as community outreach manager, who will be responsible for outreach and communication with the surrounding community, including the neighborhood and nearby businesses.

c. Employees. A list of the names of all current and prospective employees of the commercial cannabis operation, along with any other identifying information requested by the Director.

d. Consent to Criminal Investigation. Written consent from all employees to fingerprinting and a criminal background investigation by the City, upon a form provided by the City, accompanied with payment of appropriate fees to the City to cover the costs of performing such criminal background check. At the discretion of the City and in compliance with State law, the City may use live scan to perform criminal background checks.

e. Identification. For each employee, a color photocopy of either a valid California driver’s license or equivalent identification approved by the Director.

f. Land Owner. The name, address, email and phone number of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the commercial cannabis operation is to be conducted. In the event the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, the application must be accompanied by a notarized acknowledgement from the owner of the property that a commercial cannabis operation will be operated on his/her property.

3. Miscellaneous.

a. Any additional application requirements specific to the type of commercial cannabis operation permit being sought, including but not limited to as provided for by this Chapter.

b. Evidence satisfactory to the Director of compliance with all local and State law requirements governing the commercial cannabis operation.

c. Evidence satisfactory to the Director of compliance with all applicable insurance requirements as provided for by this Chapter, local law and State law. Minimum insurance levels shall be determined by the Director after an assessment of the risks posed by the commercial cannabis operation, including provision for meeting the requirements of CMC 615080(C)(2).

d. Authorization for the Director to seek verification of the information contained within the application.

e. A statement in writing by the applicant that he or she certifies under penalty of perjury that all the information contained in the application is true and correct.

f. Any such additional and further information as is deemed necessary by the Director to administer this Chapter. (Ord. 17-1637, § 2)

615080 Review of Commercial Cannabis Operation Permit Application.
A. Upon receipt of a completed application and payment of all applicable fees, the Director shall investigate the information contained in the application to determine whether the applicant meets the minimum qualifications for a commercial cannabis operation permit. These minimum qualifications are the requirements of this Chapter, the Carson Municipal Code, and applicable State law.

B. Within ninety (90) days of receipt of the completed application, the Director shall complete the investigation, approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application as being in compliance with the requirements of this Chapter, and so notify the applicant by United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the address stated in the application. If the Director determines that the application is incomplete, the Director shall notify the applicant in writing explaining the reasons thereof within sixty (60) days of receipt of the application. Applicant shall have thirty (30) days to submit a completed application, in accordance with the Director’s notification. If the application is resubmitted as incomplete, it shall be deemed abandoned. The applicant may then resubmit a new application for a new review pursuant to the requirements of this Section.

C. An applicant shall not be deemed compliant for purposes of review by the Cannabis Permit Committee, until and unless an applicant meets all of the following requirements:

1. Provides written authorization to the Operations Officers to conduct reasonable unannounced inspections of the location of the commercial cannabis operation at the discretion of the City, including but not limited to inspection of security, inventory, and written records and files pertaining to the commercial cannabis operation, for the purposes of ensuring compliance with this Chapter and all laws of the City and the State of California.

2. Executes an agreement: to indemnify, defend and hold harmless (at the commercial cannabis operation permit holder’s sole expense, the ability to do so demonstrated through proof of sufficient insurance coverage to the satisfaction of the City) the City, its elected officials, employees, agents, officers, and representatives, and each and all of them individually, from all liability or harm arising from or in connection with all claims, damages, attorney’s fees, costs and allegations arising from or in any way related to the operation of the commercial cannabis operation; and, to reimburse the City for any costs and attorney’s fees that the City may be required to pay as a result of such action. The City may, at its sole discretion, participate at its own expense in the defense of any such action.

D. Upon successfully completing the review process by the Director, the permit application shall be deemed compliant and eligible for review by the Cannabis Permit Committee for preparation of a Merit List pursuant to CMC 615080(G) and (H), unless the Director finds:

1. The applicant has made one (1) or more false or misleading statements or omissions, either on the written application or during the application process; or

2. A proposed location for the commercial cannabis operation is not allowed by State or local law, statute, ordinance, or regulation (including this Code); or

3. The applicant has not satisfied each and every requirement of this Chapter and Code; or

4. The applicant is not in compliance with applicable State law, including, but not limited to, applicable requirements and minimum standards of the Adult Use of Marijuana Act of 2016 (AUMA) (Proposition 64), the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act of 2017 (MAUCRSA) and any applicable State regulations.

E. Based on the information set forth in the application and the Director’s review, the Director may impose, as a condition of being deemed compliant and thereby eligible for review by the Cannabis Permit Committee, reasonable terms and conditions on the use of the permit, in addition to those specified in this Chapter, to ensure the safe operation of the commercial cannabis operation, and to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the residents and visitors of the City of Carson.

F. At the Director’s sole discretion, the time limits in this Section may be extended upon written notification from the Director to the applicant.

G. If the Director makes a positive determination that the application is deemed compliant, then the Cannabis Permit Committee will review the thoroughness of applicant’s adherence to the following criteria for purposes of preparing a written Merit List to be provided to the City Council. Factors to be considered shall include the Merit List, as well as all pertinent evidence timely submitted (at the determination of the Cannabis Permit Committee) by the applicant, the public, and interested parties. No predetermined weight shall be given to one (1) criterion over another. Each application shall be considered in its totality with weight given to one (1) criterion over another as determined appropriate by the Cannabis Permit Committee to further the maintenance and promotion of the health, safety and welfare of the residents and visitors of the City of Carson. A Merit List report shall detail and rank in writing the thoroughness of an applicant’s adherence to the following criteria, as they relate to the maintenance and promotion of the health, safety and welfare of the residents and visitors of the City of Carson:

1. Operation plan for the business, including attention to community concerns about the impact of the business.

2. Security plan for the business, including details for the nondiversion of cannabis or cannabis products to illegal uses.

3. Health and safety plan for the business, including enhanced product and operations health and safety (e.g., use of pesticides, sanitation, disposal of waste products).

4. Impact on the environment (e.g., refuse disposal, utility usage).

5. Neighborhood compatibility (e.g., compatibility with surrounding uses).

6. Employment opportunities for City of Carson residents.

7. Economic benefits to the City of Carson.

8. Community benefits to the City of Carson, including but not limited to plans for community engagement and programs.

9. Experience of the operators, managers and employees, including professional backgrounds (e.g., horticulture, chemistry).

10. Capitalization of the business.

11. Educational plans (e.g., youth anti-drug programs).

12. Promotion of equitable business ownership and employment opportunities which decrease disparities for marginalized communities, and address for marginalized communities the disproportionate impact of past criminalization of cannabis activities which are now lawful under State law.

13. Requirements of this Chapter, this Code and applicable State law.

14. Any additional criteria the Cannabis Permit Committee determines is of benefit to making a determination of the applicant’s commitment to the health, safety and welfare of the residents and visitors of the City of Carson.

H. Upon conclusion of this review, the Cannabis Permit Committee shall make a recommendation in writing to the City Council as to whether or not a permit should be issued. The recommendation shall articulate reasons for the recommendation and refer to Merit List criteria. (Ord. 17-1637, § 2)

615090 Issuance of Commercial Cannabis Operation Permit.
A. Issuance of a commercial cannabis operation permit constitutes a revocable privilege and shall not create or establish any vested rights for the development or use of a property. The City may determine that it is in the best interests of the health, safety and welfare of the residents and visitors of the City of Carson that no commercial cannabis operation permits are to be granted by the City.

B. Upon receipt by the City Council of a Merit List from the Cannabis Permit Committee, the City Council shall make a final written determination at a properly noticed public meeting of the City Council, within a reasonable amount of time after receipt from the Cannabis Permit Committee of a recommendation, whether the applicant shall be issued a commercial cannabis operation permit.

1. Factors to be considered shall include the written Merit List, as well as all pertinent evidence timely submitted (at the determination of the City Council) by the applicant, the public, and interested parties. No predetermined weight shall be given to one (1) criterion over another.

2. Each application shall be considered in its totality with weight given to one (1) criterion over another as determined appropriate by the City Council to further the maintenance and promotion of the health, safety and welfare of the residents and visitors of the City of Carson.

3. Notice of the written determination shall be provided promptly to the applicant upon final determination. The determination shall articulate reasons in writing for the final determination and refer to Merit List criteria. The determination shall be final and not appealable.

C. The City Council may impose reasonable terms and conditions on the use of the permit, in addition to those specified in this Chapter, to ensure the safe operation of the commercial cannabis operation, and to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the residents and visitors of the City of Carson.

D. As determined appropriate by the City, multiple qualified applications for commercial cannabis operation permits may be considered at the same time, for reasons including but not limited to comparison of applicants for limited permits using the criteria contained within CMC 615080(G). The permit process timelines provided by this Chapter may be modified by the City to facilitate such review of multiple applications. (Ord. 17-1637, § 2)

615100 Development Agreement.
Prior to operating in the City and issuance of a certificate of occupancy, in addition to the issuance of a commercial cannabis operation permit, each commercial cannabis operation shall apply for and enter into a development agreement with the City setting forth the terms and conditions under which the commercial cannabis operation will operate that are in addition to the requirements of this Chapter, including, but not limited to, public outreach and education, community service, payment of fees and other charges as mutually agreed, and such other terms and conditions that will protect and promote the public health, safety, and welfare. The procedures for development agreements will comply with this Chapter, the Carson Municipal Code and California Government Code Title 7, Division 1, Chapter 4, Article 2.5.

A. Filing Requirements.

1. Only a qualified applicant may file an application to enter into a development agreement. A qualified applicant is a person who has been issued a commercial cannabis operation permit, who has been issued the required equivalent State license issued under Business and Professions Code Division 10, and has a legal or equitable interest in the real property of the commercial cannabis operation site. The qualified applicant shall provide proof of a commercial cannabis operation permit, ownership interest, proof of interest in the real property, and proof of the authority of the agent or representative to act for the applicant. Said proof of interest and proof of authority shall be subject to review and approval by the City Attorney.

2. The Director shall prescribe the form for each application, notice and documents provided for or required under these regulations for the preparation and implementation of development agreements. The applicant shall complete and submit such an application form to the Director, along with a deposit for the estimated direct and indirect costs of processing the development agreement. The applicant shall deposit any additional amounts for all costs and fees to process the development agreement, including all legal fees, within fifteen (15) days of request by the Director. Upon either completion of the application process or withdrawal of the application, the City shall refund any remaining deposited amounts in excess of the costs of processing.

3. The Director shall require an applicant to submit such information and supporting data as the Director considers necessary to process the application, including but not limited to a community benefit assessment to evaluate the benefits the development agreement will provide to the community.

B. Processing and Requirements.

1. The Director shall endorse on the application the date it is received. An application or related document shall not be complete until an estimated deposit for the cost of processing has been paid to the City. If within thirty (30) days of receiving the application the Director finds that all required information has not been submitted or the application is otherwise incomplete or inaccurate, the processing of the application and the running of any limits shall be suspended upon written notice to the applicant and a new thirty (30) day period shall commence once the required material is received by the Director. If the Director finds that the application is complete it shall be accepted for filing and the applicant so notified. The Director shall review the application and determine the additional requirements necessary to complete processing of the agreement. After receiving the required information and the application is determined to be complete, the Director shall prepare a staff report and recommendation to the Planning Commission and City Council stating whether or not the agreement as proposed or in an amended form would be consistent with policies of the City, this Chapter and any applicable general or specific plan. The City Attorney shall review the proposed development agreement as to legal form.

2. Notice of a hearing regarding the development agreement shall be given by the Director and shall comply with the requirements of California Government Code Section 65867, as may be amended, as well as in the manner set forth in CMC 9173.22.

3. The Planning Commission shall review the proposed development agreement and provide a recommendation to the City Council to approve, approve with modifications or deny the proposed development agreement. If the Planning Commission fails to take action within sixty (60) days of opening the hearing on the matter, such failure shall be deemed to have made a recommendation of denial to the City Council unless the applicant has requested an extension of time, either in writing or on the record, which has been approved by the Planning Commission prior to the running of the sixtieth day.

4. The proposed development agreement shall be set for hearing and consideration before the Council within sixty (60) days of the recommendation of the Planning Commission, unless the applicant agrees in writing to an extension of time with the Director prior to the matter being heard by the Council.

5. Within ten (10) calendar days after the City enters into the development agreement, the City Clerk shall have the agreement recorded with the County Recorder. If the parties to the agreement or their successors in interest amend or cancel the agreement as provided in California Government Code Section 65868, or if the City terminates or modifies the agreement as provided in California Government Code Section 65865.1 for failure of the applicant to comply in good faith with the terms or conditions of the agreement, the City Clerk shall have notice of such action recorded with the County Recorder.

C. Findings and Development Agreement Conditions. After the City Council completes the public hearing, the Council may not approve the development agreement unless it finds that the provisions of the agreement:

1. Are consistent with the goals, objectives, and policies of the general plan and any applicable specific plan;

2. Are compatible with the uses authorized in and the regulations prescribed for the zoned district in which the real property is located;

3. Will not be detrimental to the health, safety, environmental quality, and general welfare of the community;

4. Will not adversely affect the orderly development of property or the preservation of property values; and

5. Provides for a reasonable penalty for any violation of the development agreement.

D. Modifications and Extensions.

1. The provisions of California Government Code Section 65868 shall apply for all modifications, extensions or other amendments of the terms of a development agreement subject to this Chapter.

2. Either party may propose an amendment or termination of an approved development agreement subject to the following:

a. The procedure for amending or terminating the development agreement is the same as the procedure for entering into an agreement in the first instance.

b. The development agreement may be amended or canceled only by the mutual consent of the parties, as provided in California Government Code Section 65868.

3. Nothing herein shall limit the City’s ability to terminate or modify the agreement consistent with California Government Code Section 65865.1 or 65865.3 as may be amended. (Ord. 17-1637, § 2)

615110 Renewal of Commercial Cannabis Operation Permit.
A. Issuance of a commercial cannabis operation permit constitutes a revocable privilege and shall not create or establish any vested rights for the development or use of a property. The City may determine through the procedures provided in this Chapter that for reasons of the health, safety and welfare of the residents and visitors of the City of Carson that a commercial cannabis operation permit will not be renewed.

B. Commercial cannabis operation permits issued pursuant to this Chapter shall automatically expire one (1) year from the date of issuance, unless specifically provided for otherwise by this Chapter.

C. The following procedures shall govern the process for the renewal of a commercial cannabis operation permit:

1. A holder of a commercial cannabis operation permit may apply for the renewal of an existing permit no less than sixty (60) days prior to the permit’s expiration date upon a form provided by the City and shall pay a filing fee as established by resolution adopted by the City Council as amended from time to time.

2. Renewal applications shall comply with all of the requirements and procedures provided for by this Chapter for applying for a new commercial cannabis operation permit. At the discretion of the City, renewal applications may consist of updating any changes to an original application or previous renewal application, or a similar method of streamlining the process.

3. The Director will review permit renewal applications and make a determination as to whether the commercial cannabis operation has remained in compliance with all the requirements of this Chapter and State law during the prior term of the permit. If the Director makes a contrary determination, the application for a permit renewal shall be denied.

4. If the Director determines the commercial cannabis operation has remained in compliance with all the requirements of this Chapter and State law during the prior term of the permit, the permit renewal application shall be granted.

5. If the holder of a commercial cannabis operation permit files a renewal application less than sixty (60) days prior to expiration, the holder must provide a written explanation detailing the circumstances surrounding the late filing. The Director may deny the untimely application after review of the explanation. If the Director accepts the application, then the Director may elect to administratively extend the permit beyond the expiration date while the Director completes the renewal permitting process. Untimely applications for renewal which are nevertheless accepted by the Director pursuant to this Section are subject to a late penalty.

D. A commercial cannabis operation permit is immediately invalid upon expiration if the permit holder has not filed a timely and/or accepted renewal application and remitted all of the required renewal fees. In the event the permit is not renewed prior to expiration, the affected commercial cannabis operation shall cease operation upon the expiration of the permit and is thereafter considered to be unlawful. (Ord. 17-1637, § 2)

615120 General Operating Standards and Restrictions.
A commercial cannabis operation shall operate in conformance with the following minimum standards, and such standards shall be deemed to be part of the conditions on the permit for a commercial cannabis operation to ensure that its operation is in compliance with California law and the Carson Municipal Code, and to mitigate any potential adverse impacts of the commercial cannabis operation on the public health, safety or welfare.

Additional minimum standards may be adopted from time to time either by resolution or ordinance from the City Council, or by the Director (upon authorization by resolution from the City Council).

A. State Standards. All State requirements and regulations that govern the operation of a commercial cannabis operation, including but not limited to ones related specifically to certain types of commercial cannabis operations, shall apply as minimum requirements and regulations for commercial cannabis operations within the City of Carson, in addition to the requirements and regulations of this Chapter and this Code.

B. Security.

1. General. All cannabis, cannabis products and cash present or kept at the premises shall be securely stored against both unauthorized access as well as theft.

2. Licensed Security Guard.

a. No less than two (2) armed security guards shall be present at the location of the commercial cannabis operation at all times.

b. All security guards shall be licensed by and in good standing with the Bureau of Security and Investigative Services (BSIS) of the California Department of Consumer Affairs.

c. All security guards shall be armed with a firearm and a baton, and possess at all times a valid and current firearms permit and baton permit issued by the BSIS.

d. At the determination of the Director in consultation with the Police Captain, further use of, and requirements for, security guards may be required of permittee.

3. Security Cameras.

a. Security cameras shall be installed and maintained in good condition, with at least thirty (30) days of digitally recorded documentation in a format approved by the Director and the Police Captain.

b. The camera and recording system must be of adequate quality, color rendition, and resolution to allow the identification of any individual present at the site of the commercial cannabis operation.

c. The cameras shall be in continuous use twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week.

d. The recording system must be capable of exporting the recorded video in standard MPEG formats (or formats approved or required by the Director) to another common medium approved by the Director, such as DVD and/or a USB drive.

e. The areas to be covered by the security cameras include, but are not limited to, the storage areas, operation areas, all doors and windows, the parking lot, all exterior sides of the property adjacent to the public rights of way, and any other areas as determined by the Director and Police Captain.

f. Remote log-in information will be provided to the Operations Officers to allow them to view live and recorded security camera images remotely at any time.

4. Alarm System. The location of the commercial cannabis operation shall be alarmed with a centrally monitored fire and burglar alarm system and monitored by an alarm company properly licensed by the State of California Department of Consumer Affairs Bureau of Security and Investigative Services in accordance with California Business and Professions Code Section 7590, et seq. and whose agents are properly licensed and registered under applicable law, all subject to approval by the Director.

5. Locked Entrances. All entrances into the building housing a commercial cannabis operation shall be locked from the exterior at all times with entry controlled by employees.

6. Windows. All windows on the building that houses the commercial cannabis operation shall be secured against entry from the outside.

7. No employee shall refuse, impede, obstruct or interfere with an inspection conducted pursuant to the authorizations provided by this Chapter.

C. Odors.

1. A commercial cannabis operation shall have an air treatment system that ensures off-site odors shall not result from its activities.

2. This requirement at a minimum means that the commercial cannabis operation shall be designed to provide sufficient odor-absorbing ventilation and exhaust systems so that any odor generated inside the location of the commercial cannabis operation is not detected outside the building, on adjacent properties or public rights-of-way, or within any other unit located within the same building as the commercial cannabis operation, if the use only occupies a portion of a building.

D. Authorizations.

1. The Operations Officers shall have the right to enter all areas of the commercial cannabis operation from time to time unannounced for the purpose of making reasonable inspections to observe and enforce compliance with this Chapter and all laws of the City and State of California.

2. Recordings made by security cameras required pursuant to this Chapter shall be made immediately available to an Operations Officer within twenty-four (24) hours of verbal request; no search warrant or subpoena shall be needed to obtain and view the recorded materials.

E. Records.

1. Commercial cannabis operations shall maintain on site the following records either in paper or electronic form:

a. The full name, address, and telephone numbers of the owner and lessee of the property.

b. The name, date of birth, address, and telephone number of each employee of the commercial cannabis operation; the date each was hired; and the nature of each employee’s participation in the commercial cannabis operation.

c. Copies of all required State licenses.

d. An inventory record documenting the dates and amounts of cannabis and cannabis products received at the site, the daily amounts of cannabis and cannabis products on the site, and the daily amounts of cannabis and cannabis products leaving the site for any reason, including but not limited to being sold, delivered, or distributed.

e. A written accounting of all expenditures, costs, revenues and profits of the commercial cannabis operation, including but not limited to cash and in-kind transactions.

f. A copy of all insurance policies related to the operation of the commercial cannabis operation.

g. A copy of the commercial cannabis operation’s most recent year’s financial statement and tax return.

h. Proof of a valid and current permit issued by the City in accordance with this Chapter, and the equivalent State of California license to operate the commercial cannabis operation. Every commercial cannabis operation shall display at all times during business hours the City permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, and the equivalent State license, in a conspicuous place so that it may be readily seen by all persons entering the location of the commercial cannabis operation.

2. All records required to be maintained by the commercial cannabis operation must be maintained for no less than three (3) years and are subject to immediate inspection (consistent with requirements pertaining to patient confidentiality pursuant to applicable State and Federal law) upon a lawful written request by an Operation Officer.

3. A commercial cannabis operation shall report any loss, damage, or destruction of these records to the Operation Officers within twenty-four (24) hours of the loss, damage, or destruction.

F. Site Management.

1. Commercial cannabis operations shall not result in a nuisance or adversely affect the health, welfare, or safety of nearby persons by creating dust, glare, heat, noise, noxious gases, odors, smoke, traffic, vibration, or other impacts, or be hazardous due to use or storage of materials, processes, products or waste. The permittee shall promptly and diligently both prevent as well as eliminate conditions on the site of the commercial cannabis operation that constitute a nuisance.

2. The commercial cannabis operation permittee shall maintain the exterior of the site, including any parking lots under the control of the permittee, free of litter, debris, and trash.

3. The commercial cannabis operation permittee shall properly store and dispose of all waste generated on the site, including chemical and organic waste, in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations.

4. Notwithstanding any provisions of this Code to the contrary, the commercial cannabis operation permittee shall remove all graffiti from the site and parking lots under the control of the commercial cannabis operation permittee within twenty-four (24) hours of its application.

G. State Board of Equalization Seller’s Permit Required.

1. Commercial cannabis operations must obtain a Seller’s Permit from the State Board of Equalization as applicable.

2. Such permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous place so that it may be readily seen by all persons entering the location of the commercial cannabis operation.

H. Employees.

1. All employees must submit to fingerprinting and criminal background checks by the City.

a. No employee convicted within the last ten (10) years of a felony substantially related to the qualifications, functions or duties of an employee of a commercial cannabis operation (such as a felony conviction for distribution of controlled substances, money laundering, racketeering, etc.) shall be employed by a commercial cannabis operation, unless such employee has obtained a certificate of rehabilitation (expungement of felony record) under California law or under a similar Federal statute or state law where the expungement was granted.

b. At the request of the commercial cannabis operation, the Director and Police Captain shall determine the applicability of a waiver of this Section to a potential employee for good cause within a reasonable period of time after a written request has been made to the Director and Police Captain for such determination.

2. All employees must possess a valid government-issued (or equivalent) form of identification containing an identifying photograph of the employee, the name of the employee, the date of birth of the employee, and the residential address of the employee. Color copies of such identification shall be maintained at the location of the commercial cannabis operation. A valid California driver’s license will satisfy this requirement.

I. Cannabis Transfer Between Permitted Operations Only. A commercial cannabis operation shall not transfer cannabis or cannabis products to or from another commercial cannabis operation, unless both operations are in possession of all required State and local licenses and permits.

J. Commercial Cannabis Operation Signage.

1. Signs on the premises shall not obstruct the entrance or the video surveillance system. The size, location, and design of any signage must conform to the sign provisions in the Carson Municipal Code.

2. Business identification signage shall be limited to that needed for identification only, consisting of a single window sign or wall sign that shall comply with the appropriate sign requirements within the applicable zoning district.

K. Prohibited Personal Activities.

1. Cannabis Use. No person shall smoke, ingest, or otherwise consume cannabis in any form on, or within twenty (20) feet of, the site of the commercial cannabis operation.

2. Alcohol Use. No person shall possess, consume, or store any alcoholic beverage on the site of the commercial cannabis operation.

L. No Minors. No minor shall be an employee of, or participate in, a commercial cannabis operation in any capacity, including, but not limited to, as a manager, employee, contractor, adviser, or volunteer.

M. Exterior Lighting. The exterior of the premises upon which the commercial cannabis operation is operated shall be equipped with and, at all times between sunset and sunrise, shall remain illuminated with fixtures of sufficient intensity and number to illuminate every portion of the property with an illumination level of not less than one (1) foot-candle as measured at the ground level, including, but not limited to, landscaped areas, parking lots, driveways, walkways, entry areas, and refuse storage areas.

N. Building Design. A commercial cannabis operation permittee must maintain the design of the buildings on the site in accordance with the plans that are approved by the City pursuant to this Chapter and otherwise approved by the City. No permittee shall modify the buildings on the site contrary to the approved plans, without the approval of the Director.

O. Nuisance. The commercial cannabis operation permittee shall take all reasonable steps to discourage and correct conditions that constitute a nuisance in parking areas, sidewalks, alleys and areas surrounding the premises and adjacent properties during business hours if related to the members of the subject commercial cannabis operation.

1. “Reasonable steps” shall include immediately calling the police upon observation of the activity, and requesting that those engaging in activities that constitute a nuisance or are otherwise illegal to cease those activities, unless personal safety would be threatened in making the request.

2. “Nuisance” includes but is not limited to disturbances of peace, open public consumption of cannabis, alcohol or controlled substances, excessive pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including the formation of any pedestrian lines outside the building, illegal drug activity, harassment of passersby, excessive littering, excessive loitering, illegal parking, excessive loud noises, especially late at night or early in the morning hours, lewd conduct or police detentions and arrests.

P. Insurance. The commercial cannabis operation permittee shall maintain insurance coverage in amounts satisfactory to the Director which evidence compliance with all applicable insurance requirements as provided for by this Chapter, local law and State law. Minimum insurance levels shall be determined by the Director after an assessment of the risks posed by the commercial cannabis operation, including provision for meeting the requirements of CMC 615080(C)(2).

Q. Upon and after receiving possession of a commercial cannabis operation permit as provided for in this Chapter, the commercial cannabis operation permit holder shall:

1. Update the Director in writing within seven (7) days upon the change in status of any of the information previously submitted to the City concerning the commercial cannabis operation, including but not limited to when there is any change in the address, email, phone number, or other identifying information, previously provided to the City in compliance with this Chapter, for any owner, manager, community outreach manager, property owner, or legal representative of the commercial cannabis operation.

2. Maintain continuing compliance with criminal background check requirements of this Chapter by ensuring that:

a. Upon the hiring, association or retention of an employee by the commercial cannabis operation, the requirements of CMC 615070(B)(2)(d) are immediately met for such employee by provision of appropriate documentation to the Director; and

b. The Director and Police Captain are immediately informed in writing of any felony conviction as described in CMC 615120(H)(1)(a) for any current employee.

3. Maintain continuing compliance with all applicable insurance requirements, including, but not limited to, those imposed by this Chapter, local law and State law.

R. Exemption. The regulations contained in this Chapter shall not apply to a commercial cannabis operation engaged in the following uses, as long as such use complies strictly with applicable law, including this Code, regulating such use and the location of such use, including, but not limited to, Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5, et seq.; a clinic licensed pursuant to Health and Safety Code Division 2, Chapter 1; a health care facility licensed pursuant to Health and Safety Code Division 2, Chapter 2; a residential care facility for persons with chronic life-threatening illness licensed pursuant to Health and Safety Code Division 2, Chapter 3.01; a residential care facility for the elderly licensed pursuant to Health and Safety Code Division 2, Chapter 3.2; and, a residential hospice or a home health agency licensed pursuant to Health and Safety Code Division 2, Chapter 8. (Ord. 17-1637, § 2)

615130 Cultivation Operating Standards and Restrictions.
A commercial cannabis operation engaged in indoor or mixed-light cultivation shall operate in conformance with both the general operating standards and restrictions provided for in CMC 615120, as well as the following minimum standards, and such standards shall be deemed to be part of the conditions of the permit for an indoor or mixed-light cultivation commercial cannabis operation to ensure that its operation is in compliance with California law and the Carson Municipal Code, and to mitigate any potential adverse impacts of the commercial cannabis operation on the public health, safety or welfare.

Additional minimum standards may be adopted from time to time either by resolution or ordinance from the City Council, or by the Director (upon authorization by resolution from the City Council).

A. City Permit and State License. No person shall engage in indoor or mixed-light cultivation without both a current and valid City commercial cannabis operation permit issued for indoor or mixed-light cultivation as well as a current and valid equivalent State license as provided for under Business and Professions Code Division 10, and as may be amended.

B. State Standards. All State requirements and regulations that govern cultivation operations, including but not limited to the regulations promulgated by the California Department of Food and Agriculture, and as may be amended, shall apply as minimum requirements and regulations for cultivation commercial cannabis operations within the City of Carson, in addition to the requirements and regulations of this Chapter and this Code.

C. Location Restrictions.

1. No cultivation operation shall locate or operate in any zone of the City of Carson, other than in industrial or commercial zones.

2. No cultivation operation shall locate within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of a school, day care center, youth center, park, library, hotel or regional shopping mall. The distance shall be measured as the shortest horizontal distance measured in a straight line from the property line of one (1) site to the property line of another site.

D. Permits. Pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 26053(c), a cultivation permit holder may hold one (1) or more of the following State license types as provided for in Business and Professions Code Section 26050:

1. Type 1A = Cultivation; specialty indoor; small.

2. Type 1B = Cultivation; specialty mixed-light; small.

3. Type 2A = Cultivation; indoor; small.

4. Type 2B = Cultivation; mixed-light; small.

5. Type 3A = Cultivation; indoor; medium.

6. Type 3B = Cultivation; mixed-light; medium.

7. Type 4 = Cultivation; nursery.

8. Type 5A = Cultivation; indoor; large.

9. Type 5B = Cultivation; mixed-light; large.

E. Water.

1. The water supply shall be sufficient for the operations intended, shall comply with all State regulations, and shall be derived from a source that is a regulated water system. Private water supplies shall be derived from a water source that is capable of providing a safe, potable, and adequate supply of water to meet the facility’s needs.

2. Plumbing shall be of adequate size and design and adequately installed and maintained to carry sufficient quantities of water to required locations throughout the plant and that shall properly convey sewage and liquid disposable waste from the facility. There shall be no cross-connections between the potable and waste water lines.

F. Sanitation.

1. The permittee shall establish and implement written procedures that maintain the highest industry standards of sanitation and cleanliness for the operation so as to ensure at all times cannabis remains free of harmful contaminants, including but not limited to pesticides, mold and fungus.

2. Litter and waste shall be properly removed and the operating systems for waste disposal shall be maintained in an adequate manner so that they do not constitute a source of contamination in areas where cannabis is exposed.

3. Floors, walls, and ceilings shall be constructed in such a manner that they may be adequately cleaned and kept clean and kept in good repair.

G. Site Requirements. The site shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Visibility. No cannabis shall be visible from the public right-of-way, the unsecured areas surrounding the buildings on the site, or the site’s main entrance and lobby.

2. Main Entrance and Lobby. The site shall have a building with a main entrance that is clearly visible from the public street or sidewalk. The main entrance shall be maintained clear of barriers, landscaping, and other obstructions. Inside of the main entrance, there shall be a lobby to receive persons into the site and to verify whether they are allowed in the cultivation commercial cannabis operation areas. Members of the general public shall not be allowed in the cultivation commercial cannabis operation areas except for reasons of lawful business.

3. Cultivation Area. All cultivation areas in any building on the site shall be separated from the main entrance and lobby, and shall be secured by a lock accessible only to employees of the permittee.

4. Storage Area. Each building with a cultivation area shall have adequate storage space for cannabis that has completed the cultivation process or is otherwise not being cultivated. The storage areas shall be separated from the main entrance and lobby, and shall be secured by a lock accessible only to employees of the permittee.

5. Secure Product. All cannabis, whether being cultivated or otherwise, at the site shall be kept in a secured manner at all times so as to deter theft and unauthorized access.

6. Transport Area. Each building with a cultivation area shall have an area designed for the secure transfer of cannabis from the cultivation area to a vehicle for transportation.

7. Lighting. Sufficient lighting must be used in all areas where cannabis is cultivated and stored, and where equipment or utensils are cleaned, so that at all times the items and activities in these areas are fully visible to both any security cameras covering the areas as well as the naked eye.

H. Training. The permittee shall establish and implement written procedures that provide for the highest industry standards of training for employees engaged in cultivation operations.

I. Signs. A permittee shall display conspicuously in the lobby of the site the following signs, so that each sign may be readily seen by persons entering the site, and each sign must be at least eight (8) inches by ten (10) inches in size:

1. “This site is not open to the public.”

2. “Retail sales of any goods and services is prohibited”

3. “Minors are prohibited from entering this site.”

4. “Smoking, ingesting, or consuming cannabis on or within 20 feet of this site is prohibited.”

J. Restricted Access.

1. The site shall be closed to the general public. No one shall be allowed on the cultivation site, except for employees, or persons with a bona fide business or regulatory purpose for being on the site, such as contractors or inspectors.

2. Minors are prohibited at all times from entering the location of the site. (Ord. 17-1637, § 2)

615140 Testing Operating Standards and Restrictions.
A commercial cannabis operation engaged in testing shall operate in conformance with both the general operating standards and restrictions provided for in CMC 615120, as well as the following minimum standards, and such standards shall be deemed to be part of the conditions of the permit for a testing commercial cannabis operation to ensure that its operation is in compliance with California law and the Carson Municipal Code, and to mitigate any potential adverse impacts of the commercial cannabis operation on the public health, safety or welfare.

Additional minimum standards may be adopted from time to time either by resolution or ordinance from the City Council, or (upon authorization by resolution from the City Council) by the Director.

A. City Permit and State License. No person shall engage in testing without both a current and valid City commercial cannabis operation permit issued for testing as well as a current and valid equivalent State license as provided for under Business and Professions Code Division 10, and as may be amended.

B. State Standards. All State requirements and regulations that govern testing operations, including but not limited to regulations promulgated by the State Department of Public Health, and as may be amended, shall apply as minimum requirements and regulations for testing commercial cannabis operations within the City of Carson, in addition to the requirements and regulations of this Chapter and this Code.

C. Location Restrictions.

1. No testing operation shall locate or operate in any zone of the City of Carson, other than in industrial or commercial zones.

2. No testing operation shall locate within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of a school, day care center, youth center, park, library, hotel or regional shopping mall. The distance shall be measured as the shortest horizontal distance measured in a straight line from the property line of one site to the property line of another site.

D. Independent. Permittees shall be independent from all other persons and entities involved in commercial cannabis operations.

E. Health and Safety; Director Approval.

1. General.

a. Testing operations before commencing operation, and as a continuing prerequisite to continuing operations, shall receive, and maintain, written approval from the Director that any closed-loop system, equipment used and the testing facilities in general, all meet or exceed appropriate health and safety standards as determined by the Director.

b. These health and safety standards include any required fire, safety and building code requirements specified in the California Fire Code, the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) standards, the International Building Code (IBC), the International Fire Code (IFC), and any other applicable standards, including complying with all applicable fire, safety, and building codes in processing, handling, and storage of solvents or gases.

2. Fire Safety Plan.

a. Testing operations shall not commence until written approval is received from the Director for a completed fire safety plan for the operation.

b. An application for a renewal of a testing commercial cannabis operation permit shall not be approved until an inspection of the site occurs by the Director which affirms that both the operation remains in compliance with the approved fire safety plan (or an amended fire safety plan as determined by the Director) and that any further actions that need to be taken in the determination of the Director are taken to ensure that all applicable and necessary health and safety requirements are met.

3. Certified Industrial Hygienist (CIH).

a. The permittee must provide for, maintain, and follow a detailed plan prepared by a CIH, and approved by the Director, to ensure the appropriate health and safety procedures including, but not limited to, procedures necessary to control hazards, for use of proper protective equipment, product safety, compliance with Cal/OSHA limits, provide specifications for ventilation controls, and ensure environmental protections, are adopted and used by the operation on a continuing basis.

b. The Director shall establish further written requirements for the plan, including but not limited to required inspections by the CIH and a hazardous materials management plan. Upon reasonable determination by the Director the permittee shall be required to update or amend the approved plan to the satisfaction of the Director.

4. UL (Underwriters Laboratories) Listed. All testing devices and equipment used by the operation must be UL listed, or otherwise approved for the intended use by the Director.

5. Hazardous Materials. All hazardous material used, generated or associated with the operation must be disposed of in a manner which is approved by the Director before disposal occurs, and which is compliant with all local, State and Federal guidelines for the disposal of hazardous materials.

6. Waste Treatment System. The permittee must provide for and maintain a waste treatment system which is approved by the Director so as to prevent contamination in areas where cannabis or cannabis products may be exposed to such a system’s waste or waste by-products.

F. Operation Requirements. The testing operation shall be subject to all applicable regulations developed (including as modified) by the State of California for commercial cannabis testing operations, and shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Conduct all testing in a manner pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 26100, and as amended, subject to State and local law.

2. Conduct all testing in a manner consistent with general requirements for the competence of testing and calibration activities, including sampling using verified methods.

3. Obtain and maintain ISO/IEC 17025 accreditation as required by the State.

4. Destroy the remains of the sample of cannabis or cannabis products upon the completion of analysis as determined by the State through regulations.

5. Dispose of any waste by-product resulting from testing operations in the manner required by State and local laws and regulations.

G. Site Requirements. The site shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Indoor Testing Only. All testing shall occur in a fully enclosed building.

2. Fire Sprinklers. The site shall be equipped with an automatic fire sprinkler system, in accordance with NPFA 13, California Fire Code (Section 903), and the Carson Municipal Code with zero (0) square foot requirement.

3. Visibility. Neither cannabis, cannabis products nor visible exterior evidence of any testing activity, shall be visible from the public right-of-way, the unsecured areas surrounding the buildings on the site, or the site’s main entrance and lobby.

4. Main Entrance and Lobby. The site shall have a building with a main entrance that is clearly visible from the public street or sidewalk. The main entrance shall be maintained clear of barriers, landscaping, and other obstructions. Inside of the main entrance, there shall be a lobby to receive persons into the site and to verify whether they are allowed in the testing areas.

5. Secure Product. All cannabis and cannabis products at the site shall be kept in a secured manner at all times.

6. Testing Area. All testing areas in any building on the site shall be separated from the main entrance and lobby, and shall be secured by a lock accessible only to employees of the cannabis manufacturing permittee.

7. Transport Area. Each building with a testing area shall have an area designed for the secure transfer of cannabis from a vehicle to the testing area.

8. Storage Area. Each building with a testing area shall have adequate storage space for cannabis that has been tested or is waiting to be tested. The storage areas shall be separated from the main entrance and lobby, and shall be secured by a lock accessible only to employees of the permittee.

H. Sanitation. The permittee shall establish and implement written procedures that maintain the highest industry standards of sanitation and cleanliness for the operation so as to ensure the cannabis tested remains free of harmful contaminants.

I. Training. The permittee shall establish and implement written procedures that provide for the highest industry standards of training for employees engaged in testing operations.

J. Signs. A permittee shall display conspicuously in the lobby of the site the following signs, so that each sign may be readily seen by persons entering the testing site, and each sign must be at least eight (8) inches by ten (10) inches in size:

1. “This site is not open to the public.”

2. “Retail sales of any goods and services is prohibited.”

3. “Minors are prohibited from entering this site.”

4. “Smoking, ingesting, or consuming cannabis on or within 20 feet of this site is prohibited.”

K. Restricted Access.

1. The site shall be closed to the general public. No one shall be allowed on the testing site, except for employees, or persons with a bona fide business or regulatory purpose for being on the site, such as contractors or inspectors.

2. Minors are prohibited at all times from entering the location of the site. (Ord. 17-1637, § 2)

615150 Wholesale Distribution Operating Standards and Restrictions.
A commercial cannabis operation engaged in distribution shall operate in conformance with both the general operating standards and restrictions for all commercial cannabis operations provided for in CMC 615120, as well as with the following minimum standards, and such standards shall be deemed to be part of the conditions of the permit for a distribution commercial cannabis operation to ensure that its operation is in compliance with California law and the Carson Municipal Code, and to mitigate any potential adverse impacts of the commercial cannabis operation on the public health, safety or welfare.

Additional minimum standards may be adopted from time to time either by resolution or ordinance from the City Council, or by the Director (upon authorization by resolution from the City Council).

A. City Permit and State License. No person shall engage in distribution without both a current and valid City commercial cannabis operation permit issued for distribution as well as a current and valid equivalent State license as provided for under Business and Professions Code Division 10, and as may be amended.

B. State Standards. All State requirements and regulations that govern distribution operations, including but not limited to the regulations promulgated by the California Bureau of Cannabis Control within the Department of Consumer Affairs, and as may be amended, shall apply as minimum requirements and regulations for distribution commercial cannabis operations within the City of Carson, in addition to the requirements and regulations of this Chapter and this Code.

C. Location Restrictions.

1. No distribution operation shall locate or operate in any zone of the City of Carson, other than in industrial or commercial zones.

2. No distribution operation shall locate within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of a school, day care center, youth center, park, library, hotel or regional shopping mall. The distance shall be measured as the shortest horizontal distance measured in a straight line from the property line of one site to the property line of another site.

D. Distribution Restrictions.

1. Distribution operations shall distribute cannabis and cannabis products only between licensed cannabis commercial operations.

2. Distribution operations shall not conduct retail sales of cannabis or cannabis products.

3. Distribution operations shall not distribute any cannabis or cannabis products to retail operations unless such cannabis or cannabis products have been properly tested and approved for retail sale pursuant to State law.

4. Upon demand by any Operations Officer a distributor shall make immediately available copies of any required shipping manifests as understood by Business and Professions Code Section 26070(f).

E. Site Requirements. The site shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Visibility. Neither cannabis nor cannabis products shall be visible from the public right-of-way, the unsecured areas surrounding the buildings on the site, or the site’s main entrance and lobby.

2. Main Entrance and Lobby. The site shall have a building with a main entrance that is clearly visible from the public street or sidewalk. The main entrance shall be maintained clear of barriers, landscaping, and other obstructions. Inside of the main entrance, there shall be a lobby to receive persons into the site and to verify whether they are allowed in the distribution commercial cannabis operation areas. Members of the general public shall not be allowed in the distribution commercial cannabis operation areas except for reasons of lawful business.

3. Secure Product. All cannabis and cannabis products at the site shall be kept in a secured manner at all times.

4. Transport Area. Each building with a storage area shall have an area designed for the secure transfer of cannabis from vehicles to the storage area.

5. Storage Area. Each building shall have adequate storage space for cannabis. The storage areas shall be separated from the main entrance and lobby, and shall be secured by a lock accessible only to employees of the permittee.

F. Sanitation. The permittee shall establish and implement written procedures that maintain the highest industry standards of sanitation and cleanliness for the operation so as to ensure the distribution of cannabis and cannabis products free of harmful contaminants.

G. Training. The permittee shall establish and implement written procedures that provide for the highest industry standards of training for employees engaged in distribution operations.

H. Signs. A permittee shall display conspicuously in the lobby of the site the following signs, so that each sign may be readily seen by persons entering the site, and each sign must be at least eight (8) inches by ten (10) inches in size:

1. “This site is not open to the public.”

2. “Retail sales of any goods and services is prohibited.”

3. “Minors are prohibited from entering this site.”

4. “Smoking, ingesting, or consuming cannabis on or within 20 feet of this site is prohibited.”

I. Restricted Access.

1. The site shall be closed to the general public. No one shall be allowed on the distribution site, except for employees, or persons with a bona fide business or regulatory purpose for being on the site, such as contractors or inspectors.

2. Minors are prohibited at all times from entering the location of the site. (Ord. 17-1637, § 2)

615160 Manufacturing Operating Standards and Restrictions.
Manufacturing operating standards and restrictions will be developed and promulgated in guidelines to be adopted by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 17-1637, § 2)

615170 Delivery Operating Standards and Restrictions.
A. Deliveries Allowed. Cannabis deliveries are allowed in the City subject to the requirements of this Chapter and compliance with applicable State law.

B. Licenses and Permits. Deliveries of cannabis and cannabis products shall only occur within the City by a commercial cannabis operation properly licensed or permitted to engage in cannabis deliveries by both the State of California as well as the originating jurisdiction of the delivery.

C. Business License. Commercial cannabis operations that conduct deliveries of cannabis or cannabis products to customers located in the City, regardless of the originating jurisdiction of the delivery, are required to have a valid and current City business license to engage in such commercial activity. (Ord. 17-1637, § 2)

615180 Administration.
Further rules, regulations, procedures and standards for the administration and implementation of this Chapter may be adopted from time to time either by resolution or ordinance from the City Council, by the Director (upon authorization by resolution from the City Council), or as further provided by this Chapter. (Ord. 17-1637, § 2)

615190 Fees.
An application fee set by resolution of the City Council shall be required for formal processing of every application made under this Chapter. The City Council is authorized to pass resolutions to recover any and all fees and costs incurred by the administration and implementation of this Chapter through an appropriate fee recovery mechanism to be imposed upon commercial cannabis operations. (Ord. 17-1637, § 2)

615200 Suspension and Revocation.
A. The Cannabis Permit Committee is authorized to suspend and/or revoke a commercial cannabis operation permit issued pursuant to this Chapter upon the determination through written findings of a failure to comply with any provision of this Chapter, any permit condition, or any agreement or covenant as required pursuant to this Chapter.

B. Prior to suspension or revocation of a commercial cannabis operation permit, the permittee shall be provided with a written notice which details the violation(s). The permittee shall have seven (7) days to cure the violation to the satisfaction of the Cannabis Permit Committee. The seven (7) day cure period may be extended by the Director or the City Council for reasonable cause.

C. The Cannabis Permit Committee may suspend or revoke a commercial cannabis operation permit if any of the following occur, and the suspension or revocation shall be final:

1. The Director determines that the commercial cannabis operation has failed to comply with any aspect of this Chapter, any permit condition, or any agreement or covenant as required pursuant to this Chapter; or

2. The equivalent State license has been suspended or revoked by the State of California; or

3. Operations cease for more than one hundred eighty (180) calendar days (including during any change of ownership, if applicable); or

4. Ownership is changed without securing a new commercial cannabis operation permit; or

5. The commercial cannabis operation fails to maintain required security camera recordings; or

6. The commercial cannabis operation fails to allow inspection of the security recordings, the activity logs, the records, or of the site by Operations Officers pursuant to this Chapter.

D. Conditions (if any) of suspension or revocation are at the discretion of the Director and may include, but are not limited to, a prohibition on all owners, operators, managers and employees of the suspended or revoked commercial cannabis operation from operating within the City for a period of time set forth in writing and/or a requirement (when operations may resume, if at all, pursuant to the Director’s determination) for the holder of the suspended or revoked permit to resubmit an application for a commercial cannabis operation permit pursuant to the requirements of this Chapter. (Ord. 17-1637, § 2)

615210 Violations and Penalties – Public Nuisance.
A. Any violation of the provisions of this Chapter is punishable as a misdemeanor or an infraction, at the discretion of the City Prosecutor, pursuant to Chapter 2 of Article I, except for as preempted by State law; and, any violation of the provisions of this Chapter is subject to administrative citation, at the discretion of the City, pursuant to Chapter 2.5 of Article I.

B. Public Nuisance Abatement.

1. Any commercial cannabis operation that is conducted in violation of any provision of this Chapter is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance and, as such, may be abated or enjoined from further operation, in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 7 of Article V.

2. All costs to abate such public nuisance, including attorneys’ fees and court costs, shall be paid by the person causing the nuisance, including the commercial cannabis operation permittee and the property owner where the nuisance is occurring.

C. The remedies described in this Section are not mutually exclusive. Pursuit of any one remedy shall not preclude the City from availing itself of any or all available administrative, civil, or criminal remedies, at law or equity.

D. Any violation of the provisions of this Chapter shall constitute a separate offense for each and every day during which such violation is committed or continued. (Ord. 17-1637, § 2)

615220 Service of Notices.
Any notice required by this Chapter is deemed issued and served upon the earliest date that either: the notice is deposited in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the most recent mailing address provided to the City pursuant to the requirements of this Chapter; or, the date upon which personal service of the notice is provided to a responsible party. (Ord. 17-1637, § 2)

615230 Prohibitions.
A. Any commercial cannabis operation in violation of the Adult Use of Marijuana Act, the Medicinal and Adult-Use of Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act, this Chapter, or any other applicable State law is expressly prohibited.

B. It is unlawful for any commercial cannabis operation in the City, or any agent, employee or representative of such commercial cannabis operation, to permit any breach of peace or any disturbance of public order or decorum by any tumultuous, riotous or disorderly conduct at the site of the commercial cannabis operation. (Ord. 17-1637, § 2)

615240 Nonconforming Use.
No use which purports to have engaged in a commercial cannabis activity of any nature prior to the enactment of this Chapter shall be deemed to have been a legally established use under the provisions of this Code, or any other local ordinance, rule or regulation, and such use shall not be entitled to claim legal nonconforming status. (Ord. 17-1637, § 2)

615250 Severability.
If any section, subsection, subdivision, sentence, clause, phrase, word, or portion of this Chapter is, for any reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Chapter. The City Council of the City of Carson hereby declare that they would have adopted this Chapter and each section, subsection, subdivision, sentence, clause, phrase, word, or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, sentences, clauses, phrases, words or portions thereof be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 17-1637, § 2)

CHAPTER 17
PERSONAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION
Sections:

617010    Purpose and Intent.

617020    Definitions.

617030    Personal Cannabis Cultivation.

617040    Personal Cannabis Cultivation Permit.

617050    Public Nuisance.

617010 Purpose and Intent.
The purpose and intent of this Chapter is to establish reasonable regulations, consistent with the meaning of Health and Safety Code Section 11362.2, and as may be amended, for the cultivation of up to six (6) cannabis plants at a private residence. (Ord. 17-1637, § 3)

617020 Definitions.
As used in this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:

A. “Accessory structure” means a subordinate building located on the same lot as a private residence, the use of which is customarily part of, incidental and secondary to that of the private residence, and which does not change the character of the residential use of the private residence.

B. “Applicant” means a person who files an application for a permit under this Chapter.

C. “Cannabis” means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. “Cannabis” also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. “Cannabis” does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination.

D. “City Manager” means the City Manager of the City of Carson, and includes his/her designees.

E. “Cultivation” means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of one or more cannabis plants or any part thereof.

F. “Cultivation site” means the real property on which cannabis cultivation occurs.

G. “Director” means the Director of Community Development for the City of Carson, and includes his/her designees.

H. “Marijuana” has the same definition as provided for “cannabis” in this Chapter.

I. “Permit” means an indoor personal cannabis cultivation permit issued pursuant to this Chapter.

J. “Person” means any individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

K. “Private residence” has the same meaning as the term is defined in Health and Safety Code Section 11362.2(b)(5), and as may be amended, which provides that private residence “means a house, an apartment unit, a mobile home, or other similar dwelling.” (Ord. 17-1637, § 3)

617030 Personal Cannabis Cultivation.
A. Prohibition. Personal cannabis cultivation is prohibited in all zones of the City. No person shall engage in the personal cultivation of cannabis in the City for any purpose.

B. Limited Exemption. The general prohibition on personal cannabis cultivation in subsection (A) of this Section does not apply to the indoor cultivation of cannabis at a private residence conducted both pursuant to a valid and current permit as provided for in this Chapter, as well as with complete adherence to the following regulations:

1. Six (6) Plants Total. Total cultivation is limited to no more than six (6) living cannabis plants at any one (1) time.

2. Indoor Cultivation Only. Cultivation shall occur entirely within a private residence or within an accessory structure to a private residence located upon the grounds of a private residence that is fully enclosed and secure.

3. No Access to Minors; Locked Space. Cultivation shall occur within a locked space inaccessible to minors (including minors residing at the private residence) and trespassers.

4. Visibility. The six (6) living plants and any cannabis produced by the plants in excess of 28.5 grams shall not be visible from any public right-of-way, or in any manner be visible by normal unaided vision from a place regularly accessible to the general public.

5. Odor.

a. The odor resulting from all cannabis cultivation shall not be detectable by human senses from any neighboring property or public right-of-way.

b. As necessary (which final determination shall be made by the Director), to ensure that no odor resulting from cannabis cultivation shall be detectable by human senses from any neighboring property or public right-of-way, a cannabis cultivation site shall install and continuously operate a functioning ventilation and filtration system which complies with all applicable building code regulations, including obtaining all required permits and approvals.

6. Inspections. Cultivation sites shall be inspected before issuance of a personal cannabis cultivation permit by the Code Enforcement Division of the City. Personal cannabis cultivation permits are subject to an inspection during the two (2) year term of the permit, and any subsequent two (2) year terms for a renewed permit. Inspections shall be for the purpose of determining whether the cultivation site meets the requirements of this Chapter, as well as other applicable chapters of the Carson Municipal Code.

7. Nuisance Activity. Cultivation shall not result in a nuisance or adversely affect the health, welfare, or safety of the resident or nearby residents by creating dust, glare, heat, noise, noxious gases, odors, smoke, traffic, vibration, or other impacts, or be hazardous due to use or storage of materials, processes, products or waste.

8. Fire Extinguisher. A working portable fire extinguisher, which complies with the regulations and standards adopted by the State Fire Marshal and applicable law, shall be kept in the same room as indoor cannabis cultivation. For good cause, additional fire extinguishers may be required at the direction of the Fire Captain.

9. Electricity.

a. The collective draw from all electrical appliances at the cannabis cultivation site shall not exceed the maximum rating of the approved electrical panel for the private residence where the cannabis is being cultivated.

b. The maximum rating shall be as established in the manufacturer specifications for the approved electrical panel.

10. Lighting. Any lighting fixture or combination of lighting fixtures used for cannabis cultivation shall:

a. Not exceed the rated wattage and capacity of the circuit breaker; and

b. Shall be shielded so as to completely confine light and glare to the interior of the private residence or fully enclosed accessory structure.

11. Private Residence. Any private residence used for cultivation shall:

a. Include a fully functional and usable kitchen, as well as bathroom and bedroom areas, for use by the permit holder; and

b. Shall not be used primarily or exclusively for cannabis cultivation.

12. Garage. Cultivation shall not displace required parking in a garage.

C. Additional Regulations. Further rules, regulations, procedures, and standards for the administration and implementation of this Chapter may be adopted from time to time either by resolution or ordinance of the City Council, or by the Director (upon authorization by resolution of the City Council). (Ord. 17-1637, § 3)

617040 Personal Cannabis Cultivation Permit.
A. Permit Application. An applicant shall submit an application to the Director, in a form provided by the City, and the application shall contain the following information:

1. The address of the property where cannabis cultivation is to occur.

2. The name of the applicant and a statement as to whether the applicant is an owner or tenant of the property where cannabis cultivation is to occur.

3. If the applicant is not the owner of the property, property owner acknowledgment, in a form provided by the City, that the property owner consents to the cultivation of cannabis at the cannabis cultivation site.

4. Proof, in a form acceptable to the City, that the cultivation site has been inspected and approved by the Code Enforcement Division of the City. Such inspections shall be for the purpose of determining whether the proposed cultivation site meets the requirements of this Chapter, as well as other applicable chapters of the Carson Municipal Code.

5. A scaled property site plan and a scaled diagram of the floor plan of the residence, and/or the fully enclosed and secure accessory structure, to be used for cultivation at the cannabis cultivation site, and an itemized list of measures taken to comply with the provisions of this Chapter, including identification and description of lighting and equipment to be used for the cannabis cultivation at the residence.

6. Any other information the Director deems necessary to efficiently administer applications and permits so as to further the purposes of this Chapter.

B. Action on Applications.

1. Upon receipt of a completed application and payment of the application and permit fees, the Director shall review the information contained in the application to determine whether the applicant shall be issued the permit.

2. If the Director determines that the applicant has completed the application improperly, the Director shall notify the applicant within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application. Applicant will then have thirty (30) days to complete the application. If the application is not submitted within that time frame, or is resubmitted incomplete, the Director shall deem the application abandoned, and the applicant may then resubmit a new application for review.

3. Within sixty (60) days of receipt of a completed application, the Director shall complete the review, approve or deny the application, and so notify the applicant by United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the address stated in the application.

4. The Director shall grant the application upon affirmative findings for all of the following requirements:

a. The applicant, and the cannabis cultivation site, are both in compliance with State law governing cannabis cultivation; and

b. The applicant, and the cannabis cultivation site, are both in compliance with all of the provisions of this Chapter, including any regulations promulgated under this Chapter; and

c. The cannabis cultivation site complies with the Building Code, Fire Code, Plumbing Code, and any other such applicable code adopted by the City.

5. At the Director’s sole discretion, the time limits in this subsection (B) may be extended upon written notification from the Director to the applicant.

C. Permits Valid for Two (2) Years. A permit issued under this Section shall automatically expire two (2) years after issuance.

D. Permit Not Transferable. A permit issued pursuant to this Chapter is nontransferable and is specific to both the permit holder and the private residence for which it was issued.

E. Permit Renewals.

1. A permit holder shall request renewal of a permit at least sixty (60) days, but not sooner than ninety (90) days, prior to expiration of the permit. Permit holders shall pay a permit renewal fee and submit to the Director, in a form provided by the City, a renewal application. The Director shall determine what information is required to be presented with a renewal application. The renewal application shall include, but not be limited to, determination whether any information provided with any prior application (whether an initial application or a renewal application) has changed since such prior submission.

2. Procedures for processing an initial application shall be followed for processing a renewal application except as provided herein. The Director shall make a determination on a permit renewal application within sixty (60) days of receipt of a complete renewal application. If the renewal application is denied, and the applicant properly appeals the decision of the Director, the existing permit shall remain valid until a final determination on the appeal is reached pursuant to the appeals process described in this Chapter.

3. At the Director’s sole discretion, the time limits in this subsection (E) may be extended upon written notification from the Director to the applicant.

F. Permit Revocation. Permits issued under this Section may be revoked by the Director upon making any of the following findings:

1. The permit was issued in error or the application contained materially incorrect or false information.

2. The cannabis cultivated at the cultivation site has been sold or used for any commercial use, or any other use or activity prohibited by City or State law, including but not limited to Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.1, 11362.2, and 11362.3, and as they may be amended.

3. The cannabis cultivation site has become a public nuisance or has been operated in a manner constituting a public nuisance.

4. The cannabis cultivation is not in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter.

G. Cure Period. Prior to suspension or revocation of a permit issued under this Section, the permittee shall be provided with a written notice which details the violation(s). The permittee shall have seven (7) days to cure the violation to the satisfaction of the Director. The seven (7) day cure period may be extended by the Director or the City Council for reasonable cause.

H. Appeals. Any decision regarding an application for, a renewal of, suspension of, or the revocation of, a personal cannabis cultivation permit may be appealed to the City Manager by an applicant or (former) permit holder as follows:

1. Appellant must file a written appeal with the Carson City Clerk within ten (10) calendar days of the decision. The written appeal shall specify the person making the appeal, identify the decision appealed from, state the reasons for the appeal, and include any evidence in support of the appeal.

2. Notice of the time and place of an appeal hearing shall be provided to the appellant within thirty (30) days of receipt of the written appeal by the Carson City Clerk.

3. The appeal hearing shall be held within sixty (60) days of the filing of the written appeal with the Carson City Clerk, unless the sixty (60) day time limit is waived by the appellant, or unless the City Manager continues the appeal hearing date for good cause and upon written notification to the appellant.

4. The City Manager shall review the facts of the matter, written documents submitted for review, the basis for making the decision which is under appeal, and then determine whether the Director’s decision should be reversed or affirmed. The determination made shall be in writing, shall set forth the reasons for the determination, and shall be final.

5. The provisions of Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6 set forth the procedure for judicial review of any final determination.

I. Fees. An application fee set by resolution of the City Council may be required for formal processing of every application and appeal made under this Chapter. The City Council is authorized to pass resolutions to recover any and all fees and costs incurred by the administration and implementation of this Chapter through an appropriate fee recovery mechanism to be imposed upon indoor cannabis cultivators and their operations. (Ord. 17-1637, § 3)

617050 Public Nuisance.
A. Public Nuisance Abatement.

1. Cannabis cultivation that is conducted in violation of any provisions of this Chapter is deemed a public nuisance, which may be abated or enjoined from further operation, in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 7 of Article V as applicable to this Chapter.

2. All costs to abate such public nuisance, including attorneys’ fees and court costs, shall be paid by the person causing the nuisance and the property owner where the nuisance is occurring.

B. The remedies described in this Section are not mutually exclusive. Pursuit of any one (1) remedy shall not preclude the City from availing itself of any or all available administrative, civil, or criminal remedies, at law or equity.

C. Any violation of the provisions of this Chapter shall constitute a separate offense for each and every day during which such violation is committed or continued. (Ord. 17-1637, § 3)

 

ARTICLE VII
STREETS
Chapters:

1    Highway Permit Ordinance

2    Master Plan of Streets and Highways

3    Small Wireless Facilities

CHAPTER 1
HIGHWAY PERMIT ORDINANCE
Sections:

§ 7100    Adoption of Highway Permit Ordinance.

§ 7101    Amendments to Highway Permit Ordinance.

§ 7102    Protection of Hazardous Excavations in Public Streets, Ways and Places.

§ 7102.1    Compliance with Safety Orders.

§ 7102.2    Protection of Excavation.

§ 7102.3    Nature of Protection.

§ 7102.4    Protection – When to be Provided.

§ 7102.5    Penalties.

§ 7103    Transfer of Duties Relating to Construction Permits, Inspections and Administration to Director of Public Works.

§ 7104    Amendments to Highway Permit Ordinance.

§ 7105    Engineering Services Relating to Construction Permits Under the Highway Permit Ordinance.

§ 7106    Repealed.

§ 7107    Repealed.

7100 Adoption of Highway Permit Ordinance.
The Highway Permit Ordinance, being Ordinance No. 3597 of the County of Los Angeles, as amended and in effect on December 7, 1979, except as hereinafter provided is hereby adopted as the Highway Permit Ordinance of the City of Carson.

Three (3) copies of said Ordinance No. 3597 of the County of Los Angeles, California, as amended, have been deposited with the office of the City Clerk of the City of Carson and shall be at all times maintained by said Clerk for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 2, § 7100; Ord. 29, § 7; Ord. 80-510, § 1)

7101 Amendments to Highway Permit Ordinance.
Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 7100 and the provisions of said Highway Permit Ordinance adopted thereby, said Highway Permit Ordinance is amended as follows:

1. Insofar as said Highway Permit Ordinance is inconsistent with the provisions of CMC 7102, CMC 7102 shall control and be applicable.

(Ord. 33, § 7101)

7102 Protection of Hazardous Excavations in Public Streets, Ways and Places.
(Ord. 33, § 7102)

7102.1 Compliance with Safety Orders.
Every person who digs, excavates or constructs any opening, ditch, trench, or other excavation in any public street, way or place in the City of Carson, shall comply with the Safety Orders issued by the California State Division of Industrial Safety, which are hereby found, determined and ordained to be necessary for the protection of pedestrians and other persons, particularly children, using or properly in or upon such public streets, ways or places, or in the immediate vicinity thereof. (Ord. 33, § 7102.1)

7102.2 Protection of Excavation.
Every person who digs, excavates or constructs any opening, ditch, trench or other excavation in any public street, way or place in the City of Carson which exceeds a depth of six (6) feet, shall protect such opening, ditch, trench or other excavation by a fence, cover or patrol as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 33, § 7102.2)

7102.3 Nature of Protection.
Such fence shall consist of boards or planks not less than one (1) inch in nominal thickness fitted closely together, or chain link with openings not to exceed two (2) inches in diameter or equivalent, shall be not less than five (5) feet in height and shall be securely mounted on wooden posts not less than four (4) inches by four (4) inches in size, or on steel pipe not less than one and one-half (1-1/2) inches in diameter, securely embedded in the ground or surface of such public street, way or place, or securely mounted on shoring constructed in said opening, ditch, trench or other excavation, in such manner as to exclude entry of a person into said opening, ditch, trench or other excavation, under or through such fence. Any cover shall be sufficient to exclude entry of persons into said opening, ditch, trench, or excavation to the satisfaction of the street superintendent. Such patrol shall consist of not less than one (1) uniformed patrolman or watchman on foot for each length of continuous excavation not to exceed eight hundred (800) feet in length; provided, that if visibility is reduced by obstruction or otherwise, additional patrolmen or watchmen shall be required in order that the entire length of such excavation is under visual observation. If such opening, ditch, trench or other excavation shall be in separated segments, parts or units otherwise divided, each such segment, part or unit shall constitute a separate opening, ditch, trench or other excavation for the purposes of this Section 7102. (Ord. 33, § 7102.3)

7102.4 Protection – When to be Provided.
Such protection shall be provided at all times while work is not actually in progress in such opening, ditch, trench or other excavation, or workmen are not on the excavation site for the furtherance of such work, except that if a patrolman or watchman shall be provided pursuant to CMC 7102.3, such patrolman or watchman need not be on duty between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. (Ord. 33, § 7102.4)

7102.5 Penalties.
Every person who excavates, digs or otherwise creates any such opening, ditch, trench or other excavation, or who causes the same to be excavated, dug or otherwise created, or who is in charge of such excavation, digging or other creation thereof, and who fails to comply with any applicable provisions of this CMC 7102 or who violates any term or provision thereof, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any part of which any such violation occurs. (Ord. 33, § 7102.5)

7103 Transfer of Duties Relating to Construction Permits, Inspections and Administration to Director of Public Works.
Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 7100 and the provisions of said Highway Permit Ordinance adopted thereby: All powers, duties and responsibilities of the Road Commissioner of the County of Los Angeles with respect to permits, inspections, work, administration or otherwise relating to construction in City streets (as more particularly set forth and specified in Section 100(d) of said Highway Permit Ordinance), are hereby transferred to and vested in the Director of Public Works of the City of Carson. “Commissioner” or “Road Commissioner of the County of Los Angeles” shall mean the Director of Public Works of the City of Carson in all cases where such officer’s title is used in said Highway Permit Ordinance in connection with such construction. “Road Department” shall mean the Public Works Department of the City of Carson in all cases where such term is used in said Highway Permit Ordinance in connection with such construction. (Ord. 72-246, § 2)

7104 Amendments to Highway Permit Ordinance.
Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 7100 and the provisions of said Highway Permit Ordinance adopted thereby, said Highway Permit Ordinance is amended by adding, repealing or amending sections thereof as follows:

(a) Section 143 is added to read:

SECTION 143. The commissioner may restrict the use of, or close any county highway whenever he considers such closing or restriction of use necessary:

(a) For the protection of the public.

(b) For the protection of such County highway from damage during storms.

(c) During construction, improvement or maintenance operations thereon.

(b) Section 304 is amended to read:

SECTION 304. The issuance fee shall be established by order of the Board of Supervisors. The fee shall not exceed the amount determined by the Board of Supervisors to be sufficient to defray the cost of handling by the County. In the absence of any such order, the issuance fee shall be $10.00 for construction permits and $1.00 for other permits.

(c) Section 308 is amended to read:

SECTION 308. The Commissioner may charge for any engineering or inspection on permits for the construction of curbs, gutters, walks and highway surfaces except when such permit is for a resident property owner in connection with said improvements at his single family residence.

(d) Section 313 is amended to read:

SECTION 313. The Commissioner’s costs of repairing and restoring the highway surface may be charged to permittee on the square-foot-thickness method or on an actual cost basis.

Under the square-foot-thickness method, the charge shall be computed as follows: The square feet of surface repaired, multiplied by the number of inches of depth plus one (1) inch, multiplied by the rate set by order of the Board of Supervisors. In the absence of such an order, the rate shall be $0.15 and the cost in any case shall be presumed to be not less than $10.00.

(e) Section 316 is added to read:

SECTION 316. Whenever a permittee fails to comply with the conditions established for the exercise of a privilege granted under a permit, the Commissioner may revoke the privilege. Upon such revocation, the permittee shall immediately restore the highway to the Commissioner’s satisfaction. If the permittee fails to do so, the Commissioner may restore the highway at the expense of the permittee or charge the permittee a fee of $100.00 a day for each day of failure to restore the highway.

(f) Section 706 is amended to read:

SECTION 706. The width of an individual driveway shall be considered as being the net width thereof, exclusive of side slopes and returns, measured along the line of the curb or center line of the highway. The width of an individual driveway shall be not less than ten (10) feet and shall not exceed in width:

(a) Twenty (20) feet if the driveway serves only residences or apartments.

(b) Twenty (20) feet for lots or parcels of land less than one hundred (100) feet wide.

(c) Thirty (30) feet or twenty (20) percent of the frontage of the lot or parcel of land, whichever is greater, but not to exceed forty (40) feet, when the driveway serves other than residences or apartments on a lot or parcel of land not less than one hundred (100) feet wide. An exception may be granted by the Commissioner in the case of a two-way driveway which has a barrier curb separation on private property in which case the apron may be sixty (60) feet in width.

(g) Section 707 is amended to read:

SECTION 707. The maximum number of driveways serving a single lot or parcel of land from any one (1) highway shall not exceed two (2) for a frontage of two hundred (200) feet or less. In the event a single lot or parcel of land has a highway frontage exceeding two hundred (200) feet, an additional driveway may be allowed for each additional one hundred (100) feet of frontage.

(Ord. 72-246, § 3)

7105 Engineering Services Relating to Construction Permits Under the Highway Permit Ordinance.
In the event the permittee cannot obtain an engineering firm to do the desired work with respect to the proposed construction, the Public Works Department may provide such services. To guarantee payment of costs incurred by the Department in performing such work, the permittee shall deposit with the Director of Public Works an amount estimated by the Director to equal the projected costs. In the event the amount deposited is insufficient to pay for work performed by the Department, the Director shall bill the permittee in accordance with Section 501 of said Highway Permit Ordinance. If the amount of deposit exceeds the cost of such services, the excess will be refunded to permittee. (Ord. 72-246, § 4; Ord. 82-625, § 1)

7106 Repealed.
Repealed by Ord. 82-625.

7107 Repealed.
Repealed by Ord. 82-625.

CHAPTER 2
MASTER PLAN OF STREETS AND HIGHWAYS
Sections:

§ 7200    Adoption of Master Plan.

7200 Adoption of Master Plan.
The Master Plan of Highways of the County of Los Angeles, insofar as it affected the area now within the City of Carson before incorporation, is hereby adopted as the Master Plan of Streets and Highways of the City of Carson. The City Clerk is directed to keep on file in his office for use by the public three (3) copies of said Master Plan of Highways of Los Angeles County. (Ord. 2, § 7200)

 

CHAPTER 3
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
Sections:

§ 7300    Small Wireless Facilities.

7300 Small Wireless Facilities.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, all “small wireless facilities” as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.6002(l), as may be amended or superseded, are subject to a permit as specified in a City Council policy, which may be adopted, amended and/or repealed by a resolution of the City Council. All small wireless facilities shall comply with such policy. If the policy is repealed and not replaced, an application for a small wireless facility shall be processed pursuant to Article IX. (Ord. 19-1929U, § 4; Ord. 19-1930, § 4)

ARTICLE VIII
BUILDING REGULATIONS – SEWAGE AND WASTE
Chapters:

1    Building Code

2    Electrical Code

3    Plumbing Code

4    Mechanical Code

5    Sewage and Industrial Waste

6    Floodplain Management

CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODE*
Sections:

§ 8100    Adoption of Building Code.

§ 8101    Violations and Penalties.

§ 8102    Amendment to Building Code.

§ 8103    Amendment to Building Code.

§ 8104    Amendment to Building Code.

§ 8105    Amendment to Building Code.

§ 8106    Amendment to Building Code.

§ 8107    Amendment to Building Code.

§ 8108    Amendment to Building Code.

§ 8109    Los Angeles County Building Code Title 26, Chapter 68, Adopted.

§ 8110    Reserved.

§ 8111    Amendment to Building Code.

§ 8112    Amendment to Building Code.

§ 8113    Amendment to Building Code.

§ 8114    Amendment to Building Code.

§ 8115    Amendment to Building Code.

§ 8116    Amendment to Building Code.

§ 8150    Adoption of Residential Code.

* Editor’s Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 2, 29, 68-83, 70-119, 70-141, 71-168, 71-178, 72-221, 72-224, 75-348, 76-365, 77-396U, 77-418, 79-459, 81-560, 81-564, 81-575, 81-583, 82-627, 85-712, 88-843, 89-870, 89-894U, 92-964, 92-981U.

8100 Adoption of Building Code.
Except as hereinafter provided, Title 26, Building Code, of the Los Angeles County Code, as amended and in effect on January 1, 2017, adopting the California Building Code, 2016 Edition (Part 2 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations), is hereby adopted by reference, and shall be known and may be cited as the Building Code of the City of Carson.

The provisions of the Building Code applying to dwellings, lodging houses, congregate residences, motels, apartment houses, or other uses classified by the Building Code as a Group R Occupancy and including Chapters 1, 2, 98 and 99 shall constitute and may be cited as the Housing Code of the City of Carson.

In the event of any conflict between a provision of the California Building Code, 2016 Edition, Title 26 of the Los Angeles County Code, or any amendment to the Building Code contained in the Carson Municipal Code, the provision contained in the latter listed document shall control.

Copies of Title 26 of the Los Angeles County Code and the California Building Code, 2016 Edition, have been deposited in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Carson and shall be at all times maintained by the City Clerk for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 95-1080U, § 1; Ord. 99-1162, § 1; Ord. 02-1262U, § 1; Ord. 02-1262, § 1; Ord. 08-1411, § 1; Ord. 11-1464U, § 1; Ord. 14-1532U, § 1; Ord. 14-1532, § 1; Ord. 17-1611U, § 1; Ord. 17-1611, § 1)

8101 Violations and Penalties.
(a) Compliance with Code. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or perform any grading in the City of Carson, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of the Building Code.

(b) Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of the Building Code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of the Building Code is committed, continued or permitted, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 95-1080U, § 1; Ord. 99-1162, § 1; Ord. 02-1262U, § 1; Ord. 02-1262, § 1)

8102 Amendment to Building Code.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 8100, the Building Code is amended by amending the following definitions in Section 202 thereof to read:

Section 202. Definitions. Whenever any of the names or terms defined in this Section are used in this Code, each such name or term shall be deemed and construed to have the meaning ascribed to it in this Section.

“Board of Appeals” shall mean the Board of Appeals established by Section 105 hereof.

“Building Department” shall mean the Building and Safety Division of the Los Angeles County Department of Public Works acting as the Building and Safety District Engineer.

“Building Official” shall mean the Director of Public Works of the County of Los Angeles acting as the Building and Safety District Engineer.

“City” shall mean the city of Carson except in Section 101.3 of said Building Code.

“County,” “County of Los Angeles,” or “unincorporated territory of the County of Los Angeles” shall mean the city of Carson.

“Electrical Code” shall mean the Electrical Code as adopted by CMC 8200.

“Fire Code” shall mean the Fire Code as adopted by CMC 3100.

“Fire Zone” shall mean the fire zone adopted by an ordinance creating and establishing fire zones.

“General Fund” shall mean the City Treasury of the city of Carson.

“Health Code” or “Los Angeles County Health Code” shall mean the Health Code as adopted by CMC 5100 as amended.

“Health Officer” shall mean the Health Officer of the city of Carson.

“Mechanical Code” shall mean the Mechanical Code as adopted by CMC 8400 as amended.

“Plumbing Code” shall mean the Plumbing Code as adopted by CMC 8300 as amended.

“Special Inspector” shall mean a person holding a valid Certificate of Registration issued by the County of Los Angeles as set forth in Section 108.6 of this Code.

(Ord. 95-1080U, § 1; Ord. 99-1162, § 1; Ord. 02-1262U, § 1; Ord. 02-1262, § 1; Ord. 08-1411, § 1)

8103 Amendment to Building Code.
Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 8100, the Building Code is amended by deleting therefrom the third sentence of Section 1101.1 and all of Section 7005.7. (Ord. 95-1080U, § 1; Ord. 99-1162, § 1; Ord. 02-1262U, § 1; Ord. 02-1262, § 1)

8104 Amendment to Building Code.
Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 8100, the Building Code is amended by amending Section 9906 thereof to read:

Section 9906. Building Rehabilitation Appeals Board. In order to hear appeals provided for in Chapter 98 and in this Chapter, there shall be and is hereby created a Building Rehabilitation Appeals Board consisting of five (5) members who are qualified to pass on matters pertaining to substandard building and property. The members of the Board shall be appointed by and hold office at the pleasure of the City Council of the City and may recommend such new legislation as deemed necessary.

The Board shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its investigations. The Building Official shall be an ex-officio nonvoting member and act as a secretary. He shall keep a record of all proceedings and notify all parties concerned of the findings and decisions of the Board.

(Ord. 95-1080U, § 1; Ord. 99-1162, § 1; Ord. 02-1262U, § 1; Ord. 02-1262, § 1)

8105 Amendment to Building Code.
Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 8100, the Building Code is hereby amended by amending exceptions 1 and 2 of Section 7003.1 to read as follows:

EXCEPTIONS: A grading permit shall not be required for:

1.  An excavation which (a) is less than three (3) feet in depth below natural grade, or (b) does not create a cut slope greater than three (3) feet in height and steeper than one and one-half (1-1/2) horizontal to one (1) vertical.

2. A fill not intended to support structures and which does not obstruct a drainage course if such fill is placed on natural grade that has a slope not steeper than three (3) horizontal to one (1) vertical and (a) is less than one (1) foot in depth at its deepest point, measured vertically upward from natural grade to the surface of the fill, or (b) does not exceed twenty (20) cubic yards on any one (1) lot.

(Ord. 95-1080U, § 1; Ord. 99-1162, § 1; Ord. 02-1262U, § 1; Ord. 02-1262, § 1)

8106 Amendment to Building Code.
Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 8100, the Building Code is hereby amended by adding Section 3304 to read as follows:

3304 Drainage. Site drainage from improved portions of a parcel of land shall not be permitted to flow over public property.

EXCEPTION: Groups R and U occupancies.

(Ord. 95-1080U, § 1; Ord. 99-1162, § 1; Ord. 02-1262U, § 1; Ord. 02-1262, § 1)

8107 Amendment to Building Code.
Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 8100, the Building Code is hereby amended by adding Sections 106.4.6, 106.4.7, and 106.4.8 to read:

106.4.6. Permits (Masonry Wall Between Commercial and Residential Zones). No building permit shall be issued for any structure or for the extension, expansion or enlargement of an existing use of any commercial zoned property on which a masonry wall is required by CMC 9136.3 until such wall has been constructed or construction thereof has been provided for, and the construction or improvement authorized in such building permit shall not pass final inspection until such masonry wall has been constructed in accordance with said CMC 9136.3.

106.4.7. Permits (Masonry Wall Between Industrial and Residential Zones). No building permit shall be issued for any structure or the extension, expansion or enlargement of an existing use on any industrial zoned property on which a masonry wall is required by CMC 9146.3 until such wall has been constructed or construction thereof has been provided for, and the construction or improvement authorized in such building permit shall not pass final inspection until such masonry wall has been constructed in accordance with said CMC 9146.3.

106.4.8. Permits (Parkway Trees). No building permit shall be issued for any construction valued in excess of $1,000 on a lot or parcel of land in a residential, commercial or industrial zoned district with respect to which parkway trees are required by CMC 9161.10 until such parkway trees have been provided for and construction authorized in such building permit shall not pass final inspection until such parkway trees have been planted in accordance with said CMC 9161.10.

(Ord. 95-1080U, § 1; Ord. 99-1162, § 1; Ord. 02-1262U, § 1; Ord. 02-1262, § 1)

8108 Amendment to Building Code.
Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 8100, the Building Code is hereby amended by:

(A) Adding a paragraph at the end of Section 107.1 to read:

The building permit fee for structures required to have a methane gas control system by Section 110.3 shall be one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the fee indicated in Table 1-A.

(B) Adding a paragraph at the end of Section 107.2 to read:

A methane gas control system plan check fee is required for all structures regulated by Section 110.3. Said fee shall be in an amount based upon the current contractual hourly rate between the City of Carson and the Los Angeles County Department of Public Works for plan checking. At the time the gas control plans are submitted, a plan check deposit of $1,000 shall be paid to the Building Official. Upon approval of the plans or suspension of the plan check, any unencumbered portion of the deposit shall be returned upon written request by the applicant. If the deposit amount is exhausted prior to approval of the plans, an additional deposit shall be made in an amount determined by the Building Official.

(C) Adding a subpart 14 to Section 107.8 to read:

For review of a gas monitoring report for a structure regulated by Section 110.3

$80.00

(D) Amending Section 110.3 to read:

110.3. Fills Containing Decomposable Material. Permits shall not be issued for buildings or structures or additions thereto regulated by this Code within one thousand (1,000) feet of fills containing rubbish or other decomposable material except as hereinafter provided, unless the fill is isolated by approved natural or man-made protective systems or unless designed according to the recommendation contained in a report prepared by a licensed civil engineer. Such report shall contain a description of the investigation, study and recommendation to minimize the possible intrusion, and to prevent the accumulation of explosive concentrations of decomposition gases within or under enclosed portions of such building or structure. At the time of the final inspection, the civil engineer shall furnish a signed statement attesting that the building or structure or addition thereto has been constructed in accordance with his recommendations as to decomposition gases required herein.

Buildings or structures or additions thereto regulated by this code shall not be constructed on fills containing rubbish or other decomposable material unless provision is made to prevent damage to structure, floors, underground piping and utilities due to uneven settlement of the fill. One-story light frame accessory structures not exceeding four hundred (400) square feet in area nor twelve (12) feet in height may be constructed without special provision for foundation stability.

Gas monitoring reports prepared by a licensed Civil Engineer shall be submitted to the Building Official in accordance with a monitoring schedule agreed upon with the City Engineer when such reports are required as a condition for issuance of a permit. It shall be unlawful to occupy a structure for which the gas monitoring has not been performed when required and a report submitted in accordance with the schedule.

Group R-3 and Group U occupancies and additions thereto within one thousand (1,000) feet of a landfill site but not actually on any such site may be constructed with a protective system as shown in Figure 1-A or Figure 1-B (see diagrams following this Section) upon execution and recordation of a waiver of liability in favor of the City.

(E) Amending Section 110.4 by adding the following paragraphs between the first and second paragraphs to read:

Group R-3 and Group U occupancies and additions thereto located at least twenty-five (25) feet from an active, abandoned, or idle oil or gas well may be constructed with a protective system as shown in Figure 1-A or Figure 1-B of Section 110.3 upon execution and recordation of a waiver of liability in favor of the City.

FIGURE 1-A

Landfill Gas Protective System for Group R-3 or U Occupancy Buildings with Slab Floors

1. Parallel collector pipes shall not exceed a twenty (20) foot spacing.

2. Collector pipes shall extend completely across the building. Where collector pipes are more than twenty (20) feet in length, vent pipes must be provided at all ends.

3.  All elements of the gas control system must be inspected and approved by the City of Carson Building Inspector before covering.

4. An electrical seal off must be provided at all points where electrical conduits, including an underground service conduit, leave the ground.

5. Extend collector pipes into all footing cavity areas and into all areas separated by parallel footings.

FIGURE 1-B

Landfill Gas Protective Systems for Group R-3 or U Occupancy Buildings with Conventional Floors

1. Provide foundation vents of three (3) square feet per twenty-five (25) lineal feet of exterior wall. Openings shall be provided near the corners and shall be located on at least three (3) sides of the building.

2. All elements of the gas control system must be inspected and approved by the City of Carson Building Inspector before covering.

3. All penetrations of the floor membrane system must be tightly sealed with resilient caulking material. Caulking must be supported by wire screening or metal flashing attached to the plywood, except for small holes for electrical wiring.

4. An electrical seal-off must be provided at all points where electrical conduit leaves the ground, including the service entrance conduit.

(Ord. 95-1080U, § 1; Ord. 99-1162, § 1; Ord. 02-1262U, § 1; Ord. 02-1262, § 1; Ord. 08-1415, § 1)

8109 Los Angeles County Building Code Title 26, Chapter 68, Adopted.
Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 8100, Chapter 68 (Expedited Permitting for Small Residential Rooftop Solar Energy Systems) of Title 26 of the Building Code of the Los Angeles County Code enacted on September 1, 2015, is hereby adopted in its entirety by reference and expressly incorporated herein. Title 26 of the Los Angeles County Code is hereby made a part of this chapter as if, for all intents and purposes, fully set forth in this Chapter. This adoption by reference shall include any subsequent amendments to Title 26 unless modified in this Chapter. (Ord. 15-1566U, § 2; Ord. 15-1566, § 2)

8110 Reserved.
8111 Amendment to Building Code.
Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 8100, the Building Code is hereby amended by providing that the amount of each and every fee set forth in said Building Code, including but not limited to the fees set forth in Section 107 and in Table Nos. 1-A and 1-B of said Building Code, shall be the fee set forth in the most current resolution of the City Council establishing fees pursuant to said Building Code. Unless further modified by ordinance of the City Council, fees shall be sixty (60) percent greater than those set forth in said Building Code. (Ord. 95-1080U, § 1; Ord. 99-1162, § 1; Ord. 02-1262U, § 1; Ord. 02-1262, § 1; Ord. 08-1415, § 2; Ord. 17-1612, § 2)

8112 Amendment to Building Code.
Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 8100, the Building Code is hereby amended as follows:

(A) Section 9602 is amended by amending the paragraph entitled Exceptions to read:

EXCEPTIONS:

1. This Chapter shall not apply to dwellings and lodging houses defined as R-3 occupancies nor to accessory buildings defined as Group U occupancies.

2. This Chapter shall not apply to warehouses used strictly for the storage of materials that are not hazardous or highly flammable, except for the following requirement: The owners of such buildings shall file an affidavit with the Building Official stating that the building will be used only for storage of materials that are not hazardous or highly flammable. A permanent sign shall be affixed and maintained at each entrance to such buildings stating:

This building is constructed of unreinforced masonry. In accordance with Chapter 96 of the City of Carson Building Code, this building is to be used only for the storage of materials that are not hazardous or highly flammable. This sign shall not be removed.

(B) Table No. 96-C of Chapter 96 is amended by changing the Minimum Time Periods for Service of Order for each Rating Classification as follows:

Rating Classification

Minimum Time Periods For Service of Order

I (Highest Priority)

180 days

II

180 days

III A

180 days

III B

180 days

III C

180 days

IV (Lowest Priority)

180 days

(Ord. 95-1080U, § 1; Ord. 99-1162, § 1; Ord. 02-1262U, § 1; Ord. 02-1262, § 1)

8113 Amendment to Building Code.
Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 8100, the Building Code is hereby amended by:

(A) Adding the following paragraphs at the end of Section 105 to read:

A fee of $255.00 shall be paid to the Building Official whenever a person requests a hearing before the Building Board of Appeals.

EXCEPTION: No fee shall be required for a hearing requested pursuant to Subsection 102.4.1 or for a hearing requested pursuant to Subsection 9606.4 to appeal an initial determination that a building is within the scope of Chapter 96.

All requests to appeal determinations, orders or actions of the Building Official, or to seek modifications of previous orders of the Building Board of Appeals shall be presented in writing.

(B) Adding a paragraph at the end of subsection 107.2 to read:

An additional hourly fee shall be paid to the Building Official for overtime plan check when requested by the applicant and approved by the Building Official. For purposes of this subsection, overtime shall mean hours worked outside of normal business hours established at City Hall.

(C) Amending subsection 107.9.2 to read:

107.9.2. For search of office records and a single copy of a microfilmed permit

$1.80

 

 

And, for each additional copy of permit

$1.80

(Ord. 95-1080U, § 1; Ord. 99-1162, § 1; Ord. 02-1262U, § 1; Ord. 02-1262, § 1; Ord. 08-1415, § 3)

8114 Amendment to Building Code.
Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 8100, the Building Code is hereby amended by deleting Section 107.19. (Ord. 95-1080U, § 1; Ord. 99-1162, § 1; Ord. 02-1262U, § 1; Ord. 02-1262, § 1; Ord. 08-1415, § 4)

8115 Amendment to Building Code.
Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 8100, the Building Code is hereby amended by amending Section 7014.2 to read as follows:

7014.2 Planning and Zoning Compliance. No grading permit shall be issued for the import or export of more than ten thousand (10,000) cubic yards of earth material to or from a grading site where such work would be classified as “Project Grading” as defined in the City of Carson Zoning Ordinance unless the project is in conformance with said ordinance.

(Ord. 95-1080U, § 1; Ord. 99-1162, § 1; Ord. 02-1262U, § 1; Ord. 02-1262, § 1)

8116 Amendment to Building Code.
Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 8100, the Building Code is hereby amended by deleting Chapter 95 in its entirety. (Ord. 95-1080U, § 1; Ord. 99-1162, § 1; Ord. 02-1262U, § 1; Ord. 02-1262, § 1)

8150 Adoption of Residential Code.
Except as hereinafter provided, Title 30, Residential Code, of the Los Angeles County Code, as amended and in effect on January 1, 2017, adopting the California Residential Code, 2016 Edition (Part 2.5 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations), is hereby adopted by reference, and shall be known and may be cited as the Residential Code of the City of Carson.

The provisions of the Building Code and Residential Code applying to dwellings, lodging houses, congregate residences, motels, apartment houses, or other uses classified by the Building Code as a Group R Occupancy and including Chapters 1, 2, 98 and 99 of the Building Code shall constitute and may be cited as the Housing Code of the City of Carson.

In the event of any conflict between a provision of the California Residential Code, 2016 Edition, Title 30 of the Los Angeles County Code, or any amendment to the Residential Code contained in the Carson Municipal Code, the provision contained in the latter listed document shall control.

Copies of Title 30 of the Los Angeles County Code and the California Residential Code, 2016 Edition, have been deposited in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Carson and shall be at all times maintained by the City Clerk for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 11-1464U, § 1; Ord. 14-1532U, § 1; Ord. 14-1532, § 1; Ord. 17-1611U, § 1; Ord. 17-1611, § 1)

CHAPTER 2
ELECTRICAL CODE
Sections:

§ 8200    Adoption of Electrical Code.

§ 8201    Definitions.

§ 8202    Violations and Penalties.

§ 8203    Amendment to Electrical Code.

§ 8204    Amendment to Electrical Code.

§ 8205    Amendment to Electrical Code.

8200 Adoption of Electrical Code.
Except as hereinafter provided, Title 27, Electrical Code, of the Los Angeles County Code, as amended and in effect on January 1, 2017, adopting the California Electrical Code, 2016 Edition (Part 3 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations), is hereby adopted by reference, and shall be known and may be cited as the Electrical Code of the City of Carson.

In the event of any conflict between a provision of the California Electrical Code, 2016 Edition, Title 27 of the Los Angeles County Code, or any amendment to the Electrical Code contained in the Carson Municipal Code, the provision contained in the latter listed document shall control.

Copies of Title 27 of the Los Angeles County Code and the California Electrical Code, 2016 Edition, have been deposited in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Carson and shall be at all times maintained by the City Clerk for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 2, § 8200; Ord. 29; Ord. 72-235, § 1; Ord. 75-348, § 3; Ord. 76-365, § 3; Ord. 77-418, § 3; Ord. 79-490, § 1; Ord. 82-627, § 2; Ord. 83-661, § 1; Ord. 86-740, § 1; Ord. 88-843, § 2; Ord. 89-894U, § 3; Ord. 92-964, § 2; Ord. 95-1080U, § 2; Ord. 99-1162, § 2; Ord. 02-1262U, § 2; Ord. 02-1262, § 2; Ord. 05-1339, § 1; Ord. 08-1411, § 2; Ord. 11-1464U, § 2; Ord. 14-1532U, § 2; Ord. 14-1532, § 2; Ord. 17-1611U, § 2; Ord. 17-1611, § 2)

8201 Definitions.
Whenever any of the following names or terms are used in the Electrical Code adopted by CMC 8200, each such name or term shall be deemed and construed to have the meaning ascribed to it in this Section as follows:

“Chief Electrical Inspector” shall mean the Director of Public Works of the County of Los Angeles except in Section 80-4 of the Electrical Code.

“County,” “County of Los Angeles” or “unincorporated area of the County of Los Angeles” shall mean the City of Carson.

“Maintenance Electrician” shall mean a person holding a valid Certificate of Registration as Maintenance Electrician issued by the County of Los Angeles as set forth in Section 82-4(b) of the Electrical Code.

“Special Inspector” shall mean a person holding a valid Certificate of Registration as Special Inspector issued by the County of Los Angeles as set forth in Section 82-14(a) of the Electrical Code. (Ord. 71-179, § 1; Ord. 72-235, § 3; Ord. 75-348, § 3; Ord. 79-490, § 1; Ord. 95-1080U, § 2; Ord. 99-1162, § 2; Ord. 02-1262U, § 2; Ord. 02-1262, § 2)

8202 Violations and Penalties.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate any of the provisions of this Chapter. Each person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion thereof during which such violation is committed, continued or permitted and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of not more than six (6) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 75-348, § 3; Ord. 79-490, § 1; Ord. 82-627, § 2; Ord. 83-661, § 1; Ord. 86-740, § 1; Ord. 88-843, § 2; Ord. 89-894U, § 3; Ord. 92-964, § 2; Ord. 95-1080U, § 2; Ord. 99-1162, § 2; Ord. 02-1262U, § 2; Ord. 02-1262, § 2)

8203 Amendment to Electrical Code.
Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 8200, the Electrical Code is hereby amended by increasing the amount of each and every fee set forth in said Electrical Code, including but not limited to the fees set forth in Section 82-8 of said Electrical Code, to be the fee set forth in the most current resolution of the City Council establishing fees pursuant to said Electrical Code. In the event no such resolution is in effect, said fees shall be one hundred (100) percent greater than those set forth in said Electrical Code. (Ord. 82-627, § 2; Ord. 95-1080U, § 2; Ord. 99-1162, § 2; Ord. 02-1262U, § 2; Ord. 02-1262, § 2)

8204 Amendment to Electrical Code.
Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 8200 and 8203, the Electrical Code is amended by:

(A) Amending the first paragraph of subsection 82-8(a) to read:

(a) Electrical Permit Fees.

PERMITS

 

For issuing permits, each

$26.00

(B) Adding a paragraph at the end of subsection 82-8(b) to read:

An additional fee of $95.00 per hour shall be paid to the Chief Electrical Inspector for overtime plan check, when requested by the applicant and approved by the Chief Electrical Inspector. For the purposes of this subsection, overtime shall mean hours worked outside of normal business hours established at City Hall.

(C) Amending subsection 82-8(e) to read:

(e) Investigation Fee for Work Without a Permit. Whenever any work has been commenced without a permit as required by the provisions of Section 82-3 of this Code, a special investigation shall be made prior to the issuance of the permit. An investigation fee shall be collected for each permit so investigated. The investigation fee shall be equal to and in addition to the permit fees specified in Section 82-8, but in no event shall the investigation fee be less than $200.00.

EXCEPTION 1: The fee shall be $100.00 when the Chief Electrical Inspector has determined that the owner-builder of a one (1) or two (2) family dwelling, accessory building or accessory structure had no knowledge that a permit was necessary and had not previously applied for a permit from the Building and Safety Division of the County of Los Angeles.

EXCEPTION 2: The foregoing provisions shall not apply to emergency work when it shall be proved to the satisfaction of the Chief Electrical Inspector that such work was urgently necessary and that it was not practical to obtain a permit therefor before the commencement of the work. In all such cases, a permit must be obtained as soon as it is practical to do so, and if there be an unreasonable delay in obtaining such permit this exception shall not apply and the investigation fee shall be charged.

(D) Amending the second paragraph of Section 84-2 to read:

The noncompliance fee shall not be imposed unless the order states that a failure to comply within fifteen (15) days after the compliance date specified in the order will result in the fee being imposed. No more than one (1) such fee shall be collected for failure to comply with an order. The amount of the noncompliance fee shall be $60.00 per building for one (1) and two (2) family dwelling occupancies and $120.00 per building for all other occupancies, and shall be in addition to the fees specified elsewhere in this Code.

(Ord. 92-964, § 2; Ord. 95-1080U, § 2; Ord. 99-1162, § 2; Ord. 02-1262U, § 2; Ord. 02-1262, § 2)

8205 Amendment to Electrical Code.
Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 8200, Section 80-10 of the Electrical Code is hereby repealed. (Ord. 92-964, § 2; Ord. 95-1080U, § 2; Ord. 99-1162, § 2; Ord. 02-1262U, § 2; Ord. 02-1262, § 2)

CHAPTER 3
PLUMBING CODE
Sections:

§ 8300    Adoption of Plumbing Code.

§ 8301    Definitions.

§ 8302    Violations and Penalties.

§ 8303    Amendment to Plumbing Code.

§ 8304    Amendment to Plumbing Code.

§ 8305    Amendment to Plumbing Code.

8300 Adoption of Plumbing Code.
Except as hereinafter provided, Title 28, Plumbing Code, of the Los Angeles County Code, as amended and in effect on January 1, 2017, adopting the California Plumbing Code, 2016 Edition (Part 5 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations), is hereby adopted by reference, and shall be known and may be cited as the Plumbing Code of the City of Carson.

In the event of any conflict between a provision of the California Plumbing Code, 2016 Edition, Title 28 of the Los Angeles County Code, or any amendment to the Plumbing Code contained in the Carson Municipal Code, the provision contained in the latter listed document shall control.

Copies of Title 28 of the Los Angeles County Code and the California Plumbing Code, 2016 Edition, have been deposited in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Carson and shall be at all times maintained by the City Clerk for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 2, § 8300; Ord. 29, § 10; Ord. 72-221, § 8; Ord. 75-348, § 5; Ord. 77-418, § 5; Ord. 76-365; Ord. 81-575, § 2; Ord. 82-627, § 3; Ord. 85-712, § 2; Ord. 88-843, § 3; Ord. 89-894U, § 4; Ord. 92-964, § 3; Ord. 92-981U, § 3; Ord. 95-1080U, § 3; Ord. 99-1162, § 3; Ord. 02-1262U, § 3; Ord. 02-1262, § 3; Ord. 08-1411, § 3; Ord. 11-1464U, § 3; Ord. 14-1532U, § 3; Ord. 14-1532, § 3; Ord. 17-1611U, § 3; Ord. 17-1611, § 3)

8301 Definitions.
Whenever any of the following names or terms are used in the Plumbing Code, each such name or term shall be deemed and construed to have the meaning ascribed to it in this Section as follows:

“Administrative Authority,” “Chief Plumbing Inspector” or “Plumbing Inspector” shall mean the Director of Public Works of the County of Los Angeles acting as the City Engineer except in Section 101.4 of the Plumbing Code.

“Board of Examiners of Plumbers and Gas Fitters” or “Board of Examiners” shall mean the Board of Examiners of Plumbers and Gas Fitters of the County of Los Angeles established by Section 105.3 of the Plumbing Code.

“City” shall mean the City of Carson except in Section 101.3 of the Plumbing Code.

“County,” “County of Los Angeles” or “unincorporated territory of the County of Los Angeles” shall mean the City of Carson.

“Gas Fitting Contractor,” “Journeyman Gas Fitter,” “Journeyman Plumber,” or “Plumbing Contractor” shall mean a person holding a valid Certificate of Registration issued by the County of Los Angeles as set forth in Section 72 of the Plumbing Code. (Ord. 72-221, § 8; Ord. 75-348, § 5; Ord. 95-1080U, § 3; Ord. 99-1162, § 3; Ord. 02-1262U, § 3; Ord. 02-1262, § 3)

8302 Violations and Penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of the Plumbing Code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each separate day or any portion thereof, during which any violation of the Plumbing Code occurs or continues, shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as herein provided. (Ord. 71-177, § 1; Ord. 72-221, § 9; Ord. 75-348, § 5; Ord. 82-627, § 3; Ord. 85-712, § 2; Ord. 88-843, § 3; Ord. 89-894U, § 4; Ord. 92-964, § 3; Ord. 92-981U, § 3; Ord. 95-1080U, § 3; Ord. 99-1162, § 3; Ord. 02-1262U, § 3; Ord. 02-1262, § 3)

8303 Amendment to Plumbing Code.
Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 8300, the Plumbing Code is hereby amended by increasing the amount of each and every fee set forth in said Plumbing Code, including but not limited to the fees set forth in Section 49, including Table 1-1 of said Plumbing Code, to be the fee set forth in the most current resolution of the City Council establishing fees pursuant to said Plumbing Code. In the event no such resolution is in effect, said fees shall be one hundred (100) percent greater than those set forth in said Plumbing Code. (Ord. 82-267, § 3; Ord. 95-1080U, § 3; Ord. 99-1162, § 3; Ord. 02-1262U, § 3; Ord. 02-1262, § 3)

8304 Amendment to Plumbing Code.
Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 8301 and 8302, the Plumbing Code is amended as follows:

(a) Subsection 218.0 of the Plumbing Code is amended by changing the definition of “Person” to read:

Person is an individual human being, a firm, partnership or corporation, his or their heirs, executors, administrators, assigns, officers or agents; the County of Los Angeles and any local agency as defined in Section 53090 of the Government Code, or officers thereof. Singular includes plural; male includes female.

(b) Subsection 705.1.1 of the Plumbing Code is amended by adding the following sentence which reads as follows:

All joints for liquid materials to be reamed to full size and cleaned of all loose materials.

(c) Section 705.3 of the Plumbing Code is amended by adding subsection 705.3.4 which reads as follows:

705.3.4 Dielectric unions shall be used at all points of connection where there is a dissimilarity of metals.

(Ord. 89-894U, § 5; Ord. 92-964, § 4; Ord. 92-981U, § 4; Ord. 95-1080U, § 3; Ord. 99-1162, § 3; Ord. 02-1262U, § 3; Ord. 02-1262, § 3)

8305 Amendment to Plumbing Code.
Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 8300, Section 103.19 of the Plumbing Code is hereby deleted. (Ord. 92-964, § 4; Ord. 95-1080U, § 3; Ord. 99-1162, § 3; Ord. 02-1262U, § 3; Ord. 02-1262, § 3)

CHAPTER 4
MECHANICAL CODE
Sections:

§ 8400    Adoption of Mechanical Code.

§ 8401    Definitions.

§ 8402    Violations and Penalties.

§ 8403    Amendment to Mechanical Code.

8400 Adoption of Mechanical Code.
Except as hereinafter provided, Title 29, Mechanical Code, of the Los Angeles County Code, as amended and in effect on January 1, 2017, adopting the California Mechanical Code, 2016 Edition (Part 4 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations), is hereby adopted by reference, and shall be known and may be cited as the Mechanical Code of the City of Carson.

In the event of any conflict between a provision of the California Mechanical Code, 2016 Edition, Title 29 of the Los Angeles County Code, or any amendment to the Mechanical Code contained in the Carson Municipal Code, the provision contained in the latter listed document shall control.

Copies of Title 29 of the Los Angeles County Code and the California Mechanical Code, 2016 Edition, have been deposited in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Carson and shall be at all times maintained by the City Clerk for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 38, § 8400; Ord. 72-221, § 10; Ord. 75-348, § 7; Ord. 76-365, § 7; Ord. 77-418, § 7; Ord. 82-627, § 4; Ord. 85-712, § 3; Ord. 88-843, § 4; Ord. 89-894U, § 6; Ord. 92-964, § 4; Ord. 92-981U, § 4; Ord. 95-1080U, § 4; Ord. 99-1162, § 4; Ord. 02-1262U, § 4; Ord. 02-1262, § 4; Ord. 08-1411, § 4; Ord. 11-1464U, § 4; Ord. 14-1532U, § 4; Ord. 14-1532, § 4; Ord. 17-1611U, § 4; Ord. 17-1611, § 4)

8401 Definitions.
Whenever any of the following names or terms are used in the Mechanical Code, each such name or term shall be deemed and construed to have the meaning ascribed to it in this Section as follows:

“Board of Appeals” or “Board of Examiners of Plumbers” shall mean the Board of Examiners of Plumbers and Gas Fitters of the County of Los Angeles established by Section 101.9 of the Plumbing Code.

“Building Department” shall mean the Building and Safety Division of the Department of Public Works acting as the City Engineer.

“Building Code,” “Uniform Building Code” or “Los Angeles County Building Code” shall mean the Building Code of the City of Carson as amended.

“Building Official” shall mean the Director of Public Works of the County of Los Angeles acting as the City Engineer.

“City” shall mean the City of Carson.

“Electrical Code” shall mean the Electrical Code as adopted by CMC 8200 as amended.

“Fire Code” or “Los Angeles County Fire Code” shall mean the Fire Code as adopted by CMC 3100 as amended.

“General Fund” shall mean the City Treasury of the City of Carson.

“Health Code” or “Los Angeles County Health Code” shall mean the Health Code as adopted by CMC 5100 as amended.

“Mechanical Code” shall mean the Mechanical Code of the City of Carson.

“Plumbing Code” shall mean the Plumbing Code as adopted by CMC 8300 as amended. (Ord. 71-176, § 1; Ord. 72-221; Ord. 75-348, § 7; Ord. 95-1080U, § 4; Ord. 99-1162, § 4; Ord. 02-1262U, § 4; Ord. 02-1262, § 4)

8402 Violations and Penalties.
No person, firm or corporation shall erect, install, alter, repair, relocate, add to, replace, use or maintain heating, ventilating, comfort cooling, or refrigeration equipment in the jurisdiction, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of the Mechanical Code. Maintenance of equipment which was unlawful at the time it was installed, and which would be unlawful under said Mechanical Code, shall constitute a continuing violation of said Mechanical Code.

Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of said Mechanical Code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of said Mechanical Code is committed, continued, or permitted, and upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 72-221, § 12; Ord. 82-627, § 4; Ord. 85-712, § 3; Ord. 88-843, § 4; Ord. 89-894U, § 6; Ord. 92-964, § 4; Ord. 92-981U, § 5; Ord. 95-1080U, § 4; Ord. 99-1162, § 4; Ord. 02-1262U, § 4; Ord. 02-1262, § 4)

8403 Amendment to Mechanical Code.
Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 8400, the Mechanical Code is hereby amended by increasing the amount of each and every fee set forth in said Mechanical Code, including but not limited to the fees set forth in Section 115 and Table 1-A of said Mechanical Code, to be the fee set forth in the most current resolution of the City Council establishing fees pursuant to said Mechanical Code. In the event no such resolution is in effect, said fees shall be one hundred (100) percent greater than those set forth in said Mechanical Code. (Ord. 81-577, § 2; Ord. 82-627, § 4; Ord. 95-1080U, § 4; Ord. 99-1162, § 4; Ord. 02-1262U, § 4; Ord. 02-1262, § 4)

8404 Amendment to Mechanical Code.
Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 8400, Section 117 of the Mechanical Code is hereby repealed. (Ord. 92-964, § 4; Ord. 95-1080U, § 4; Ord. 99-1162, § 4; Ord. 02-1262U, § 4; Ord. 02-1262, § 4)

CHAPTER 5
SEWAGE AND INDUSTRIAL WASTE
Sections:

§ 8500    Adoption of Sanitary Sewer and Industrial Waste Ordinance.

§ 8501    Definitions.

§ 8502    Amendments to Sanitary Sewer Ordinance.

§ 8503    Amendments to Sanitary Sewer Ordinance.

§ 8504    Amendments to Sanitary Sewer Ordinance.

§ 8505    Violations and Penalty.

8500 Adoption of Sanitary Sewer and Industrial Waste Ordinance.
Title 20, Utilities, Division 2, Sanitary Sewers and Industrial Waste, of the Los Angeles County Code as amended and in effect on January 2, 1990, is hereby adopted by reference as the Sanitary Sewer and Industrial Waste Ordinance of the City of Carson.

A copy of the Sanitary Sewer and Industrial Waste Ordinance has been deposited in the office of the City Clerk of the City and shall be at all times maintained by the Clerk for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 2, § 8400; Ord. 29, § 8400; Ord. 38; Ord. 71-180, § 1; Ord. 78-455, § 1; Ord. 90-901, § 1)

8501 Definitions.
Whenever any of the following names or terms are used in said Sanitary Sewer and Industrial Waste Ordinance, each such name or term shall be deemed and construed to have the meaning ascribed to it in this Section as follows:

“Board” shall mean the City Council.

“County Engineer” shall mean the City Engineer.

“County Health Officer” shall mean the City Health Officer.

“County of Los Angeles” shall mean the City of Carson except in such instances where the County of Los Angeles is a correct notation due to circumstances.

“County Sewer Maintenance District” shall mean the County Sewer Maintenance District except in the instance where the territory concerned either is not within or has been withdrawn from a County Sewer Maintenance District. In any such instance, “County Sewer Maintenance District” shall mean the City of Carson.

“Ordinance” shall mean an ordinance of the City of Carson except in such instances where the reference is to a stated ordinance of the County of Los Angeles.

“Public Sewer” means all sanitary sewers and appurtenances thereto, lying within streets or easements dedicated in the City, which are under the sole jurisdiction of the City.

“Trunk Sewer” means a sewer under the jurisdiction of a public entity other than the City of Carson. (Ord. 71-180, § 2; Ord. 78-455, § 1)

8502 Amendments to Sanitary Sewer Ordinance.
Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 8500, the Sanitary Sewer and Industrial Waste Ordinance is hereby amended by deleting therefrom Section 20.32.290 and amending Sections 20.28.050 and 20.32.150 to read:

The City Engineer may recommend that the Council approve an agreement to reimburse or agree to reimburse a subdivider, school district, an improvement district formed under special assessment procedures, or person for the cost of constructing sanitary sewers for public use where such sewers can or will be used by areas outside of the proposed development, and to establish a reimbursement district and collection rates as described in the agreement under the provisions of this ordinance.

In the event the City Engineer determines that the property described in the application for a permit is included within a sewer reimbursement district, which has been formed by the Council in accordance with Section 4007.1, the charge for connecting to the public sewer shall be as set forth in the agreement.

(Ord. 71-180, § 3; Ord. 78-455, § 1; Ord. 90-901, § 2)

8503 Amendments to Sanitary Sewer Ordinance.
Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 8500, the Sanitary Sewer and Industrial Waste Ordinance is hereby amended by adding a paragraph to Section 20.32.280 to read:

All monies collected under this Section for sewer maintenance are to be submitted directly to the County Sewer Maintenance District for inclusion in the Maintenance District’s funds.

(Ord. 71-202, § 1; Ord. 78-455, § 1; Ord. 90-901, § 3)

8504 Amendments to Sanitary Sewer Ordinance.
Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 8500, the Sanitary Sewer and Industrial Waste Ordinance is hereby amended by adding a paragraph to Section 20.32.690 to read:

In the event the damaged public sewer is not in a sewer maintenance district, the violator shall reimburse the City within thirty (30) days after the City Engineer shall render an invoice for the same. The amount when paid shall be deposited in the City Treasury.

(Ord. 78-455, § 1; Ord. 90-901, § 4)

8505 Violations and Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter is committed, continued or permitted, and upon conviction is punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 82-613, § 1; Ord. 90-901, § 5)

CHAPTER 6
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Sections:

§ 8600    Statutory Authorization.

§ 8600.05    Statement of Purpose.

§ 8600.10    Definitions.

§ 8600.15    General Provisions.

§ 8600.20    Administration.

§ 8600.25    Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction.

8600 Statutory Authorization.
Government Code Sections 65302, 65560, and 65800 confer upon the City of Carson the legal authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. (Ord. 06-1351, § 1)

8600.05 Statement of Purpose.
It is the purpose of this Chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:

A. Protect human life and health;

B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;

C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;

E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage;

G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and

H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. (Ord. 06-1351, § 1)

8600.10 Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this Chapter its most reasonable application.

A. “Area of Special Flood Hazard” means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.

B. “Base Flood” means a flood which has a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the “One-Hundred-Year Flood” or “100-Year Flood”). “Base Flood” is the term used throughout this Chapter.

C. Building – see “Structure.”

D. “Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.

E. “Flood” or “Flooding” means:

1. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; or mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding as defined herein and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current.

2. The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in this definition.

F. “Floodplain” or “Flood-Prone Area” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source – see “Flooding.”

G. “Floodplain Administrator” is the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.

H. “Floodplain Management” means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.

I. “Floodplain Management Regulations” means this Chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes Federal, State or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.

J. “Governing Body” is the local governing unit, i.e., county or municipality, that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.

K. “Historic Structure” means any structure that is:

1. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

2. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;

3. Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or

4. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states with approved programs.

L. “Manufactured Home” means a structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term “Manufactured Home” does not include a “Recreational Vehicle.”

M. “Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

N. “New Construction,” for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the “Start of Construction” commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

O. “One-Hundred-Year Flood” or “100-Year Flood” – see “Base Flood.”

P. “Recreational Vehicle” means a vehicle which is

1. Built on a single chassis;

2. Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

3. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and

4. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

Q. “Start of Construction” includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

R. “Structure” means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home.

S. “Substantial Damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

T. “Substantial Improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the “Start of Construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “Substantial Damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:

1. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

2. Any alteration of a “Historic Structure”; provided, that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “Historic Structure.” (Ord. 06-1351, § 1)

8600.15 General Provisions.
1. Lands to Which This Chapter Applies. This Chapter shall apply to all areas identified as flood-prone within the jurisdiction of City of Carson.

2. Basis for Establishing Flood-Prone Areas. The Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood data available from other Federal or State agencies or other source to identify flood-prone areas within the jurisdiction of City of Carson. This data will be on file at the City Hall, City of Carson, City Clerk Office, 701 E. Carson Street, Carson, CA 90745. No construction will be permitted in areas of special flood hazard area in the City of Carson as identified in the “Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for the County of Los Angeles” dated September 30, 2005, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps (FBFMs) and any subsequent revision until such time that standards that meet appropriate NFIP requirements are adopted. An area of special flood hazard is an area in the floodplain subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on the most recent FIRM for the City of Carson as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.

3. Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this Chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the City of Carson from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.

4. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. This Chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this Chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.

5. Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this Chapter, all provisions shall be:

A. Considered as minimum requirements;

B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes.

6. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this Chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This Chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Chapter shall not create liability on the part of City of Carson, any officer or employee thereof, the State of California, or the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 06-1351, § 1; Ord. 08-1412, § 1)

8600.20 Administration.
1. Establishment of Development Permit. A development permit shall be obtained for all proposed construction or other development in the community, including the placement of manufactured homes, so that it may be determined whether such construction or other development is within flood-prone areas.

2. Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. The City Engineer is hereby appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this Chapter by granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions.

3. Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator. The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

A. Permit Review. Review all development permit applications to determine that:

1. Permit requirements of this Chapter have been satisfied;

2. All other required State and Federal permits have been obtained; and

3. The site is reasonably safe from flooding.

B. Review and Use of Any Other Base Flood Data. The Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood data available from other Federal or State agency or other source. (Ord. 06-1351, § 1)

8600.25 Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction.
1. Standards of Construction. If a proposed building site is in a flood-prone area, all new construction and substantial improvements, including manufactured homes, shall:

A. Be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.

B. Be constructed:

1. With materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;

2. Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;

3. With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.

2. Standards for Subdivisions or Other Proposed New Development. If a subdivision proposal or other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, is in a flood-prone area, any such proposals shall be reviewed to assure that:

A. All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the flood prone area;

B. All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and

C. Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.

3. Standards for Utilities.

A. All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate:

1. Infiltration of flood waters into the systems, and

2. Discharge from the systems into flood waters.

B. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 06-1351, § 1)

 

ARTICLE IX
PLANNING AND ZONING
Chapters:

1    Zoning

2    Subdivision Regulations

3    Standards and Criteria for Residential Condominiums

4    Density Bonus Provisions for Residential Units

5    Oil and Gas Code

CHAPTER 1
ZONING*
Parts:

1    Introduction

2    Residential Zones

3    Commercial Zones

4    Industrial Zones

5    Open Space Zone and Special Uses

6    General Development Standards

7    Procedures

8    Implementing Provisions

9    Definitions

*This Chapter is adopted by Ordinance No. 77-413, adopted October 3, 1977. All amendments to this Chapter are noted within the section changed.

PART 1. INTRODUCTION
Sections:

Division 1. Title, Authority and Purpose

§ 9111.1    Title.

§ 9111.2    Authority.

§ 9111.3    Purpose.

Division 2. Format

§ 9112    Explanation of Format of this Chapter.

Division 3. Zoning Classifications

§ 9113.1    Names and Purposes of Zones.

§ 9113.2    Overlay Districts.

§ 9113.3    Density Designations.

Division 4. Zoning Boundaries

§ 9114.1    Zoning Map.

§ 9114.2    Interpretation of Zoning Map.

Division 1. Title, Authority
and Purpose
9111.1 Title.
This Chapter may be cited as the Carson Zoning Ordinance.

9111.2 Authority.
This Chapter is enacted pursuant to the California Planning and Zoning Law: Title 7, Division 1, Chapter 4 (Sections 65800 through 65912) of the Government Code.

9111.3 Purpose.
The purpose of this Chapter is to serve the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare by establishing land use districts designed to obtain the physical, environmental, economic and social advantages resulting from planned use of land in accordance with the General Plan of the City of Carson, and by establishing those regulations for the development and use of land and improvements within the various districts which will ensure that the growth and development of the City of Carson shall be orderly, attractive and efficient for the maximum benefit of its citizens.

Division 2. Format
9112 Explanation of Format of this Chapter.
The Zoning Map, as indicated by CMC 9114.1, delineates the zoning district applicable to each area of the City. The general purpose of each of these districts is indicated in CMC 9113.1.

There are four (4) basic categories of zoning districts: residential, commercial, industrial and open space/special use. Parts 2, 3, 4 and 5 of this Chapter contain, respectively, most of the regulations applicable within each of these categories. Since many of the regulations are the same for all of the zoning districts within a category, separate sections of the regulations are not provided for each zoning district. Where different regulations exist among the zoning districts within the same category, these differences are shown as a part of each regulation.

For certain specific activities or land uses for which extensive regulations have been adopted as a part of the zoning regulations, these special provisions are set forth in Division 8 of either Parts 2, 3, 4 or 5, depending upon the type of use.

Parts 6, 7, 8 and 9 of this Chapter contain regulations and provisions which, for the most part, are applicable to all zoning districts. Part 6 contains general development standards including those for vehicular access and parking, trash areas and signs. Part 7 provides for the procedures to be followed in administering and changing the regulations of this Chapter. Part 8 provides for the implementation and enforcement of these regulations, including provisions for the continuation or termination of nonconformities, that is, circumstances which were lawfully established but do not comply with current regulations because of subsequent changes in the regulations. Part 9 defines various words and phrases used in this Chapter.

Division 3. Zoning Classifications
9113.1 Names and Purposes of Zones.
The following zoning districts are hereby established, with their general purposes as indicated:

Residential Zones

RS – Residential, Single-Family. This zone is created for the establishment, expansion and preservation of residential areas which are to be developed with single-family detached dwellings and such other activities considered harmonious with such low density residential development.

RM – Residential, Multiple Dwelling. This zone is created for the establishment, expansion and preservation of residential areas which are to be developed with multiple dwellings or combinations of single-family and multiple dwellings, and such other activities considered harmonious with such medium and high density residential development.

RA – Residential Agricultural. This zone is created for single-family residential uses together with compatible crop cultivation and related agricultural activities on land which is not yet fully utilized for residential purposes.

Commercial Zones

CN – Commercial, Neighborhood Center. This zone is created primarily for convenience retail shopping facilities to serve surrounding neighborhoods. Characteristically, each center is anchored by a grocery store with small retail service shops and professional offices.

CR – Commercial, Regional Center. This zone is created primarily for a major center, with its peripheral areas, which serves a community or subregional area and offers a full range of retail merchandise and services.

CG – Commercial, General. This zone is created primarily to provide areas for all types of commercial activities not grouped in commercial centers.

CA – Commercial, Automotive. This zone is created primarily to maximize and group retail sales of new automobiles at dealerships and promote the development of an auto sales district with consistent and appealing landscaping, lighting, signage and compatible architectural elements.

MU-CS – Mixed-Use – Carson Street. This zone is created primarily to create a downtown retail and residential district which will provide a distinctive core area along Carson Street which includes the Civic Center. This designation provides for pedestrian-oriented, mixed-use (commercial/residential) development which may include market rate, affordable or senior housing and transit-oriented development.

MU-SB – Mixed-Use – Sepulveda Boulevard. This zone is created primarily to create a retail, office and residential district along the south side of Sepulveda Boulevard two hundred forty (240) feet east of Marbella Avenue and four hundred (400) feet west of Avalon Street. This designation provides for mixed-use (commercial/ residential) development which may include market rate, affordable or senior housing development, residential or commercial development. The lots are very shallow in this area which makes conventional development difficult. The purpose of this zone is to create the flexibility needed to develop a vibrant residential/commercial corridor.

Industrial Zones

ML – Manufacturing, Light. This zone is created primarily for small and medium size industrial uses which are not likely to have adverse effects upon each other or upon neighboring residential and commercial zones.

MH – Manufacturing, Heavy. This zone is created primarily for the full range of industrial uses which are acceptable within the community as a whole, with provisions for controlling any adverse effects upon the more sensitive areas of the City.

Open Space Zone and Special Uses

OS – Open Space. This zone is created for the enhancement, expansion and protection of large outdoor recreation areas, natural resource areas, ecological preserves and land subject to special hazards which make such land unsuitable for buildings.

SU – Special Use. This classification is created primarily in order to provide for special zone designations with appropriate regulations for certain large or unique land uses which have a major impact upon the surrounding community and which could not have been reasonably anticipated in the zoning pattern. (Ord. 03-1279, § 1; 06-1363, § 9; Ord. 07-1392, § 9)

9113.2 Overlay Districts.
The following special designations are hereby created and may be combined by notation on the Zoning Map with any of the zoning districts listed in CMC 9113.1 in order to accomplish additional purposes within such designated areas:

BP – Blimp Port. This designation is created to provide for the development and operation of blimp ports. Properties within this designation will be required to meet certain site requirements and development standards.

CEM – Cemetery. This designation is created to provide for the development and operation of cemeteries and related uses. Properties within this designation will be required to meet certain development standards that provide for adequate setbacks, screening, parking, landscaping, and signage.

COL – College. This designation is created to provide for the development of higher education institutions that may include classrooms, administrative offices, and accessory uses. Site development standards will not be required for properties preempted under State law. All academic uses will be regulated under the rules and regulations of the Board of Trustees of the California State University and Colleges, California State Department of Finance, California Public Works Board, Office of the State Fire Marshal and Office of the State Architect.

D – Design Overlay. This designation is created primarily to provide for Site Plan and Design Review of future development within the designated areas in order to achieve special standards of design, architectural quality, style and compatibility, landscape treatment, and functional integration of neighboring developments.

EMS – Electronic Marquee Signage. This designation is created to provide for the development and operation of two (2) freeway-oriented electronic marquee signs for outdoor advertising purposes, one (1) on a 91 Freeway-adjacent commercial zone parcel and one (1) on a 405 Freeway-adjacent commercial zone parcel. The only parcels eligible for this designation shall be those four (4) parcels identified and considered in connection with the April 2001 National Training Center Environmental Impact Report (State Clearinghouse Number 2000101041) certified by the Board of Trustees of the California State University and College System.

MUR – Mixed-Use Residential. This designation is created to provide for pedestrian-oriented, mixed-use (commercial/residential) development, and high density residential development which may include market rate, affordable or senior housing, within designated areas in commercial zones.

ORL – Organic Refuse Landfill. This designation is created to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare by regulating uses of organic refuse landfill sites and ensuring that proper mitigation measures are taken to eliminate or minimize hazards to persons and property and environmental risks associated with such sites including, but not limited to, toxicity, fire, explosion and subsidence. (Ord. 94-1039, § 1; Ord. 02-1245, § 1; Ord. 11-1479, § 1)

9113.3 Density Designations.
Where a number appears on the zoning map in combination with the symbol for a residential zone, such number indicates the permitted density of development as provided in CMC 9124. (Ord. 78-449)

Division 4. Zoning Boundaries
9114.1 Zoning Map.
The map entitled “Zoning Map, City of Carson,” on file in the office of the City Clerk, City of Carson, is hereby made a part of this Chapter by this reference thereto. The boundaries and symbols (as identified in Division 3 of this Part) indicate the areas of the City to which the regulations of the various districts apply.

The boundaries and symbols shown on the Zoning Map shall be amended or revised only in accordance with Zone Changes adopted pursuant to CMC 9172.13 or Zoning Boundary Adjustments adopted pursuant to CMC 9172.24. (Amendments to zoning map: Ord. 78-421; Ord. 78-422; Ord. 78-425; Ord. 78-439; Ord. 78-456; Ord. 78-457; Ord. 79-465; Ord. 79-472; Ord. 79-476; Ord. 80-537; Ord. 80-538; Ord. 81-556; Ord. 82-604; Ord. 83-651; Ord. 86-734; Ord. 86-748; Ord. 86-753; Ord. 86-756; Ord. 86-757; Ord. 86-758; Ord. 86-759; Ord. 87-795; Ord. 87-811; Ord. 88-826; Ord. 88-827; Ord. 88-838; Ord. 88-839; Ord. 88-845; Ord. 88-846; Ord. 89-865; Ord. 89-866; Ord. 89-879; Ord. 90-914; Ord. 90-923; Ord. 90-927; Ord. 91-937; Ord. 91-950; Ord. 91-951; Ord. 91-953; Ord. 92-971; Ord. 94-1033; Ord. 94-1040; Ord. 97-1125; Ord. 99-1171; Ord. 00-1195; Ord. 00-1205; Ord. 02-1240; Ord. 02-1242; Ord. 02-1247; Ord. 02-1252; Ord. 03-1285; Ord. 04-1305, § 2; Ord. 05-1331, § 2; Ord. 05-1336, § 2; Ord. 05-1338, § 6; Ord. 06-1341, § 18; Ord. 06-1350, § 7; Ord. 06-1353, § 10; Ord. 06-1364, § 8; Ord. 06-1369, § 8; Ord. 07-1370, § 9; Ord. 07-1391, § 7; Ord. 07-1393, § 9; Ord. 07-1395, § 8; Ord. 08-1406, § 8; Ord. 08-1407, § 7; Ord. 10-1441, § 6; Ord. 11-1463, § 6; Ord. 11-1466, § 6; Ord. 12-1493, § 1; Ord. 12-1501, § 1; Ord. 12-1503, § 1; Ord. 13-1521, § 8; Ord. 13-1531, § 8; Ord. 16-1582, § 8; Ord. 17-1608, § 2; Ord. 17-1610, § 2; Ord. 17-1614, § 2)

9114.2 Interpretation of Zoning Map.
In determining the precise location of zoning boundaries as shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall be followed, with precedence given to the rules in the order listed:

A. Where properties on opposite sides of a freeway, railroad, street, alley, walkway or flood control easement or right-of-way are in different zoning classifications, the zoning boundary shall be considered to be the centerline of such right-of-way or easement unless otherwise clearly indicated. The centerline shall be considered to be the line which would become the property line in the event the right-of-way or easement were vacated. (Ord. 80-532, § 1)

B. Where the zoning boundary appears to be in the approximate location of a property line, the zoning boundary shall be considered to coincide with the property line unless otherwise clearly indicated.

C. The location of a zoning boundary shall be determined by scaling from the nearest reference points shown on the Zoning Map.

D. Where any area shown on the Zoning Map is without a zoning designation, such area shall be deemed to be classified in the RS Zone.

PART 2. RESIDENTIAL ZONES
Sections:

Division 1. Uses Permitted

§ 9121.1    Uses Permitted.

§ 9121.12    Uses Permitted on Organic Refuse Landfill Sites.

§ 9121.2    Interpretation of Uses Permitted.

§ 9121.3    Prohibited Uses.

Division 2. Accessory Uses

§ 9122.1    Accessory Living Quarters.

§ 9122.2    Outbuildings and Outdoor Uses.

§ 9122.3    Animal Keeping.

§ 9122.4    Home Occupation.

§ 9122.5    Child Day Care.

§ 9122.6    Sale of Produce in RA Zone.

§ 9122.7    Motor Vehicle Repair and Service.

§ 9122.8    Second Dwelling Units.

§ 9122.9    Sex Offender Residency Restrictions.

Division 3. Conditional Use Criteria

§ 9123    Conditional Use Criteria.

Division 4. Density

§ 9124    Dwelling Units.

Division 5. Site Requirements

§ 9125.1    Reserved.

§ 9125.2    Minimum Lot Area.

§ 9125.3    Street Frontage and Access.

§ 9125.4    Minimum Lot Width.

§ 9125.5    Multiple Single-Family Rental Units.

§ 9125.6    Second Dwelling Unit Development Standards.

Division 6. Site Development Standards

Buildings and Structures

§ 9126.11    Reserved.

§ 9126.12    Height of Buildings and Structures.

Yards and Open Spaces

§ 9126.21    Ground Coverage.

§ 9126.22    Future Rights-of-Way.

§ 9126.221    Parking Setback.

§ 9126.23    Front Yard.

§ 9126.24    Side Yards.

§ 9126.25    Rear Yard.

§ 9126.26    Passageway.

§ 9126.27    Space Between Buildings.

§ 9126.28    Usable Open Space.

§ 9126.29    Encroachments.

Other Site Development Standards

§ 9126.3    Fences, Walls and Hedges.

§ 9126.4    Trash Areas.

§ 9126.41    Trash and Recycling Areas.

§ 9126.5    Repealed.

§ 9126.6    Parking, Loading and Driveways.

§ 9126.7    Signs.

§ 9126.8    Utilities.

§ 9126.9    Site Planning and Design.

§ 9126.91    Site Planning and Design – Residential Projects That Include Affordable and/or Senior Citizen Households.

Division 7. Environmental Effects

§ 9127.1    Exterior Lighting.

Division 8. Special Requirements for Certain Uses

Residential Condominiums

§ 9128.11    Intent and Purpose.

§ 9128.12    Existing Residential Condominiums.

§ 9128.13    Application for Conditional Use Permit.

§ 9128.14    Development Policy.

§ 9128.15    Development Standards.

§ 9128.16    Development Criteria.

§ 9128.17    Declaration of Covenants – Conditions and Restrictions.

Mobile Home Parks

§ 9128.2    Mobile Home Parks.

§ 9128.21    Relocation Impact Report (RIR).

Subdivision Directional Signs

§ 9128.31    Regulation.

§ 9128.32    Application.

§ 9128.33    Specifications.

§ 9128.34    Agreement and Deposit.

§ 9128.35    Time Limit.

Home Occupations

§ 9128.4    Home Occupations.

Multiple-Family Dwelling

§ 9128.51    Multiple-Family Dwelling.

§ 9128.52    Existing Multiple-Family Dwellings.

§ 9128.53    Application for Conditional Use Permit.

§ 9128.54    Development Standards.

§ 9128.55    Development Criteria.

Reserved

§ 9128.6    Reserved.

Single-Room Occupancy Housing

§ 9128.7    Single-Room Occupancy Housing.

Division 1. Uses Permitted
9121.1 Uses Permitted.
Uses are permitted in the residential zones as indicated in the following table:

USES PERMITTED IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES

Legend

X.

Automatically permitted use.

L.

Automatically permitted use provided special limitations and requirements are satisfied as noted herein or in Division 8 of this Part.

D.

Use permitted subject to approval of the Director.

LD.

Use permitted provided special limitations and requirements are satisfied as noted herein or in Division 8 of this Part, and subject to approval of the Director.

C.

Use permitted upon approval of a conditional use permit.

CC.

Use permitted upon approval of the City Council as prescribed under other provisions of the Carson Municipal Code.

 

All residential projects that include affordable and/or senior citizen households, as defined in CMC 9126.91, shall be subject to the requirements contained in CMC 9172.23 (Site Plan and Design Review) except temporary uses set forth in this Section.

 

 

ZONES

 

RA

RS

RM

Permanent Residential Uses:

Single-family dwellings on lots 50 feet wide or greater.

X

X

X

Single-family dwellings on lots less than 50 feet wide are subject to CMC 9126.9 and 9172.23.

L

L

L

Mobile home (provided the mobile home is certified under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. Section 5401 et seq.) and is located on a permanent foundation system pursuant to Section 18551 of the California Health and Safety Code. The Director shall ensure roofing material, roof overhang, and siding material will be architecturally compatible with surrounding residences.).

L

L

L

Multiple-family dwellings on lots 50 feet wide or greater. (See CMC 9123 and 9128.51 – 9128.55.)

 

 

C

Multiple-family dwellings on lots less than 50 feet wide are subject to CMC 9126.9, 9172.23, 9123 and 9128.51 – 9128.55.

 

 

C

Residential condominium. (See CMC 9123 and 9128.11 – 9128.17.) Residential stock cooperatives.

 

 

C

Mobile home park. (See CMC 9123 and 9128.2.)

C

C

C

Group quarters for members of a religious order (convent, rectory, monastery, etc.).

 

X

Boarding or rooming house, fraternity or sorority house, dormitory and similar group quarters. (See CMC 9123.)

 

 

C

 

Small family home community care facility.

X

X

X

Community residential care facility other than a small family home; community day care facility. (See CMC 9123.) (Added by Ord. 81-566, § 3; Ord. 89-889, § 1)

 

 

C

Single-room occupancy (SRO) housing. (See CMC 9128.7.)

 

 

L

Supportive housing.

X

X

X

Transitional housing.

X

X

X

Permanent Nonresidential Uses:

Public, elementary or secondary school.

X

X

X

Private elementary or secondary school. (See CMC 9123.)

 

 

C

Church, temple or other place of religious worship:

 

 

 

Located on an arterial street.

 

 

X

Located on a collector street.

 

 

C

Cultivation of plants including nursery, orchard, vineyard, field crops, flowers, greenhouses, lathhouses, etc. (no mushroom farms, no retail sales).

X

 

 

Archaeological dig, provided the Director determines there is a reasonable prospect that significant scientific, cultural or historical information will be obtained from the site.

D

D

D

Electric distribution substation, pumping station, water well, water reservoir. (See CMC 9123.)

C

C

C

Automobile parking lot. (See CMC 9123.)

 

 

C

Automobile parking structure for a large-scale multifamily development or serving a church, temple, or other place of religious worship where the lot is adjacent to an arterial street. (See CMC 9123.)

 

 

C

Access to other property lawfully used for purposes not permitted on subject property, provided the Director finds no available alternative access is preferable and the residential character of the area will not be adversely affected.

D

D

D

Oil wells. (See CMC 9500 – 9537, Oil and Gas Code.)

 

 

 

Temporary Uses:

Mobile home occupied by the owner of the premises during construction of a dwelling, for a period not exceeding 6 months. The Director may approve time extensions of up to 6 months each provided he finds construction is proceeding in good faith.

L

L

L

Mobile home occupied by the owner of the premises as a replacement for a dwelling damaged or destroyed by a major disaster so declared by the Governor of California. Such use is limited to a period of 1 year or until a permanent dwelling is occupied, whichever is less. The Director may approve a time extension of up to 1 year provided he finds reconstruction is proceeding in good faith.

L

L

L

Contractor’s office and/or storage of construction materials and equipment at a construction site, during the period of construction and not to exceed 60 days thereafter. In the event construction is suspended for a period of 6 months, such use and material shall be terminated and removed.

L

L

L

Real estate tract office, limited to the sale of property in the tract where such office is located, for a period not exceeding 2 years. The Director may approve a time extension of up to 1 year if sales are proceeding in good faith.

L

L

L

Subdivisional directional sign. (See CMC 9128.31 – 9128.35.)

LD

LD

LD

Carnival, mechanical rides, pony rides, and similar uses. (See CMC 63119 and 63119.1.)

CC

CC

CC

Tent revival.

CC

CC

CC

Fireworks stand. (See CMC 3101.0 through 3101.10.)

 

 

CC

Wireless Telecommunications Facilities:

Major wireless telecommunications facilities, subject to the requirement of CMC 9138.16.

C

C

C

Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Section shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 2 of Article I. (Ord. 79-479, § 6; Ord. 80-532, §§ 2, 3; Ord. 81-585, § 1; Ord. 82-602, § 1; Ord. 84-700, § 1; Ord. 85-720, § 1; Ord. 86-765U, § 1; Ord. 92-972, § 1; Ord. 95-1079, Exh. A; Ord. 01-1225, § 2; Ord. 03-1284, § 1; Ord. 09-1426, § 2; Ord. 13-1525, § 1; Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 2))

9121.12 Uses Permitted on Organic Refuse Landfill Sites.
A. No use, except as hereinafter provided, shall be permitted on property designated as ORL (Organic Refuse Landfill) without the approval of a conditional use permit by both the Commission and the Council. Such conditional use permit shall require, as a condition precedent to use of the property under the conditional use permit, approval by the Building and Safety Division and the Council of a report submitted by the applicant pursuant to the provisions of the Building Code, prepared by a licensed civil engineer designated by the applicant and approved by the City, which shall provide and include plans for a protective system or systems designated to eliminate or mitigate the potential hazards and environmental risks associated with the proposed use. Approval of such report by the Building and Safety Division shall be in the discretion of the Building Official, who shall evaluate any risks and hazards associated with the site and proposed use, and who may grant approval only if he finds that the report and plans adequately provide for protection against such associated risks and hazards. The Building Official’s approval shall be submitted to the Council for final approval which will be in the discretion of the Council.

The following uses are exempt from the provisions of this Section:

1. Uses which do not involve buildings or structures, including but not limited to outdoor storage, display and outdoor recreational facilities.

2. Construction of structures which are unoccupiable, such as signs, flagpoles, walls, fences and towers, but not including storage tanks.

3. Paving of no more than twenty (20) percent of the site.

4. Repair or minor alterations to existing structures which do not increase floor area. (Ord. 78-449; Ord. 81-560, § 1; Ord. 82-586, § 1)

B. An application for a conditional use permit required by subsection A shall be considered in accordance with CMC 9172.21, except that the Commission’s decision shall be referred to the Council for review as if an appeal had been filed pursuant to CMC 9173.4.

C. Every conditional use permit for a use located on property designated as ORL (Organic Refuse Landfill) shall be subject to the following conditions in addition to any other conditions that the Commission or the Council may impose:

1. Approval by the Building Official of the report provided for in subsection A of this Section.

2. The applicant shall comply with a development schedule approved by the Community Development Director.

3. All measures to eliminate or mitigate the hazards and environmental risks associated with the site proposed in the report approved by the Building Official provided for in subsection A of this Section shall be subject to approval by the Council and shall be incorporated into the project. Such measures shall include monitoring, evaluation and control of methane gas produced by the site as the City shall determine to be necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare with respect to the production or migration of methane gas.

4. Monitoring and regular inspections and reports by a licensed civil engineer designated by the applicant and monitored, evaluated and approved by the Building Official shall be done and filed with the City from time to time as directed by the Building Official at the applicant’s cost.

5. The mitigation measures required by subsection (C)(3) shall be implemented to the satisfaction of the Building Official and City Council. In the event that the Building Official or Council finds that such measures when implemented are inadequate to protect the public health, safety, or welfare, the Building Official or Council may (1) require additional mitigation measures to be incorporated into the project, or (2) after notice to the applicant and an opportunity to be heard, declare the conditional use permit null and void if the Council finds that the public health, safety or welfare cannot be adequately protected to the satisfaction of the Council.

6. Adequate measures shall be taken to eliminate odors from the site to the satisfaction of the Building Official.

7. The applicant shall, at the applicant’s own expense, carry public liability insurance during the existence of the conditional use permit, with a company and policy to be approved by the City Attorney, covering liability for injuries or death arising out of or in connection with the use of the site pursuant to said permit in an amount not less than $5,000,000. The City shall be named as an additional assured under such insurance policy.

D. Whenever both subsection A and any other section of this Chapter require a conditional use permit for a particular property, only one (1) conditional use permit shall be required, which shall be applied for, processed and considered pursuant to the provisions of subsection B of this Section. The application and conditional use permit, if approved, shall refer to both sections which are applicable.

E. Subsection A of this Section shall not apply to the following:

1. Any lawfully established existing use.

2. An expansion of an existing, lawfully established use on a lot on which such existing use was approved provided that the existence of an organic refuse landfill in such lot is shown by the record to have been considered by the granting body in connection with the approval of such existing use.

3. Any proposed use for which a conditional use permit requiring approval of methane gas control measures by the Council either (1) has been granted, or (2) has been applied for and is being processed on the effective date of this Section; provided, that subsection A shall apply if such conditional use permit which has been granted expires, is declared to be null and void or is otherwise terminated or if such conditional use permit for which an application is being processed is thereafter denied. (Ord. 78-449; Ord. 79-471; Ord. 81-560, § 1; Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 3))

9121.2 Interpretation of Uses Permitted.
Further definition and enumeration of uses permitted in the various residential zones shall be determined by means of interpretation in accordance with CMC 9172.24.

9121.3 Prohibited Uses.
All uses are prohibited except as expressly permitted by the provisions of this Chapter.

Division 2. Accessory Uses
9122.1 Accessory Living Quarters.
As part of a single-family dwelling use, accessory living quarters may be provided, within a main building or in an accessory building, for family members, guests, servants, and not more than six (6) roomers or boarders, provided no separate kitchen facilities are provided and such quarters are not occupied or rented as a separate dwelling.

Accessory living quarters shall not exceed five hundred (500) square feet of floor area. Accessory living quarters exceeding five hundred (500) square feet of floor area, shall be subject to a conditional use permit. The accessory living quarter shall incorporate the same or substantially similar architectural features, building materials and colors as the main dwelling unit or compatible dwellings located on adjacent properties. A restrictive covenant shall be recorded on the property for any accessory living quarter approved under this Section, which prohibits conversion to a second dwelling unit without proper approval. (Ord. 03-1290, § 8; Ord. 11-1479, § 2)

9122.2 Outbuildings and Outdoor Uses.
Accessory structures (outdoor buildings) shall not exceed five hundred (500) square feet of lot coverage. Accessory structures (outdoor buildings) exceeding five hundred (500) square feet of lot coverage shall be subject to a conditional use permit. Accessory structures shall not have a bathroom, unless such bathroom is constructed as an ancillary part to the accessory structure and the accessory structure does not encroach into any required yard. A restrictive covenant shall be recorded on the property for any accessory structure approved under this Section, which prohibits conversion to a living quarter or second dwelling unit without proper approval.

A. As part of any residential use, the following accessory buildings, facilities and outdoor uses are permitted:

Private garage and carport.

Children’s playhouse and tree house.

Housing of permitted animals.

Lathhouse, greenhouse, tool house.

Hobby shop.

Amateur radio station.

Recreation facilities and areas.

Swimming pool. (See also Chapter 4 of Article III of the Carson Municipal Code.)

Tennis court, subject to a Conditional Use Permit.

Real estate advertising sign. (See CMC 9126.7.)

Yard sale. (See CMC 4600 through 4606.)

Other accessory facilities customary to residential uses. (Interpretation of this provision to be in accordance with CMC 9172.24.)

B. In conjunction with multiple dwellings or group quarters use, the following accessory buildings or facilities are permitted provided their use is limited to residents of the dwellings or quarters:

Laundry building.

Meeting room.

Automobile parking building.

Other accessory facilities customary or needed to provide a common service to residents. (Interpretation of this provision to be in accordance with CMC 9172.24.)

C. As part of a permitted agricultural use in the RA Zone, buildings and shelters for farm machinery and equipment used on the premises are permitted.

D. Fairs and bazaars when conducted by a church, school or other nonprofit public service organization are a permitted accessory use provided the fair or bazaar is located on the same site as the subject facility, does not occupy more than fifty (50) percent of the required parking area or obstruct circulation and that said events do not occur more than four (4) times in any one (1) year unless approved by the Director for additional events. (Ord. 98-1135, § 1; Ord. 03-1290, § 9; Ord. 11-1479, § 3)

9122.3 Animal Keeping.
(See also Animal Control Ordinance: Chapter 3 of Article III of the Carson Municipal Code)

The occupants of each dwelling unit or group quarters are permitted to keep only the following types of animals, for their personal use only, with the number of animals limited as indicated:

Cats and dogs, but not more than a total, in any combination of three (3) such animals over four (4) months of age.

Any number of tropical fish (no caribe).

Not more than 20 white mice and rats.

Not more than a total of three (3) of the following, in any combination:

Canaries

Chinchillas

Chipmunks

Finches

Gopher snakes

Guinea pigs

Hamsters

Hawks

King snakes

Marmoset monkeys

Mynah birds

Parrots, parakeets, amazons, cockatiels, cockatoos, lories, lorikeets, lovebirds, macaws, and similar birds of the psittacine family

Pigeons

Rabbits

Ravens

Squirrel monkeys

Steppe legal eagles

Swans

Toucans

Turtles

White doves

Other similar animals, subject to the same numerical limitations, which are neither more obnoxious nor detrimental to the public welfare than the animals listed, shall be permitted. Large animals or livestock such as horses, cows, sheep, goats, pigs, hogs and fowl such as chickens, turkeys, peacocks, guineas, geese and ducks, are not permitted. (Interpretation of this provision to be in accordance with CMC 9172.24.)

Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Section shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 2 of Article I of this Code. (Ord. 79-479, § 6)

9122.4 Home Occupation.
Subject to the provisions of CMC 9128.4, home occupations may be conducted by the occupants of a dwelling as such term is defined in CMC 9191.202.

Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Section shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 2 of Article I of this Code. (Ord. 79-479, § 6; Ord. 88-836, § 1; Ord. 11-1479, § 4)

9122.5 Child Day Care.
Day care for children may be provided as an accessory use in connection with each dwelling unit, subject to the following limits:

Single-family dwelling: not more than six (6) children exclusive of the children of the resident family; with an assistant caregiver present, not more than twelve (12) children, including children of the resident family and of the assistant caregiver.

Multiple dwelling unit: not more than three (3) children including children of the resident family. (Ord. 82-594, § 1)

9122.6 Sale of Produce in RA Zone.
In connection with a permitted agricultural use in the RA Zone, wholesale trade (but no retail sales) of the products raised on the premises may be conducted. No advertising signs are permitted.

9122.7 Motor Vehicle Repair and Service.
Minor repair and service of a motor vehicle as defined in CMC 9191.406 is permitted as an accessory use in conjunction with a dwelling unit, subject to the following limitations:

A. All minor repair and service activities, as defined in CMC 9138.11(A)(4), and minor upholstery repair may be performed on a motor vehicle if conducted within an enclosed garage or in any carport, side or rear yard which is screened from public view.

B. Minor repair and service activities performed on a driveway, in a carport, or other legally paved surface on private property, and visible from the public right-of-way, shall be limited to the following:

1. Washing, cleaning, and polishing of a motor vehicle.

2. Adding or changing fluids such as brake fluid, window washing fluid, oil, water, etc.

3. Changing or replacing wiper blades, head/tail lamps, fuses, flat tires, timing, spark plugs, radiator cap, filters, brakes, and batteries and similar activities.

All minor repairs and services may only be performed on motor vehicles owned by and registered to the occupants of the dwelling or their invitees.

No repair or service work shall involve repetitive testing of an operating engine.

Not more than one (1) motor vehicle, as viewed from a public right-of-way, may be repaired at any one (1) point in time.

No repair or service work shall be performed on any motor vehicle where such work results in any loud, unusual or penetrating noise which is disturbing, obnoxious, discomforting, or annoying to a reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area. (Added by Ord. 93-1017, § 1)

9122.8 Second Dwelling Units.
A. Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this Section is to comply with amendments made in 2002 to Government Code Section 65852.2, which provides for the City to set standards for the development of second dwelling units so as to increase the supply of smaller and affordable housing while ensuring that they remain compatible with existing neighborhoods.

B. Location.

1. One second dwelling unit may be located on any residentially zoned lot that principally allows single-family dwellings and contains only a legal, single-family detached dwelling.

2. Second dwelling units shall not be allowed where roadways, public utilities and services are inadequate.

3. Second dwelling units are not required to meet the density requirements of the General Plan, but shall otherwise be consistent with the General Plan text and diagrams.

C. Permitting Procedures. Any application for a second dwelling unit that meets the location standards of subsection B of this Section and the development standards of CMC 9125.6, shall be approved ministerially without discretionary review or public hearing. Existing lawfully established second dwelling units that do not meet the standards defined in CMC 9125.6 shall obtain a conditional use permit pursuant to CMC 9172.21 and be subject to the provisions of CMC 9182.3.

D. Submittal Requirements and Application Processing.

1. Step One – Submittal. The application for a second dwelling unit permit shall be submitted to the Planning Division concurrent with the submittal of an application for a building permit. In addition to the standard submittal requirements for a building permit, the second dwelling unit application shall include:

a. Site Plan.

i. Lot lines and dimensions.

ii.  North arrow and scale of plan.

iii. All setback lines.

iv. Footprint of existing and proposed buildings, structures, fences, walls, walks, and landscaping on site (measured from property line and distances between buildings and structures).

v. Indicate lot size, lot coverage, building area (by floor).

vi. Locations, dimensions and descriptions of all parking spaces, access to parking spaces, circulation patterns both on and off the site, and curb cuts.

vii. Indicate all contiguous properties, streets and alleys showing center lines, lane striping, curb lines, street widths, right-of-way lines, street names, fire hydrants and other street furniture.

viii. Indicate uses of adjoining lots and location of building footprints.

ix. Indicate all existing and proposed easements.

x. Identify proposed utility locations (i.e., transformers and water mains).

xi. Indicate landscape areas including existing trees on the site and parkway.

b. Floor Plans.

i. Overall building and individual room dimensions, including square footage calculations.

ii. All proposed interior walls and partitions.

iii. Room identification.

iv. Window and door locations.

c. Elevations (photographs may be substituted for elevations on existing buildings unless otherwise required by the Planning Division).

i. Show exterior sides of building(s), label according to which direction the building faces (i.e., north face).

ii. Indicate exterior wall openings.

iii. Show roof pitches.

iv. All roof-mounted equipment and screening.

v. Exterior materials and finishes.

d. Color photographs of the site and adjacent properties. The photos shall be taken from each of the property lines of the project site to show the project site and adjacent sites. Label each photograph and reference to a separate site plan indicating the location and direction of the photograph.

e. Deed restriction completed as required, signed and ready for recordation.

2. Step Two – Issuance. The Planning Division shall issue a second dwelling unit building permit if it conforms to the specific standards contained in this Section and CMC 9125.6 (Second Dwelling Unit Development Standards). (Ord. 03-1290, § 1)

9122.9 Sex Offender Residency Restrictions.
Permanent and temporary residence for a sex offender is permitted as an accessory use to a mobilehome or dwelling subject to the provisions of Chapter 15 of Article IV and CMC 9182.31. (Ord. 08-1413U, § 2; Ord. 08-1414U, § 3; Ord. 08-1413, § 2)

Division 3. Conditional Use Criteria
9123 Conditional Use Criteria.
In addition to the general criteria for the approval of a Conditional Use Permit pursuant to CMC 9172.21(D)(1), special criteria and limitations as indicated below shall be considered in acting upon a Conditional Use Permit in a residential zone:

Residential condominium; residential stock cooperative:

Ability to comply with the provisions of CMC 9128.11 – 9128.17.

 

Mobile home park:

Ability to comply with the provisions of CMC 9128.2.

Fraternity or sorority house, dormitory:

The location shall be conveniently accessible in relation to the college or other institution attended by residents.

Community care facility, long-term health care facility:

The facility shall become licensed pursuant to Division 2 of the California Health and Safety Code or, if exempt from licensure, shall meet standards equivalent to those prescribed by State law for similar facilities.

Private elementary or secondary school:

The site shall have frontage on an arterial street.

 

Electric distribution substation, pumping station, water well, water reservoir:

The facility shall be necessary for the safe or efficient functioning of a public utility system.

The location in a residential zone shall be necessary to serve the residential uses in the vicinity and no suitable alternate location shall be available in a nonresidential zone.

Automobile parking lot:

Pedestrian and vehicular access to such a lot shall be other than through an existing or potential residential area unless the use of the lot is restricted to serving adjacent residential uses or uses directly related to nearby residential uses.

The parking lot shall be within four hundred (400) feet walking distance from the principal use which it serves.

Automobile parking structure:

The parking structure shall be located on the same lot as the large-scale multifamily development or church, temple, or other place of religious worship.

Multiple-family dwelling:

Ability to comply with the provisions of CMC 9128.51 – 9128.55.

(Ord. 84-700, § 2; Ord. 85-720, § 2, 3; Ord. 95-1079, Exh. A; Ord. 09-1426, § 3; Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 4))

Division 4. Density
9124 Dwelling Units.
Where no density designation (see CMC 9113.3) is included with the zoning symbol on the Zoning Map, one (1) dwelling unit is permitted on each lot, except as otherwise provided in CMC 9125.5. (For example, the zoning symbols RA and RS mean one (1) single-family dwelling is permitted on each lawfully established lot.)

Where a density designation (see CMC 9113.3) is included with the zoning symbol on the Zoning Map, the maximum number of dwelling units permitted on a lot or project area is the net lot area in acres multiplied by the density designation number. At least one (1) dwelling unit is permitted on each lawfully established lot. Any fractional amount equal to or greater than one-half (1/2) in the result shall permit an additional dwelling unit. (For example, the zoning symbol RM-18 permits eighteen (18) dwelling units per net acre. On a 1.2 acre site, 1.2 x 18 = 21.6 or 22 dwelling units are permitted.) No density greater than twenty-five (25) dwelling units per net acre shall be permitted. (Ord. 81-561, § 1)

Division 5. Site Requirements
9125.1 Reserved.
9125.2 Minimum Lot Area.
No lot shall be created which has a net area less than five thousand (5,000) square feet, or if a density designation applies, such larger area as may be required to permit one (1) dwelling unit.*

Any existing lawfully established lot is deemed to have the required lot area.

No lot shall be reduced to less than the required lot area, except a portion of a lot may be acquired for public purposes provided the remainder is not less than eighty (80) percent of the required lot area or four thousand (4,000) square feet, whichever is greater.

* See special requirement for mobile home parks in CMC 9128.2.

9125.3 Street Frontage and Access.
No lot shall be created unless it is capable of being provided with vehicular access directly from a public street or alley. The street frontage shall be at least fifty (50) feet, except that for a lot with frontage on a cul-de-sac the frontage shall be at least forty (40) feet.

A new or additional use (other than a replacement for an existing dwelling accidentally destroyed) shall not be developed on an existing lot unless there is vehicular access from a public street or alley as required per CMC 9162.8(c). The required vehicular access shall be either directly from a public street or alley or by means of a right-of-way on access. (Ord. 79-460, § 1; Ord. 89-868, § 1)

9125.4 Minimum Lot Width.
No lot shall be created unless it has a width of at least fifty (50) feet for an interior lot or fifty-five (55) feet for a corner lot.

Any existing lawfully established lot is deemed to have the required width.

No lot shall be reduced to less than the required width, except a portion of a lot may be acquired for public purposes provided the lot width of the remainder is not less than forty (40) feet.

9125.5 Multiple Single-Family Rental Units.
A. Development Standards. Detached rental units may be constructed on any sewered parcel containing an existing dwelling unit provided:

1. The parcel is ten thousand (10,000) square feet or larger;

2. The density of the parcel will not exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet per unit;

3. Adequate private open space shall be provided to each unit;

4. Adequate guest parking shall be provided to relieve impacts to surrounding properties; and

5. Detached rental units incorporate the same or substantially similar architectural features, building materials and colors as the main dwelling unit or comparable dwellings located on adjacent properties, unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission.

B. Procedure.

1. Second dwelling units that meet the location and development standards, as defined in CMC 9122.8 and 9125.6, shall be approved ministerially without discretionary review or public hearing.

2. All other units permitted by this Section shall obtain a conditional use permit pursuant to CMC 9172.21. (Ord. 78-434; Ord. 86-728, §§ 1, 2; Ord. 03-1290, § 2)

9125.6 Second Dwelling Unit Development Standards.
A second dwelling unit permit shall be issued per CMC 9122.8 (Second Dwelling Units) only if the unit complies with the following development standards:

A. Lot Criteria.

1. Must contain one (1) single-family residence.

2. No more than one (1) second dwelling unit shall be located on a single lot.

3. Subject lot shall not contain an accessory living quarters or other structure used for living purposes.

B. Minimum Lot Size.

1. Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet within the RS (Residential, Single-Family) Zone.

2. Six thousand five hundred (6,500) square feet within the RM (Residential, Multiple-Family) Zone.

C. Unit Size (Detached).

1. Zero (0) bedroom, one (1) bathroom and kitchen: five hundred (500) square foot maximum.

2. One (1) bedroom, one (1) bathroom and kitchen: six hundred fifty (650) square foot maximum.

3. Two (2) bedrooms, one (1) bathroom and kitchen: seven hundred (700) square foot maximum.

D. Unit Size (Attached).

1. Same requirements as in subsection C of this Section, (Unit Size (Detached)), but shall not exceed forty (40) percent of existing dwelling unit’s living area. In case of internal division to create second unit, the floor area of the primary residence shall not be reduced to less than one thousand (1,000) square feet, excluding garage/carport.

E. Setback Requirements.

1. A detached second dwelling unit shall be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from the primary residential structure and a minimum of six (6) feet from accessory structures. Side yard setback shall be five (5) feet and rear yard setback shall be fifteen (15) feet.

2. If second unit is proposed above accessory structure, minimum side yard setback shall be ten (10) feet, including accessory structure.

F. Height.

1. A second dwelling unit shall not exceed two (2) stories. The maximum building height for a second dwelling unit is thirty (30) feet.

G. Off-Street Parking.

1. The number and type of parking spaces required for second dwelling units shall be as provided in CMC 9162.21(A)(13).

2. Second dwelling unit parking requirement is in addition to any parking spaces required for a primary residence. Existing single-family dwelling shall be conforming to parking requirement as provided in CMC 9162.21. Nonconformity to parking requirement shall be made conforming in order to be eligible for a second unit.

H. Architectural Compatibility.

1. The second dwelling unit shall incorporate the same or substantially similar architectural features, building materials and colors as the main dwelling unit or compatible dwellings located on adjacent properties, unless otherwise approved by the Planning Division.

I. Permanent Foundation.

1. A permanent foundation shall be required for all second dwelling units.

J. Owner Occupied.

1. Either the main residence or second dwelling unit shall be occupied by owner of the property.

K. Privacy.

1. Any balcony, window or door of a second story second dwelling unit shall utilize techniques to lesson the privacy impacts onto adjacent properties. These techniques may include use of obscured glazing, window placement above eye level, screening treatments, or locating balconies, windows and doors toward the existing on-site residence.

L. Resale Requirement and Deed Restrictions.

1. Before obtaining a second dwelling unit permit, the property owner shall file with the County Recorder a declaration or agreement of restrictions, which has been approved by the City Attorney as to its form and content, containing a reference to the deed under which the property was acquired by the owner and stating that:

a. The second dwelling unit shall not be sold separately.

b. The second dwelling unit is restricted to the maximum size allowed per the development standards.

c. The second dwelling unit shall be considered legal only so long as either the primary residence or the second dwelling unit is occupied by the owner of record of the property.

d. The restrictions shall be binding upon any successor in ownership of the property and lack of compliance shall void the approval of the unit and may result in legal action against the property owner. (Ord. 03-1290, § 3)

Division 6. Site Development Standards
Buildings and Structures

9126.11 Reserved.
9126.12 Height of Buildings and Structures.
No building or structure shall exceed a height of thirty (30) feet as measured from the average grade of the existing or proposed curb abutting the subject lot. (Ord. 84-705, § 1)

Yards and Open Spaces

9126.21 Ground Coverage.
In the RM Zone, the ground area included within the exterior walls and/or supporting columns of all roofed structures shall not exceed forty (40) percent of the net lot area, except when a parking structure or subterranean parking is proposed, the ground area shall not exceed seventy (70) percent of the net lot area. (Ord. 09-1426, § 4)

9126.22 Future Rights-of-Way.
This Section is applicable only where portions of a lot are within areas planned to be part of future streets, alleys or public rights-of-way, as determined by the Director, and the acquisition of such portions would not reduce the lot area to less than eighty (80) percent of the required area or below four thousand (4,000) square feet, whichever is greater, and would not reduce the lot width below forty (40) feet.

In cases to which this Section is applicable, unless otherwise approved by the Commission, the portions of any lot within such future right-of-way areas shall not be occupied by structures other than those encroachments allowed in future right-of-way areas as provided in CMC 9126.29. All other required setbacks, yards and open spaces shall be provided in addition to the future right-of-way areas, and the future right-of-way lines shall be considered to be lot lines for purposes of measuring such other setbacks, yards and open spaces.

9126.221 Parking Setback.
Any garage having its vehicular access facing a public street shall be set back at least twenty-five (25) feet from the street property line.

Any automobile parking space, carport or garage having its vehicular access facing an alley shall be set back at least twenty-six (26) feet from the opposite side of the alley.

9126.23 Front Yard.
Each residential lot shall have a front yard with a required depth of twenty (20) feet or twenty (20) percent of the lot depth, whichever is less.

A required front yard shall not be occupied except as provided in CMC 9126.29 and 9162.3. (Ord. 84-705, § 2; Ord. 85-720, § 5; Ord. 90-917, § 1)

9126.24 Side Yards.
Each lot shall have a side yard width as follows:

Use

Minimum Side Yard Width

Single-Family

Dwellings

3 feet for lots smaller than thirty feet wide. 10 percent of the lot width for lots 30 to 50 feet wide. 5 feet for lots wider than 50 feet.

 

Where the side of a lot abuts a street, the required side yard shall be twice the width required above.

Multiple-Family

Dwellings and

Residential

Condominiums

6 feet for lots smaller than 30 feet wide. 20 percent of the lot width for lots 30 to 50 feet wide. 10 feet for lots wider than 50 feet.

The above provisions may be waived, in connection with approval of a tract or parcel map, to permit the location of buildings at approximately one (1) inch from side lot lines provided compensating additional side yard space is provided on the opposite side of each lot and special noise absorbing walls are provided along the side lot line as specified in CMC 9163.2.

Required side yards shall not be occupied except as provided in CMC 9126.29. (Ord. 84-705, § 3; Ord. 85-720, § 6)

9126.25 Rear Yard.
Each lot shall have a rear yard with a minimum depth of fifteen (15) feet or fifteen (15) percent of the lot depth, whichever is less.

A required rear yard shall not be occupied except as provided in CMC 9126.29. (Ord. 84-705, § 4)

9126.26 Passageway.
On each lot there shall be a passageway at least ten (10) feet in width extending from a street frontage to at least one (1) entrance to each dwelling unit and rooming unit, or where such units have access to a hallway within a building, the passageway shall extend to at least one (1) entrance to such hallway.

A required passageway shall not be occupied except as provided in CMC 9126.29.

9126.27 Space Between Buildings.
The minimum spacing between single-family dwellings, or single-family dwellings and multiple-family dwellings, is the sum of the yard setbacks, depending upon orientation, as required by Division 6 of this Part.

The spacing between main residential buildings within multiple-family dwelling projects or residential condominium projects shall be at least ten (10) feet, except where a parking space is proposed therein, in which case there shall be at least fifteen (15) feet between main buildings. Where an individual unit fronts on an interior courtyard, the separation from an adjacent main residential building shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet. When main residential buildings are proposed to be separated by less than twenty (20) feet, the buildings shall not have windows, balconies, or patios directly opposing each other except for windows which open into stairwells or are located within vaulted ceiling areas where the height of the bottom of the window is no less than six (6) feet from the floor. When a project is designed with windows, balconies or patios that are part of an individual unit and the separation between the buildings is less than fifteen (15) feet, the Commission shall evaluate the project to ensure that adequate light, air, ventilation and privacy of all the residential units is provided and may require additional spacing up to twenty (20) feet to ensure the provisions of these elements, and allow for separation of building masses and higher quality of design.

Between any combination of main residential building, accessory living quarters, recreation building or two (2) story accessory building, there shall be a separation of at least ten (10) feet.

Between a main residential building and any one (1) story accessory building, there shall be a separation of at least six (6) feet.

A required space between buildings shall not be occupied except as provided in CMC 9126.29. (Ord. 84-705, § 5; Ord. 85-720, § 7; Ord. 92-977, § 1)

9126.28 Usable Open Space.
On each lot developed with single-family dwelling units, there shall be usable open space of at least one hundred thirty (130) square feet for each zero and one (1) bedroom unit and at least one hundred fifty (150) square feet for each two (2) or more bedroom unit.

In each condominium or multiple-family dwelling project, there shall be usable open space of at least thirty (30) percent of the net project areas for projects of one (1) acre or less, and at least forty (40) percent of the net project for projects greater than one (1) acre.

Required usable open space shall not be occupied except as provided in CMC 9126.29. (Ord. 84-705, § 6; Ord. 85-720, § 8)

9126.29 Encroachments.
Every part of a required yard or open space shall be open and unobstructed from finished grade or floor surface to the sky except for the facilities indicated by the following table.

Encroachments Permitted in Required Yards and Open Spaces*

Type of
Encroachment

Section No. Reference

9126.22

9126.221

9126.23

9126.24

9126.25

9126.26

9126.27

9126.28

Type of Yard

Future Right-of-Way Areas

Parking Setback (between street or alley & garage door or parking space)

Front Yard

Side Yard

Rear Yard

Passageway

Space Between Buildings (on same lot)

Usable Open Space

Less than 60' from front lot line

60' or more from front lot line

50% of area – building encroachment permitted

50% of area required to remain open

Main Building

Addition to single-family dwelling

 

 

 

 

 

Permitted for single-family use only. One-story, 15' max. height. Not less than 5' from rear lot line. Maintain required side yard.

 

 

 

 

Accessory Buildings

Accessory living quarters

Recreation buildings

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Other accessory buildings & structures – one-story, 15' max. height (no bathrooms permitted)

 

 

 

 

Permitted. If less than 3' from interior lot line, building wall to be at 1? from lot line, no wall openings facing adjoining property, and prevent drainage onto adjoining property.

 

 

 

 

Projections from Buildings

Eaves, awnings & shading devices

 

Same as permitted in overlapping front, side, or rear yard.

May project up to 5' into required yard but not less than 2-1/2' from lot line.

At least 2-1/2' from lot line.

 

May project up to 5' into required yard but not less than 2-1/2' from lot line.

 

Horizontal separation between eaves to be at least 1/2 of the required space between buildings.

Permitted.

For passageway adjoining lot line eaves projection into required passage-way to be not more than 1/2 of required passageway width.

 

 

Architectural features – cornices, sills, etc.

 

Not more than 1-foot projection.

Permitted.

 

Utility meters

 

No restriction.

 

Unenclosed & unroofed stairways, landings, porches & balconies

 

 

Platform or stair treads not more than 3' above finished grade. Railing may extend not more than 3-1/2' above such platform or tread. All such structures prohibited within 5' of any existing or future street right-of-way.

 

Cantilevered portions of building with at least 8' headroom below

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Permitted.

 

Chimneys & fireplaces

Cantilevered mechanical equipment

 

 

 

May project up to 2-1/2' into required yard but not less than 2-1/2' from lot line.

 

May project up to 2-1/2' into required yard but not less than 2-1/2' from lot line.

 

 

 

Ground supported mechanical equipment, abutting or attached to building

 

 

 

Not less than 5' from lot line.

 

 

 

Not less than 5' from lot line. No obstruction of human passage around & between buildings.

 

 

 

Covered porches

 

 

May project up to 5' into the required yard. Covered porches are limited to the first floor, and shall be open on all three sides (support structures, arches and other architectural elements not to exceed 10% in the vertical plane). Must be architecturally compatible to existing structure (including, but not limited to, tie-in rooflines, matching roof and building materials, and colors).

Covered porches exceeding 50% width or properties with less than the required 20' or 20% front yard setback, are subject to Administrative Design Review and may encroach up to 5' into required yard, but not less than 10' from lot line.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Free-Standing Mechanical Equipment

 

 

 

Not less than 5' from lot line; except, with a 5' to 6' high solid masonry wall along lot line, equipment may abut wall if equipment not higher than wall and if there is at least 5' separation between equipment and main building.

 

 

 

 

Utility-Owned Facilities

Pole lines

Permitted in approved easements.

Other aboveground facilities – transformer boxes, pedestal terminals, etc.

Located in approved easement. Height above finished grade not more than 3-1/2'.

 

Located in approved easement. Height above finished grade not more than 3-1/2'.

Located in approved easement. Height above finished grade not more than 6'.

No obstruction of human passage around and between buildings.

Swimming Pool

 

 

 

Not less than 5' from lot line.

 

Permitted

 

Fences, Walls, and Hedges

Same as permitted in adjoining front or side yard, or as provided as condition of tract or parcel map approval, or as required by other laws

Same as permitted in overlapping front, side, or rear yard if driveway gate is provided.

Height above finished grade not more than 3-1/2', or as provided as condition of tract or parcel map approval, or as required by other laws.

Height above finished grade not more than 6', or as provided as condition of tract or parcel map approval, or as required by other laws.

 

Any fence, wall or hedge across passageway to have at least 2-1/2' wide opening or gate.

 

Landscaping (other than hedges).

Outdoor Recreation Equipment and Facilities

Permitted

No obstruction of driveway.

Permitted.

Outdoor Storage of Bulk Materials, Trash Area (See CMC 9164.1)

Same as permitted in adjoining side or rear yard. Not permitted in front yard area.

 

 

Must be screened from public view and not obstruct human passage around and between buildings.

 

 

Outdoor Parking of Automobiles, Boats, Trailers, Recreational Vehicles, etc.

Same as permitted in adjoining front, side or rear yard.

Permitted (not counted as required parking).

Permitted in driveway and as provided in Section 9162.3.

Must be screened from public view and shall not obstruct human passage around and between buildings. This restriction shall not apply to property on which a dwelling is located where the garage door does not face the street.

 

 

Real Estate Advertising Sign

One temporary sign per lot as provided in CMC 9126.7

 

 

*Blank boxes in chart indicate situations in which no encroachment is permitted.

Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Section shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 2 of Article I of this Code. (Ord. 79-479, § 6; Ord. 90-917, § 2; Ord. 01-1227, § 1; Ord. 11-1479, § 6)

Other Site Development Standards

9126.3 Fences, Walls and Hedges.
A fence, wall or hedge shall not exceed a height of six (6) feet above the finished grade at each point along the fence, wall or hedge. Where there is a difference between the grades on the two (2) sides of the fence, wall or hedge, the higher grade shall be used.

The height limitation of this Section shall not apply in any case where it is in conflict with any other City ordinance or State law or regulation.

9126.4 Trash Areas.
Trash areas shall be provided in accordance with Division 4 of Part 6 of this Chapter.

9126.41 Trash and Recycling Areas.
Trash and recycling areas shall be provided in accordance with Division 4 of Part 6 of this Chapter. (Ord. 93-1013, § 1)

9126.5 Repealed.
Repealed by Ord. 86-749.

9126.6 Parking, Loading and Driveways.
The number and type of parking spaces required for each use shall be as provided in CMC 9162.21.

Each parking space and loading area shall have driveway access from a public street or alley.

(See Division 2 of Part 6 of this Chapter for dimensions, improvement standards and other requirements for parking, loading areas and driveways.) (Ord. 80-532, § 3)

9126.7 Signs.
A. Real Estate Advertising. Real estate advertising signs are permitted subject to the following:

1. One (1) unlighted real estate sign is permitted, not to exceed three (3) square feet in area and four (4) feet in height if on a straight stake or stakes or six (6) square feet in area and six (6) feet in height if on a colonial post. Information may be printed on both sides of the sign, but it shall be restricted to the sale, lease or rental of the premises on which the sign is located.

2. Such sign shall be situated not less than ten (10) feet from the inside line of the sidewalk, or if there is no sidewalk, from the property line, except if the building setback on such premises is less than ten (10) feet, such sign shall be situated not less than one-half (1/2) the setback from the inside line of the sidewalk or property line.

3. Two (2) riders, not larger than six (6) by twenty-four (24) inches containing advertising matter pertinent to the premises, is permitted to be placed under the real estate advertising sign. Information may be printed on both sides of the riders.

4. Real estate advertising signs shall be removed from the premises at the close of escrow.

5. No more than five (5) lead-in signs, not to exceed four (4) square feet in area each, shall be permitted for new single or multi-unit developments. No such signs shall be permitted for existing developments.

6. No more than four (4) real estate flags, pennants or banners, in any combination, shall be permitted per street frontage on single or multi-unit property being sold, leased or financed.

7. On-Site Open House Signs. Open house signs placed on the property that is for sale are subject to the following regulations:

(a) One (1) on-site open house sign, not to exceed three (3) square feet in area and not to exceed three (3) feet in height, shall be permitted.

(b) Open house signs shall be placed on-site only during the hours that an open house is occurring at the property advertised, and at which the seller or his/her representative is present; provided, that on-site open house signs shall only be placed on-site on Saturdays, Sundays and Federal holidays between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.

(c) No open house signs shall be placed so as to obstruct pedestrians’ and motorists’ view of signs erected by a local, State, or Federal governmental agency, including but not limited to traffic signs, public directional signs, parking signs, and street address signs.

(d) No open house signs shall be placed so as to obstruct or hinder sidewalk or street access by pedestrians and vehicles.

(e) No open house signs shall be placed so as to obstruct ingress and egress to any public or private property.

(f) Open house signs shall not be designed or constructed to cause undue distraction to motorists. For example, signs shall not be illuminated, either internally or externally, shall not have flashing lights, shall not have any moving parts, shall not generate any source sounds (including radio waves), and shall not release steam or smoke.

(g) Open house signs shall be subject to any other reasonable restrictions, or modifications to the above restrictions, which the Community Development Director finds are necessary to further the purposes of this code, consistent with the type of sign or business.

8. Off-Site Open House Signs. Open house signs on private property that is not the property for sale are subject to all of the following limitations:

(a) Signs shall not be permanently affixed, but should be anchored or weighed down to prevent them from falling or being blown into the street or sidewalk.

(b) The purpose of the sign is limited to indicating in which direction potential buyers or customers should proceed to locate the open house.

(c) Off-site open house signs may only be placed on private property, subject to the property owner’s permission.

(d) Consistent with CMC 9167.3(E) and 5316, open house signs may not be placed in the public rights-of-way or be placed in, posted, or affixed to any public property or structures, which shall include, but not be limited to, City-owned or City-run facilities, including parking areas, sidewalks, public parks, medians, parkways, streets, utility poles, light or traffic light poles, traffic signs or traffic sign poles, or street trees.

(e) No more than two (2) off-site open house signs per property for sale are permitted.

(f) A distance of five hundred (500) feet or more is required between individual open house signs on the same street, which purpose is to direct persons to a particular address or property. This limitation does not apply to signs that pertain to different properties for sale.

(g) The background sign area of an open house sign shall be no larger than three (3) square feet.

(h) All open house signs shall not exceed three (3) feet in height, measured from the highest street grade in contact with the sign to the top of the sign.

(i) No open house signs shall be placed so as to obstruct pedestrians’ and motorists’ view of signs erected by a local, State, or Federal governmental agency, including but not limited to traffic signs, public directional signs, parking signs, and street address signs.

(j) No open house signs shall be placed so as to obstruct or hinder sidewalk or street access by pedestrians and vehicles.

(k) No open house signs shall be placed so as to obstruct ingress and egress to any public or private property.

(l) Open house signs shall be placed off site only during the hours that an open house is occurring at the property advertised on the sign, and at which the seller or his/her representative is present; provided, that open house signs for each property for sale shall only be placed off site on Saturdays, Sundays, and Federal holidays, between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.

(m) Open house signs shall not be designed or constructed to cause undue distraction to motorists. For example, signs shall not be illuminated, either internally or externally, shall not have flashing lights, shall not have any moving parts, shall not generate any source sounds (including radio waves), and shall not release steam or smoke.

(n) Open house signs shall be subject to any other reasonable restrictions, or modifications to the above restrictions, which the Community Development Director finds are necessary to further the purposes of this code, consistent with the type of sign or business.

(o) No off-site open house sign shall be erected prior to obtaining an open house sign permit. A permit must be obtained per property sold, and is valid for seven (7) days from the effective date of the permit. Permits will be issued by the Director upon request, and may be subject to a permit fee as determined by City Council resolution. No open house sign permit shall be construed to permit any violation of the provisions of this Section, or of any other applicable provision of the Carson Municipal Code.

9. All on-site flags, pennants, banners, open house signs, and all lead-in signs shall be permitted only on Saturdays, Sundays, and Federal holidays, between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.; provided, that a representative of the real estate firm or the property owner is present at all times while such signage is displayed.

10. For condominium developments, only one (1) master post shall be permitted for all real estate advertising signs, open house signs, and riders. The height of the master post shall not exceed eight (8) feet.

11. A placard not over two (2) square feet in area may be placed in the window of a residential building indicating a unit is available for sale, rent or lease.

12. Except as provided for in subsection (A)(8) of this Section, no off-site real estate advertising or open house signs are permitted.

13. Violations.

a. Violations of this subsection (A) shall be subject to the following civil fines within a calendar year: (a) $50.00 for the first violation; (b) $75.00 for the second violation; and (c) $100.00 for the third and any subsequent violation.

b. Fines shall be payable within thirty (30) days of issuance. Late payment shall incur a late penalty equal to the amount of the fine. The failure of any person, within sixty (60) days of the date of issuance of a fine, to pay the fine and any applicable late penalty, may result in the matter being referred to the Director of Finance to file a claim with the small claims court. Alternatively, the City may pursue any other legal remedy to collect the civil fines. The City may also recover its collections costs according to proof.

c. Violations shall be recorded by realtor office address, rather than by individual property for sale; provided, that if the property is being sold by its owner, the violations shall be recorded against the property that is for sale.

d. The remedies provided in this Section are in addition to any other remedies and penalties that may be available under the Carson Municipal Code and the laws of the State of California.

B. Identification Sign. For each multiple dwelling or rooming house, or permitted agricultural use in the RA Zone, one (1) unlighted sign not exceeding six (6) square feet in area and four (4) feet in any dimension may be placed on the wall of the building providing it does not extend above or out from the front wall and indicates only the name and address of the premises. (Ord. 78-434)

C. Nonresidential Uses. Identification signs for nonresidential uses may be erected subject to the following:

1. Not more than two (2) sign structures shall be permitted on a lot, except the Director may approve additional signs if he finds there are more than two (2) separate nonresidential uses on the same lot, the location of not more than two (2) sign structures would constitute an unnecessary hardship on the property owner, and the additional signs would not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare.

2. The total sign area per lot shall not exceed an area in square feet equal to the linear feet of lot frontage on a public street or streets. Lot frontage on a freeway shall not be considered in computing this figure.

3. When the total frontage of a lot is less than the square root of the lot’s area, said frontage shall be deemed to be equal to the square root of the lot’s area for the purpose of determining the permitted sign area.

4. A pole sign shall not be permitted.

5. A ground sign in excess of three and one-half (3-1/2) feet in height shall not be permitted. The distance between the ground elevation and the bottom of a ground sign shall not exceed one (1) foot.

6. A sign may be affixed to a building but shall not project above the height of the building wall or roof fascia.

7. A sign shall not project into an existing or future right-of-way.

8. No “A” frame or “sandwich” sign, or scintillating, flashing or revolving sign shall be permitted.

9. Streamers, banners, pennants and similar displays are not permitted; provided, however, that streamers, banners, pennants and similar displays may be attached directly upon the structure of a lawfully erected fireworks stand (see CMC 3101.0 through 3101.10) without necessity of a banner permit.

10. Christmas decorations displayed between thirty (30) days prior to and fifteen (15) days after December 25th are not subject to zoning regulations.

11. Official public events, including but not limited to national, state and local elections, are not subject to zoning regulations. (Ord. 80-514)

D. Except as provided for violations of subdivision (A) of this Section, any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Section shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 2 of Article I. (Ord. 79-479, § 6; Ord. 01-1225, § 3; Ord. 15-1563, §§ 3, 4)

9126.8 Utilities.
In D (Design Overlay) designated areas, all new utility lines, other than major transmission lines, shall be placed underground. This requirement may be waived by the Commission where topography, soil, undue financial hardship or other conditions make such underground installation unreasonable or impractical. Undergrounding shall be in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations of the utility, as currently on file with the California Public Utilities Commission.

All aboveground equipment (other than pole lines when permitted), such as transformers and pedestal terminals, which are visible from an adjacent public street or walkway, shall be within a solid enclosure or otherwise screened from public view. Such enclosure/screening shall be in accordance with the utility’s service requirement. (Int. 3-79; Ord. 11-1479, § 7)

9126.9 Site Planning and Design.
A. Within any D (Design Overlay) designated area, all development subsequent to the date of such designation shall be in conformance with development plans which have been approved pursuant to the Site Plan and Design Review procedure as provided in CMC 9172.23.

No permit shall be issued for grading or construction involving significant exterior changes, as determined by the Director, which is not in conformance with such approved development plans.

B. The D (Design Overlay) designation in conjunction with a residential development is intended:

To promote residential amenities beyond those expected under conventional development.

To develop attractive neighborhoods through creative and imaginative planning as a unit.

To achieve a higher quality of design through flexibility of development standards and integrated planning, design and control of development.

To achieve harmony between each development and the existing or future surrounding development.

To assist in improving the quality and quantity of housing available to meet the needs of all social and economic groups within the community.

To preserve areas of natural scenic beauty or of historical, cultural or scientific interest.

To provide for appropriate use of land which is sufficiently unique in physical characteristics or other circumstances to warrant special methods of development.

C. In approving development plans, the approving authority may allow deviations from the Residential Site Development Standards (Division 6 of this Part) and may impose additional requirements as conditions of approval if the approving authority finds in writing that such deviations and additional requirements are justified in order to achieve one (1) or more of the objectives listed above.

Approval of development plans in a D (Design Overlay) designated area also shall be subject to the following provisions:

1. Open Space. Open space shall comprise not less than thirty (30) percent of the net project area.

Subject to the approval of the approving authority, open space may include one (1) or more of the following, designated for the use and enjoyment of all the occupants of the planned residential development or appropriate phase thereof:

Common open space developed for recreation purposes.

Areas of scenic or natural beauty forming a portion of the proposed development.

Present or future recreational areas of noncommercial nature including parks and playgrounds. Where specifically approved by the approving authority, green fees or similar charges related to use of a golf course or similar open recreational use may be permitted, provided such charges are incidental to operation of said facilities, are not primarily commercial in nature, and do not alter the character of said recreational facility.

Present or future hiking, riding or bicycle trails.

Landscaped portions adjacent to streets or highways which are in excess of minimum required rights-of-way.

Other similar areas determined appropriate by the approving authority.

In approving said open space, the approving authority shall give consideration to the project to be developed; the characteristics of such open space; the manner in which the open space is to be owned, improved and maintained; and such other information as the approving authority deems pertinent. Reservation of open space shall be made a condition of approval. Such reservation shall be by public dedication, establishment of a maintenance district, common ownership or other satisfactory means to ensure the permanent reservation of and perpetual maintenance of required open space.

2. Development Schedule. The approving authority may approve a development schedule permitting a project to be developed in more than one (1) phase.

A project developed in phases shall be designed so that each successive phase will contain sufficient open space to independently qualify under subsection (C)(1) of this Section.

Modifications in the development schedule may be approved by the approving authority in subsequent development plan approvals.

3. Landscaping. A plan for landscaping all open areas shall be submitted to and approved by the approving authority.

4. Division of Lots. In addition to a tentative division of land map when required by the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Carson (Chapter 2 of Article IX of the Carson Municipal Code), where lots are to be sold or separated in ownership from other property in the development, or applicable phase thereof, a map shall be submitted to the approving authority indicating the proposed boundaries of the lots to be sold or separated in ownership. Where the proposed division would create one (1) or more lots having an area, width or frontage less than the normal site requirements as provided in Division 5 of this Part, said map shall also delineate the relationship between said lots and open space provided as required in subsection (C)(1) of this Section. The approving authority may approve the proposed division in ownership if it finds the relationship between the proposed lots and the designated open space affords effective use and enjoyment of said open space to the occupants of each of said lots.

5. Sale or Separation of Lots. Where lots are sold or otherwise separated in ownership, no dwelling unit or lot for a residential building shall be sold or encumbered separately from an undivided interest in the open space appurtenant to such dwelling unit or lot as required by subsection (C)(1) of this Section. Such undivided interest shall include either an undivided interest in the open space or a share in the corporation or voting membership in an association owning this open space where approved as provided in subsection (C)(1) of this Section. This provision shall not apply when said required open space has been accepted for public dedication, or where held in separate ownership with recreational rights to the required open space reserved to the lot owners and maintenance easements granted to an established maintenance district, or where other means are established which will ensure the permanent reservation and perpetual maintenance of required open space.

9126.91 Site Planning and Design – Residential Projects That Include Affordable and/or Senior Citizen Households.
A. Residential projects that include affordable and/or senior citizen households shall be those projects in which a minimum of ten (10) percent of the units are provided for affordable and/or senior citizen households.

1. “Affordable households” shall mean and include “very low income,” “lower income,” “low income” or “moderate income” households defined as follows:

“Very low income households” shall mean those households with an income that is fifty (50) percent or less of the “area median family income” published approximately annually by the State Department of Housing and Community Development Department (HCD) based on information provided by the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).

“Lower income households” shall mean those households with an income that is more than fifty (50) percent or sixty (60) percent or less of the “area median family income” published annually by HCD based on information provided by HUD.

“Low income households” shall mean those households with an income that is more than sixty (60) percent or eighty (80) percent or less of the “area median family income” published annually by HCD based on information provided by HUD.

“Moderate income households” shall mean those households with an income that is more than eighty (80) percent or one hundred twenty (120) percent or less of the “area median family income” published annually by HCD based on information provided by HUD.

2. “Senior citizen households” shall mean those households in which the residents are persons at least fifty-five (55) years of age.

B. Maximum Monthly Rents or Mortgage Payments and Terms of Affordability. The maximum monthly rents or mortgage payments for “affordable” and “senior citizen” units are as follows:

Income Category

Maximum Monthly Rent or Mortgage Payment

Very low income

(.5 x area median family income x .3)
12

Lower income

(.6 x area median family income x .3)
12

Low income

(.8 x area median family income x .3)
12

Moderate income

(1.2 x area median family income x .3)
12

Senior citizen

No income limitation

The affordable or senior citizen units must be kept as affordable or senior citizen units per the following chart:

 

Owner Occupied

Rental

Type of Unit

Minimum Time

Minimum Time

Affordable

15 years*

30 years

Senior citizen

15 years*

30 years

*Or such other time length as determined by the Planning Commission.

The above formulas shall also consider the number of bedrooms per unit.

C. Deviations and Conditions.

1. In approving development plans for residential projects qualifying under this Section, the approving authority may allow deviations from the following development standards:

a. Site Requirements in CMC 9125.2, 9125.3 and 9125.4;

b. Residential Site Development Standards in Division 6 of this Part; and

c. Vehicular Parking, Loading and Maneuvering Areas development standards in CMC 9162.1 and 9162.21.

d. The following portions of CMC 9128.15 for Residential Condominiums and CMC 9128.54 for Multiple-Family Dwellings: Private Open Space, Length of and Separation Between Buildings, Landscaping Requirements, Recreational Facilities.

2. The approving authority may impose additional requirements as Conditions of Approval if it finds in writing that such deviations and additional requirements are justified in order to achieve one (1) or more of the objectives listed in CMC 9126.9(B).

3. As a guideline to be used in considering development plans for residential projects qualifying under this Section, the approving authority shall utilize the development criteria as provided for in CMC 9128.16 and 9128.55 in addition to the following criteria:

The project should be a comprehensive and integrated design, providing for its own open space, landscaping, recreational facilities, off-street parking and amenities for contemporary living. Any deviations from the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance should not significantly reduce or alter the design of the project to the extent that overall qualities of the architecture and site plan are compromised.

Architectural unity and harmony should be achieved both within the project and between the project and the surrounding community so that the project does not constitute a disruption to the established fabric of the community. The height of proposed structures should be compatible with the existing and anticipated development within the area. To the extent feasible, structures should be designed to reduce height adjacent to existing buildings of smaller scale and the public right-of-way.

Consideration should be given to innovative design which effectively provides for residential projects of higher density while assuring adequate fire protection, water supply, vehicular and pedestrian circulation and other public services.

In designing projects which are intended for affordable residential development, consideration may be given to a reduction in lot area, configuration and street frontage for single-family residential lots. The design of the subdivision should be compatible with existing single-family developments within the immediate neighborhoods. Lot sizes should not be less than four thousand (4,000) square feet in area and should provide sufficient widths and street frontages to allow for adherence to minimum front, side and rear yard setback requirements. The single-family homes should utilize innovative design concepts which create an attractive neighborhood. (Ord. 92-972, § 2)

Division 7. Environmental Effects
9127.1 Exterior Lighting.
All lighting of buildings, landscaping, parking lots and similar facilities shall be directed away from all adjoining and nearby residential property. Such lighting shall be arranged and controlled so as not to create a nuisance or hazard to traffic or to the living environment. This Section is also applicable to arc lights, search lights and similar lighting devices.

Division 8. Special Requirements for Certain Uses
Residential Condominiums*

* Per CMC 9191.162, CMC 9128.11 through 9128.17 apply to residential stock cooperatives. (Ord. 85-720, § 16)

9128.11 Intent and Purpose.
Residential condominium projects may require that numbers of householders, with vested ownership in their respective dwelling units, live in close proximity to one another. Condominium projects also require that such owners be bound together in an Association which is responsible for the maintenance, management and possible reconstruction of improvements within the common area of the project. This mix of individual and common ownership is different from conventional and familiar patterns of housing in the City. The unique status of residential condominium projects tends to magnify the effects associated with higher urban densities to the point where they may lead to conditions of mismanagement, neglect and blight that impact upon the public health, safety, welfare and economic prosperity of the larger community. To ensure that such problems are avoided in both the short and long term, it is the express intent of the City to treat residential condominiums differently from apartments and other like structures. Pursuant to such intent and in order to provide guidance in the consideration of proposed condominium projects, the purposes of CMC 9128.11 through 9128.17 are as follows:

To ensure that the significance of the fragmented pattern of condominium ownership with respect to long-range planning, unforeseen change and maintenance of the City’s housing stock is not superficially discounted in favor of short-term and expedient financial considerations.

To establish reasonable procedures for the dissolution of the condominium and demolition of the structures at the end of their economic, functional or physical life and thus obviate conditions of residential obsolescence and blight and their pernicious effects upon both immediate occupants and the larger community.

To ensure that the potentially deleterious effects resulting from a lack of continuous and centralized management do not impact upon the public health, safety and welfare and, at the same time, ensure that there is democratic and effective management of the project that does not allow, over time, a majority of the unit owners to effectively contravene the initial commitments made to the project at the time of its inception and thus undercut the good faith of any minority of unit owners.

To ensure that the project developer provides adequate private outdoor living space, storage space and parking space to meet the expectations and changing needs of property owners over a long period of time.

To ensure that the project developer is attentive to the performance characteristics of the structure and mitigates such problems as vibration and noise transmission which may not be apparent to the buyer without living in the unit but which, if not adequately attenuated, may nevertheless render the living environment within the project undesirable and the transfer of unit ownership difficult.

To ensure that the project developer uses contemporary and environmentally sensitive concepts of site planning and architectural design in the creation of the project and to ensure that the project, once completed, maintains its integrity over time not only to preserve the long-term financial commitment of the unit owner, but also to optimize the utilitarian and aesthetic qualities that make the project a viable home for him in the future.

To ensure that, when appropriate, governmental entities have the right to enter into specified areas of the project to protect the public health, safety and welfare and preserve the public peace. (Ord. 84-700, § 3)

9128.12 Existing Residential Condominiums.
Existing residential condominiums which do not comply with the provisions of CMC 9128.11 through 9128.17 shall be nonconforming uses and shall be allowed to continue operation subject to the following provisions:

Except for strictly interior modifications to individual condominium units, no structural or architectural alterations, except incidental maintenance, shall be made to any existing residential condominium or its common areas within the City, unless and until a Conditional Use Permit is obtained therefor.

The Commission may grant a Conditional Use Permit if it finds that compliance with the provisions of CMC 9128.14 through 9128.17 would impose a cost or other hardship disproportionate to the proposed structural or architectural alteration; provided, that the applicant is making reasonable efforts to conform to those provisions and the purposes delineated in CMC 9128.11.

9128.13 Application for Conditional Use Permit.
The application for a Conditional Use Permit for a proposed residential condominium project shall include the following information, in the number of copies and degree of detail which the Director determines to be sufficient for the Commission to evaluate the project:

A complete legal description of the property and a boundary map showing the existing topography of the site and the location of all existing easements, structures and other improvements, and trees over six (6) inches in diameter.

Dimensioned schematic development plans consisting of at least a site plan, garage plan, typical floor plan, building elevations showing natural grades, transverse and longitudinal sections showing natural grades and a conceptual landscaping plan for the project as a whole. In instances where the project involves the conversion of an existing structure to condominium usage, complete as-built drawings shall be provided.

A tabular analysis showing how the project compares to the minimum standards for condominium projects in the zone in which it would be located.

Typical detailed sections of the types of wall and floor/ceiling construction that would be used in both common and interior partition walls within the condominium project, including either published data from a recognized testing laboratory or a statement from a licensed acoustical engineer or the City Building Official as to the STC (Sound Transmission Class) and IIC (Impact Insulation Class) of the proposed type of construction.

The proposed condominium documents including the Declaration of Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions, Description of Project Elements and tentative Condominium Plan that would apply to the conveyance of units, the assignment of parking and the management of common areas within the project.

Such other information which the Commission or Director determines is necessary to evaluate the proposed project.

9128.14 Development Policy.
The Commission shall review all proposals for residential condominium usage in order to determine their degree of compliance with both the Development Standards and Development Criteria delineated in CMC 9128.15 and 9128.16. A condominium proposal which does not comply with all of the precise development standards in these sections may be approved where the Commission finds that there are unusual circumstances regarding the development’s location, site or configuration; that the project is in substantial compliance with both the Development Standards and Development Criteria and that there are mitigating features incorporated in the project which tend to further the expressed intent and purpose of CMC 9128.11 through 9128.17.

Recognizing that the conversion of existing multiple residential structures to condominium usage presents unique problems with respect to the requirements of this Section, the Commission is empowered to vary any and all requirements contained herein in regard to a particular conversion proposal upon a finding that the creation of the proposed condominium will not have the potential to contravene the intent and purpose of CMC 9128.11 through 9128.17. Project characteristics of critical importance in determining whether a proposed conversion has that potential include the age of the structure and the degree to which the proposal varies from the required standards for the following:

Parking

Unit size

Sound transmission characteristics

Private open space

Storage space

The Commission also is empowered to impose conditions on its approval of the Conditional Use Permit which would require that specified modifications, designed to bring a structure more nearly into compliance with the condominium Development Standards contained herein, be made to the structure proposed for conversion.

9128.15 Development Standards.
The Commission shall require, except as noted above, that all residential condominium projects conform to all ordinances of the City and all of the following condominium Development Standards.

Private Open Space. Notwithstanding the minimum total amount of usable open space required for a project and the required minimum dwelling unit size, all of the units shall have an appurtenant private patio, deck, balcony, atrium or solarium with a minimum area of one hundred fifty (150) square feet, except that one (1) bedroom and zero bedroom units shall have a minimum of one hundred thirty (130) square feet. Such space shall have a configuration that would allow a horizontal rectangle or square of one hundred (100) square feet in an area and a minimum of seven (7) feet to be placed in said space. The space shall be designed for the sole enjoyment of the unit owner and guests, and shall have at least one (1) weatherproofed, duplex receptacle electrical convenience outlet. Additionally, such space shall be at the same level as, and immediately accessible from, either a kitchen, dining room, family room or living room within the unit. The Commission may evaluate each project on its own merit in regard to the type, configuration and characteristics of the development, including condominium unit mix pertaining to the number of bedrooms per unit and percentage thereof, and may allow variations from the above dimensional standards where it can be shown that the required private open space meets the intent and purpose of this Section. (Ord. 80-536, § 1; Ord. 84-705, § 7)

Length of and Separation Between Buildings. Each detached residential building within a condominium project shall have a linear horizontal distance no greater than six (6) units in length. The spacing between main residential buildings within condominium projects shall be at least ten (10) feet, except where a parking space is proposed therein, in which case there shall be at least fifteen (15) feet between main buildings. Where an individual unit fronts on an interior courtyard, the separation from an adjacent main residential building shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet. When main residential buildings are proposed to be separated by less than twenty (20) feet, the buildings shall not have windows, balconies or patios directly opposing each other except for windows which open into stairwells or are located within vaulted ceiling areas where the height of the bottom of the window is no less than six (6) feet from the floor. When a project is designed with windows, balconies or patios that are part of an individual unit and the separation between buildings is less than fifteen (15) feet, the Commission shall evaluate the project to ensure that adequate light, air, ventilation and privacy of all the residential units is provided and may require additional spacing up to twenty (20) feet to ensure the provision of these elements, and allow for separation of building masses and higher quality of design. (Ord. 84-705, § 7; Ord. 85-720, § 9; Ord. 92-977, § 2)

Landscaping Requirements. One (1) specimen size tree (thirty (30) inch box tree) shall be provided for each unit. Specimen trees existing on a site prior to development shall be identified on the proposed site plan and shall not be removed without prior written approval from the Director of Community Development. Existing specimen trees may be used to satisfy the landscaping requirement. (Ord. 84-705, § 7)

Recreational Facilities. All projects one-half (1/2) acre or larger shall contain a children’s playground with an area based on the following formula: seventy (70) square feet for each two (2) bedroom unit and one hundred forty (140) square feet for each three (3) or more bedroom unit in the project. In no event shall the playground be less than thirteen hundred (1,300) square feet. All projects one (1) acre or larger shall contain a clubhouse or meeting room in addition to the aforementioned playground. Individual features of said playground and clubhouse or meeting room are subject to the approval of the Director of Community Development. (Ord. 84-705, § 7; Ord. 85-720, § 9)

Private Storage Space. Each unit within the project shall have at least two hundred (200) cubic feet of enclosed, weather-proofed and lockable storage space for the sole use of the unit owner.

Such space shall have a minimum horizontal interior dimension of three and one-half (3-1/2) feet. The space, if a reach-in type, shall have an opening of three and one-half (3-1/2) feet by six (6) feet, or, if a walk-in type, shall have a minimum clear access opening of two and one-half (2-1/2) feet by six and two-thirds (6-2/3) feet.

Such space may be provided within individual storage lockers, cabinets or closets in any location approved by the Commission, but shall not be split among two (2) or more locations. Moreover, since it is the intent of this standard to require space over and above that normally associated with the day-to-day functioning of the unit, the Commission shall exercise reasonable discretion in differentiating between such required private storage space and guest, linen or clothes closets or food pantries that are customarily within the unit. Thus, while providing such private storage space within the limits of the unit is not precluded, it shall be over and above that which would otherwise be provided within the unit.

If such space is located within a common area within the project, the Association shall be responsible for the care and maintenance of the exterior surface of the space in order to assure that the surface is maintained in a manner compatible with the architectural treatment of the project. Regardless of the location, the precise architectural treatment of such space shall be approved by the Planning Division to ensure that such areas are safe, convenient and unobtrusive to the functional and aesthetic qualities of the project.

Off-Street Parking. Each condominium project shall provide off-street parking in accordance with the provisions of CMC 9162.21.

Not more than thirty (30) percent of the total required spaces designated for guests may be designed and reserved for the parking of compact automobiles. Such spaces shall be so designated either by signing or marking. (Ord. 78-452; Ord. 85-720, § 9)

Treatment of Utilities.

Plumbing Shut-off Valves. Water supply lines to each unit within the project shall be fitted with shut-off valves of either a hand valve or screw-stop type. If there are extenuating circumstances which make the installation of such valves impractical, the Commission may approve a system which provides individual shut-off valves ahead of each fixture within the unit. A shut-off valve shall also be provided ahead of each water-supplied appliance not contained within a unit.

Drip Pans. Hot water heaters and any other appliances which the Building Official determines to be a potential source of water leakage or flooding shall be installed with built-in drip pans and a one and one-quarter (1-1/4) inch minimum diameter drain line leading to a safe point of disposal outside the building. The end of said drain shall be provided with a removable screen to prevent insect entrance to the unit. Drip pans may be omitted where appliances are located in garages that are constructed such that any water leakage cannot damage the common wall between units or find its way into an adjoining unit. (Ord. 80-536, § 1)

Utility Meters. With the exception of water supply and central heating and/or air conditioning, each utility that is controlled and consumed within the individual unit shall be separately metered in such a way that the unit owner can be separately billed for its use.

Circuit Breaker. Each unit shall have its own circuit breaker panel for all electrical circuits and outlets which serve the unit. Such panel shall be accessible without leaving the unit.

Isolation of Vibration and Sources of Structure-borne Noise in Condominium Projects Where Units Have Common Walls and/or Floor and Ceiling.

Shock Mounting of Mechanical Equipment. All permanent mechanical equipment such as motors, compressors, pumps and compactors which, because of their rotation, reciprocation, expansion and/or contraction, turbulence, oscillation, pulsation, impaction, or detonation, are determined by the Building Official to be a source of structural vibration or structure-borne noise shall be shock-mounted with inertia blocks or bases and/or vibration isolators in a manner approved by the Building Official. Domestic appliances which are cabinet-installed or built into the individual units, such as clothes washers and dryers, or other appliances which are determined by the Building Official to be a source of structural vibration or structure-borne noise, shall be isolated from cabinets and the floor or ceiling by resilient gaskets and vibration mounts approved by the Building Official. The cabinets in which they are installed should be offset from the back wall with strip gasketing of felt, cork or similar material approved by the Building Official. Where such appliances utilize water, flexible connectors shall be installed on all water lines. If provision is made within the units for the installation of nonpermanent appliances such as clothes washers and dryers, then permanent rubber mounting bases and surface plates shall be installed in a manner approved by the Building Official.

Location of Plumbing Fixtures. No plumbing fixture, except pullman-mounted lavatories, shall be located on a common wall between two (2) separate units where it would back up to a living room, family room, dining room, den or bedroom of an adjoining unit. (Ord. 80-536, § 1)

Separation of Vents and Lines. No common water supply lines, vents, or drain lines shall be permitted for contiguous units unless there is at least eight and one-half (8-1/2) feet of pipe between the closest plumbing fixtures within the separate units. The Building Official may approve other methods of isolating sound transmission through plumbing lines where their effectiveness can be demonstrated.

Insulation and Insulation of Lines. All water supply lines within the project shall be isolated from wood or metal framing with pipe isolators specifically manufactured for that purpose and approved by the Building Official. In multi-story condominium projects, all vertical drainage pipe, except piping serving only one (1) condominium unit that is located in a wall that is not common to any other unit, shall be surrounded by three-quarters (3/4) inch thick dense insulation board or full thick fiberglass or wool blanket insulation for its entire length except the sections that pass through wood or metal framing. (Ord. 80-536, § 1)

Attenuation of Noise.

General. Wall and floor/ceiling assemblies separating units from each other or from public or quasi-public spaces such as interior corridors, laundry rooms, recreation rooms and garages shall provide airborne sound insulation for walls, and both airborne and impact sound insulation for floor/ceiling assemblies.

Airborne Sound Insulation. All wall assemblies enumerated or alluded to in the previous paragraph shall be of a type of construction that has a minimum rating of 58 STC (Sound Transmission Class). All floor/ceiling assemblies enumerated or alluded to in the previous paragraph shall be of a type of construction that has a minimum rating of 50 STC. Wood floor joists and sub-flooring shall not be continuous between separate condominium units. Penetrations or openings in the construction for piping, electrical outlets and devices, recess cabinets, bathtubs, soffits and heating, ventilating and/or air conditioning intake and exhaust ducts, and the like, shall be sealed, lined, insulated or otherwise treated to maintain the required rating and such treatment shall be approved by the Building Official. Entrance doors to the unit shall be of solid construction and, together with perimeter seals, shall have a minimum rating of 30 STC. Such perimeter seals shall be maintained in effective operating condition.

Impact Sound Insulation. All separating floor/ceiling assemblies enumerated or alluded to above shall be of a type of construction that has a minimum rating of 69 IIC (Impact Insulation Class). Floor coverings may be included in the assembly to obtain the required ratings, but must be retained as a permanent part of the assembly and may only be replaced by another floor covering that provides the same or greater impact insulation.

Verification of Sound Class. STC and IIC ratings shall be based on the results of laboratory measurements and will not be subjected to field testing. The STC rating shall be based on the American Society for Testing and Materials system specified in ASTM B90-66t or equivalent. The IIC rating shall be based on the system in use at the National Bureau of Standards or equivalent. Ratings obtained from other testing procedures will require adjustment to the above rating systems. (Ord. 78-452)

9128.16 Development Criteria.
There are important considerations relative to each proposal for residential condominium usage and to each proposed site that do not lend themselves to specific development standards. The following criteria shall apply to proposals for condominium usage made pursuant to the provisions of CMC 9128.11 through 9128.17, and shall serve as a basis for the evaluation of accepted and appropriate planning and architectural techniques necessary for the orderly development of the City, and concurrently shall give substance to the policies necessary to achieve the purposes of these sections:

The project should be a comprehensive and integrated design, providing for its own open space, off-street parking and amenities for contemporary living. Insofar as the scale of the project allows, open space, walkways and other areas for people should be separated from parking areas, driveways and other areas for automobiles.

Architectural unit and harmony should be achieved both within the project and between the project and the surrounding community so that the project does not constitute a disruption to the established fabric of the community.

The layout of structures and other facilities should effect a conservation in street, driveway, curb cut, utility and other public or quasi-public improvements. Structures should be designed to minimize, within the context of accepted architectural practice, the consumption of natural resources either directly or indirectly (e.g., gas, water, electricity).

The project should be designed to maintain as much of the natural topography, large trees and environment as practical.

The configuration and orientation of the project should respect reasonable design limits imposed by the natural and man-made environment. Structures should be situated to take advantage of view, topography, sun and wind, while at the same time not destroying these advantages for adjacent properties. Structures should also be situated to minimize or buffer any undesirable characteristics of the site such as street noise and nearby obnoxious commercial or industrial uses.

The layout of units and open space within the project should establish, through the use of structure and landscape materials, a perceptible spatial transition from the public street, though the semi-privacy of the common areas, to the privacy of the unit. Most importantly, the environment of each condominium unit should be private and free from visual, audible and other intrusions.

9128.17 Declaration of Covenants – Conditions and Restrictions.
To achieve the purposes of CMC 9128.11, the Declaration of Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions relating to the management of the common area and facilities shall accompany all proposals for residential condominium usage made pursuant to the provisions of CMC 9128.11 through 9128.17. In addition to such covenants, conditions and restrictions that may be required by the Department of Real Estate of the State of California or pursuant to Title 6 of Part IV of Division II of the California Civil Code or other State laws or policies, such declaration shall provide for the following, none of which, after acceptance in final form by the City, shall be amended, modified or changed without first obtaining the written consent of the City:

Assignment or Conveyance of Private Open Space. The surface area and appurtenant airspace or private open space areas, including but not limited to the private patio, deck, balcony, solarium or atrium required by CMC 9128.15, and any integral portion of that space that may exceed the minimum area requirements, shall be described and irrevocably assigned to its respective unit, except that where the private open space is totally within the boundary described by the interior surfaces of the unit, it shall be conveyed as an integral part of the unit.

Assignment or Conveyance of Private Storage Areas. The surfaces and appurtenant airspace of private storage areas, including but not limited to the private storage space required by CMC 9128.15, shall be described and irrevocably assigned by the Declaration or Condominium Plan to its respective unit, except that where the private storage space is totally, within the boundary described by the interior surfaces of the unit, as it would be in a closet opening upon a unit’s room or hallway, it shall be conveyed as an integral part of the unit.

Assignment or Conveyance and Use of Required Off-Street Parking Spaces. Required off-street, enclosed parking spaces, except guest parking spaces, shall be permanently and irrevocably assigned to particular units within the project on the basis of two (2) spaces per unit, except that where two (2) parking spaces are totally within the boundary described by the interior surfaces of the unit, as they would be in townhouse development with a private entrance from the parking garage to the unit, they shall be conveyed as an integral part of the unit. To the maximum practical extent, the two (2) spaces assigned to each unit shall be contiguous. In no case shall the private storage area of one (1) unit overhang or take its access from the required off-street parking space of another unit. All parking spaces shall be used solely by unit owners, members of their families, their guests or lessees of the owner’s unit, except that a unit occupant within the project may rent one (1) space to another unit occupant or to the Association. All parking spaces shall be solely for the purpose of parking motor vehicles as defined by the California Vehicle Code.

Maintenance of Impact Insulation Class. The Impact Insulation Class (IIC) rating of all separating floor/ceiling assemblies, as required by CMC 9128.15, shall be described in the Declaration. Where the minimum IIC rating is obtained through the use of floor covering(s), the Declaration should provide that said covering(s) shall not be removed for any purpose except cleaning or replacement, and shall further provide that any replacement covering(s) shall furnish not less than the degree of impact insulation afforded by covering(s) originally installed.

Right of Public Entry to Common Area. The City of Carson, the County of Los Angeles, the State of California, and the Government of the United States, and any department, bureau or agency thereof, shall have the right of immediate access to all portions of common areas of the project not assigned for the exclusive use of the owner of a particular unit at all times. Notice of such right of governmental agency access shall be prominently displayed in the common areas of the project.

Television and Radio Antenna. Individual television and radio antennas shall be prohibited outside of any owner’s unit. The Declaration shall provide either for a central antenna with connections to each unit via underground or internal wall wiring, or each unit shall be served by a cable antenna service provided by a company licensed to provide such service within the City.

Voting. For the purpose of voting, including without limitation voting to set the amount of regular or special assessments and for the purpose of amending the Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions, one (1) vote shall be allocated for each unit within the project. The amount of regular and special assessments may be made proportional to the gross square footage of each unit within the project.

Partition and Sale of the Project. An action may be brought by one (1) or more owners of units within the project for partition thereon by sale of the entire project as if the owners of all the condominiums in such project were tenants-in-common in the entire project in the same proportion as their interests in the common areas provided, however, that a partition shall be made only upon a showing of the existence of one (1) or more of the conditions set forth in Section 752b of the California Code of Civil Procedure, or that:

Two years after damage or destruction to the project which renders a material part thereof unfit for its use, the project has not been rebuilt or repaired substantially to its state prior to its damage or destruction; or

One-half or more of the project has been destroyed or substantially damaged and condominium owners holding in aggregate more than fifty (50) percent interest in the common areas are opposed to repair or restoration of the project; or

The most recently constructed dwelling structure has been in existence in excess of the number of years shown in the following table, the project is obsolete and uneconomic, and the percentage of condominium owners holding in aggregate a percentage interest in the common areas as set forth in the following table are opposed to repair or restoration of the project.

Age of Structure

Percentage of Interest in Common Areas Held by Condominium Owners

30 years

70 percent

40 years

60 percent

50 years

50 percent

60 years

40 percent

70 years

30 percent

For purposes of this Section, multiple owners of a single unit shall not be deemed possessed, in the aggregate, of any greater interest in the common areas than that possessed by a single owner of a unit.

Maintenance. The Declaration shall contain a provision establishing the obligation and duty of the governing body of the condominium to maintain the common areas in good condition.

Enforcement. The Declaration shall contain a provision ensuring the right of any owner to enforce the terms of the Declaration.

Maintenance of Common Areas and Facilities.

Obligation. No Conditional Use Permit shall be granted for a residential condominium development unless the obligation for care, upkeep and management of the common element is imposed on a nonprofit corporation (the Association).

Assessments. In order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, provision shall be made both for annual assessments for maintenance and special assessments for capital improvements. The amount of the regular annual assessment, and the procedure for its change, shall be specified. The manner in which special assessments may be levied for the purpose of defraying, in whole or part, the cost of any construction, reconstruction, repair or replacement of a capital improvement upon the common area shall be specified. The amount of regular and special assessments may be made proportional to the gross square footage to each unit within the project. Both annual and special assessments may be collected on a monthly basis. The remedies which the Association may bring for the nonpayment of assessments shall be specified and may include penalties for late payment.

Veto Right and Authority of the City. In consideration for the City’s approval of a condominium project, including without limitation any approval of a conversion to condominium usage, the Declaration shall provide that the City, at its option, has the right and authority to veto any action of the Association which would tend to decrease the amount of the regular annual assessment upon a finding by the City that such a decrease could or would adversely affect the long-run maintenance of the condominium structures and/or common areas. To enable the City to exercise said optional veto, the Declaration shall provide that Association actions to decrease the annual assessment do not become effective until sixty (60) days after written notice of such action is given to the City.

Utility Easements Over Private Streets and Other Areas. If the condominium project contains private streets, provision shall be made for public utility easements in or adjacent to such private streets, adjacent to public streets or over other portions of the project to accommodate fire hydrants, water meters, street furniture, storm drainage, sanitary sewers, water and gas mains, electrical lines and similar urban infrastructure. The Commission may also require access routes necessary to assure that fire fighting equipment can reach and operate efficiently in all areas of the project.

Amendment of the Declaration. Any amendment to the Declaration which would amend, modify, delete or otherwise affect any provision required by this Section shall require the prior written approval of the City. To that end, no such amendment of the Declaration shall be effective unless: (1) the text thereof shall have been submitted to the City thirty (30) days prior to its adoption by the owners; (2) either the City has approved the amendment or failed to disapprove it within said thirty (30) day period; and (3) the recorded instrument effecting such amendment shall recite that it was so submitted and approved or not disapproved.

Mobile Home Parks

9128.2 Mobile Home Parks.
Every Conditional Use Permit for a mobile home park shall be subject to the following conditions regardless of whether such conditions are specifically set forth in the Conditional Use Permit. In granting a Conditional Use Permit, additional conditions may be imposed but may not change or modify any of the following conditions:

Area. A mobile home park shall have a net area of not less than two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet.

Mobile Home Site Size. The average size of the mobile home sites shall not be less than twenty-two hundred (2,200) square feet. No mobile home site may have an area of less than twelve hundred (1,200) square feet. The area of a mobile home site covered by a mobile home and any other structure(s) shall not exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the site area.

Yards. The required front yard of the mobile home park shall be the same as required in the zone in which it is located but in no event less than fifteen (15) feet. No mobile home or structure, other than a fence or wall, shall be located within five (5) feet of the front, side or rear lot line of a mobile home site.

Distance Between Mobile Homes. There shall be a distance of not less than ten (10) feet between mobile homes.

Driveways. Each mobile home site shall have access upon a driveway of not less than twenty-five (25) feet in clear width, exclusive of required parking areas. All driveways shall be improved with macadam, asphalt or concrete surfacing, and shall have clear and unobstructed access to a public street.

Parking Requirements. There shall be not less than two (2) parking spaces at least nine (9) feet by twenty (20) feet in size for each mobile home site, and in addition thereto, not less than one (1) such parking space for each four (4) mobile home sites for guest parking. Tandem parking is permitted for the two (2) required parking spaces for each mobile home site.

Walls. A wall at least six (6) feet in height shall be built and maintained to completely enclose all mobile home park facilities. Such walls shall be located so as to be in compliance with the yard requirements of the applicable zone.

Landscaping. Such areas of a mobile home park shall be landscaped as the Commission finds necessary to prevent the mobile home park from being materially detrimental to the public welfare or to the property of other persons located in the vicinity thereof.

Signs. Signs shall not be used in conjunction with a mobile home park except:

One sign, not over twenty (20) square feet in area, solely for the purpose of identifying the name of the mobile home park may be erected for each street frontage. No sign is permitted along a freeway frontage.

Directional or informational signs relating solely to the operation of the mobile home park may be erected, not exceeding four (4) square feet in area per sign and not exceeding four (4) feet in height.

One park directory sign may be provided at each vehicular entrance to the mobile home park. Such directory sign shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in area per sign.

Recreation Facilities. Recreation facilities shall be provided sufficient for the reasonable use and enjoyment of the residents of the mobile park.

Prohibitions:

A recreational vehicle shall not be occupied in a mobile home park.

A mobile home shall not support a building.

Recreational facilities shall not be used by any person other than residents of the mobile home park and their guests.

A mobile home park shall have no dwelling units other than one (1) dwelling unit for the use of a caretaker or a manager responsible for maintaining or operating the property.

Vehicles shall not be parked within required driveways.

A mobile home shall not be used for any commercial purpose other than a permitted home occupation pursuant to CMC 9128.4.

There shall be no commercial uses in a mobile home park, other than home occupations, except those uses approved by the Commission upon a finding that such uses are appurtenant and necessary to facilitate the operation of a mobile home park.

Other Regulations. The mobile home park shall comply with all other applicable statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations.

9128.21 Relocation Impact Report (RIR).
For the purpose of this Section, any closure of a mobile home park or trailer park or any part thereof or any change of the park’s status to a vacant use shall be deemed to be conversion of the park.

Prior to the conversion of a mobile home park or trailer park or any part thereof to any other use or to a vacant use, the person or entity (hereinafter “the applicant”) proposing such conversion shall file an application with the City and obtain approval from the City of a relocation impact report (RIR) in accordance with the provisions contained in this Section.

For the purpose of this Section, the term “Mobile Home” shall mean a vehicle designed or used for human habitation and shall include camping trailers, motor homes, slide-in campers and travel trailers, when used as the occupant’s primary place of residence as established by nine (9) months’ continuous residency, and mobile homes as defined in the California Mobile Home Residency Law, Civil Code Section 798, et seq.

No sign stating that the mobile home park or trailer park is closing, may be closing or has been closed, and no sign concerning a proposed new use of the park, may be placed on or adjacent to a mobile home park or trailer park before the City has adopted a final resolution approving the RIR for the park and the applicant has executed and recorded a certificate of acceptance of the conditions of the resolution approving the RIR and given the required six (6) months’ notice of termination of tenancy.

A. Time for Filing RIR. An RIR shall be filed by the applicant and approved by the Commission prior to the giving of the written notice of change in use of a mobile home park or trailer park or any portion thereof required by Section 798.56 of the California Civil Code. The RIR shall constitute an application for a permit requesting a change of use within the meaning of Section 798.56 of the California Civil Code.

If the applicant files a tentative tract or parcel map to a subdivision to be created upon the conversion of a mobile home park or a trailer park to another use prior to giving the written notice under Section 798.56 of the California Civil Code, then the RIR shall be filed concurrently with the filing of the map.

B. Application and Resident Questionnaire. The City may require that the applicant file an application on a form, provided by the City, concurrently with the filing of an RIR.

The City may also require that the applicant give to each affected mobile home owner a questionnaire, provided by the City, which includes, but is not limited to:

1. The purchase price and date of purchase of the mobile home by the resident. (Information may be provided at the option of the resident.)

2. The amount and terms of any remaining amount due on a mortgage on the mobile home.

3. The cost incurred by the resident in making any improvements, such as additions to or enlargement of the mobile home, patios, porches, carports, landscaping, and related amenities.

4. Any circumstances, including but not limited to job location, which would restrict the area in which the resident is able to relocate.

All questionnaires shall be given to each resident by the applicant at least forty (40) days prior to filing the proposed RIR with the City and shall be returned by each resident to the applicant within thirty (30) days. All completed questionnaires shall be submitted to the City by the applicant concurrently with the filing of an RIR.

Said questionnaires shall be kept separate from the RIR and will not be included in the RIR sent to each resident. The identity of a resident and his or her individual responses shall be confidential and shall not be divulged except as necessary to determine the relocation assistance to be received by that particular resident or to settle disputes concerning the relocation assistance approved by the City. The City may also require information, such as that in the questionnaire, directly from the resident.

C. Content of RIR. The RIR shall contain the following:

1. A description of the proposed new use.

2. A timetable for conversion of the park.

3. A legal description of the park.

4. The number of spaces in the park, length of occupancy by the current occupant of each space, and current rental rate for each space.

5. The date of manufacture and size of each mobile home.

6. The appraised on-site value and off-site value of each of the mobile homes in the park. The appraiser is to be selected by the City and the cost is to be borne by the applicant.

7. The total number of mobile home residents, broken down space by space, to identify owner or renter occupancy, principal or second home occupancy, resident under sixteen (16) years of age, residents sixty-two (62) years of age or over, and the number of residents who are handicapped and/or disabled.

8. The name and mailing address of each mobile home resident and each nonresident mobile home owner.

9. A list of known available spaces in the South Bay-Long Beach area of Los Angeles County, the Orange County area and other areas of Los Angeles County within a fifty (50) mile radius from the park, including any written commitments from mobile home parks and trailer park owners willing to accept displaced residents, the comparability of such parks and the rental rates for such spaces.

a. If comparable spaces are not available for the mobile homes of the residents within the above described areas, the RIR shall contain information on the location and rental rates of available spaces in other areas, if any, within a reasonable distance from the mobile home park, the purchase price of comparable mobile homes in place in a comparable park within a reasonable distance, the purchase and installation cost of a new mobile home if spaces are available for new mobile homes in a comparable park within a reasonable distance, the rental rates in such parks.

b. If comparable spaces are not available within a reasonable distance, the purchase price of condominiums similar in size to the mobile homes within a reasonable distance, and the rental rates and moving costs involved in moving to an apartment or other rental unit within a reasonable distance.

10. Estimates from two (2) moving companies as to the minimum and per mile cost of moving mobile homes of various sizes, including tear-down and setup of mobile homes and moving of improvements such as porches, carports, patios, and other moveable amenities installed by the residents. Said moving companies shall be approved by the Director of Community Development (hereinafter “Director”) prior to inclusion with the RIR.

11. Proposed measures to mitigate the adverse impacts of the conversion upon the park residents.

12. The City may require that the applicant hire a Relocation Specialist to find alternate housing. The specialist shall be selected by the applicant, subject to the City’s approval, and shall be paid for by the applicant.

13. Information whether residents have been offered the option of a long-term lease of the land and purchase of the improvements if the park is to be sold.

D. Hearing and Notice. Upon filing of an RIR, the Director shall examine the same and advise the applicant within thirty (30) days after receipt thereof whether it is complete. When a complete RIR has been filed it shall be accepted by the Director, and the Director shall set a time, date and place for review of the RIR by the Commission not later than forty-five (45) days after the date of acceptance. The Director shall mail a copy of the RIR to all residents of the mobile home park or trailer park and any nonresident owners of mobile homes in the park and shall give notice by certified mail or personal delivery to the applicant, the residents, and any nonresident owners of mobile homes in the park of the date, time and place of the hearing at least thirty (30) days prior thereto. The RIR sent to each resident and nonresident mobile home owner shall not include the resident questionnaire, however it shall include the individual appraisal of that resident’s mobile home. The notice shall also contain a general explanation of the matters to be considered by the Commission. The Director may give such additional notice as the Commission deems necessary or desirable. The hearing shall be conducted and the decision made in accordance with CMC 9173.23, 9173.31, 9173.32 and 9173.33.

E. Commission Findings and Decision. Upon review of the RIR and consideration of the written and oral evidence received at the hearing, the Commission shall, by resolution, render its decision within forty-five (45) days of the date first set for hearing. The Commission shall approve the RIR if it is able to make an affirmative finding that reasonable measures have been provided in an effort to mitigate the adverse impact of the conversion on the ability of the park residents to be displaced to find alternative housing. If the Commission does not make this finding and is unable to impose reasonable measures to mitigate the adverse impact, the Commission may disapprove the RIR. No other permit or approval shall be granted in furtherance of the proposed conversion and no change of use shall occur until and unless an RIR has been approved.

In approving an RIR, the Commission may impose reasonable measures not exceeding the reasonable costs of relocation to mitigate adverse impacts created by the conversion, which may include, but not be limited to, any of the following:

1. Provision for payment of the cost of physically moving the mobile home to a new site, including tear-down and setup of mobile homes, including, but not limited to, movable improvements such as patios, carports and porches.

2. Payment of a lump sum to compensate for payment of the first and last month’s rent and any security deposit at the new mobile home park.

3. Payment of a lump sum to compensate for any differential between rental rates at the closing mobile home park and the new mobile home park during the first year of the new tenancy.

4. For those mobile home residents who move to apartments or other rental housing alternatives, provision for the first and last month’s rent, plus security deposit, cleaning fees, not to exceed the Fair Market Rents for new construction and substantial rehabilitation for the Los Angeles area as established by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. Mobile home households may be compensated based on the number of bedrooms in the mobile home so that a one (1) bedroom mobile home may be compensated based on a one (1) bedroom apartment, a two (2) bedroom mobile home based on a two (2) room apartment, etc.

5. For those mobile home residents who move to apartments or other rental housing alternatives, a lump sum payment to compensate for any differential between rental rates at the closing mobile home park and the rental housing alternative during the first year of tenancy. Mobile home households may be compensated based on the Fair Market Rents for new construction and substantial rehabilitation for the Los Angeles area as established by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. Mobile home households may be compensated based on the number of bedrooms in the mobile home so that a one (1) bedroom mobile home may be compensated based on a one (1) bedroom apartment, a two (2) bedroom mobile home based on a two (2) bedroom apartment, etc.

6. Provision of a replacement space within a reasonable distance of the mobile home park or trailer park.

7. A requirement that a resident whose mobile home cannot be relocated within a reasonable distance to a comparable park be compensated by a lump sum payment based upon consideration of the fair market value of the mobile home on-site, including resident improvements (i.e., landscaping, porches, carports, etc.), any mortgage obligations of the resident on the mobile home, and the costs of purchasing a mobile home on-site in a comparable park or acquiring other comparable replacement housing.

8. A provision for setting aside a certain number of units for the residents of the park if the park is to be converted to another residential use.

The total of the mitigation measures required shall be subject to and shall not exceed the limitation in Government Code Section 65863.7 which provides: the steps required to be taken to mitigate shall not exceed the reasonable costs of relocation.

F. Effective Date of Commission – Decision and Appeal. The decision of the Planning Commission shall become effective and final fifteen (15) days after the date of its decision unless an appeal is filed in accordance with CMC 9173.4. An appeal shall be considered by the Council as provided in CMC 9173.4 except that the Director shall advise the appellant within fifteen (15) days after receipt thereof whether it is complete, shall set a date for the appeal hearing not later than thirty (30) days after it is accepted as complete, shall give fifteen (15) days’ notice of the hearing to all affected parties in the manner required by subsection D of this Section and the Council shall, by resolution, render its findings and decision thereon within forty-five (45) days after the date first set for hearing on the appeal.

G. Subsequent Modification of Mitigation Measures.

1. After an RIR has been approved and after the applicant has executed and recorded a certificate of acceptance of the conditions of the RIR, modification of the mitigation measures imposed, including additions and deletions, may be considered upon the filing of a written application by the applicant, or the applicant’s authorized representative. Modification may be granted on the grounds that there has been a change in circumstances or new information, which could not reasonably have been known or considered at the time of the hearings on the RIR, has become available. Examples of such new information or changed circumstances include, but are not limited to, revised plans by the applicant and a change in the availability of relocation spaces. Modification shall not be granted when it would unreasonably prejudice the ability of the residents to relocate to comparable housing.

2. Any application for modification shall be subject to the notice and hearing procedures set forth in subsection D of this Section. The decision and any appeal in connection with a modification request shall take place as with the initial approval.

H. Performance of Mitigation Measures. The applicant shall execute and record a certificate accepting the mitigation measures imposed on the approval of an RIR within thirty (30) days of the final resolution approving the RIR and imposing the mitigation measures and shall give the six (6) month notice of the termination of tenancy and closure of the park within forty-five (45) days of the adoption of that resolution. A resolution approving an RIR shall automatically become null and void if the certificate accepting the conditions is not filed and executed and the notice of termination not given within forty-five (45) days of the date of the final resolution approving the RIR. All mitigation measures imposed in the approval of an RIR shall be fully performed as to each resident prior to that resident’s required vacation of the mobile home park or trailer park, unless otherwise provided in the mitigation measure. No resident shall be required to vacate a mobile home/trailer space unless the applicant is in full compliance with all mitigation measures imposed pertaining to such resident, and has otherwise fulfilled the notice requirements of the California Mobile Home Residency Law relating to “Termination of Tenancy” and the notice required in CMC 4700 through 4709.

I. Expiration, Extension and Revocation of RIR.

1. Expiration. An RIR shall become automatically null and void if the conversion of the mobile home park has not occurred within twelve (12) months of its effective date unless extended as provided in subsection (I)(2) of this Section or unless otherwise provided in the RIR or the resolution of approval of the RIR.

2. Extension. Upon application by the applicant filed with the Director on or before the date of expiration of the RIR, an RIR may be extended by the Commission, or the Council on appeal, if the Commission finds that the termination of the RIR would constitute an undue hardship to the applicant and that the continuation of the RIR would not be detrimental or have any further adverse impact on the residents in the park. An application for an extension shall be subject to the hearing and notice procedures set forth in subsection D of this Section. In approving an extension, the Commission may subject the RIR to any additional mitigation measures deemed necessary to mitigate any adverse impacts resulting from the extension. Multiple extensions may be granted, but no one (1) extension shall be issued for more than twelve (12) months.

3. Revocation. Proceedings for the revocation of an RIR may be initiated by the Council, the Commission or the Director. Upon initiation of a revocation, the Commission shall conduct a hearing with notice given in the same manner set forth in subsection D of this Section, except that notice to the applicant shall be by certified mail or personal service. After the hearing, the Commission may, by resolution, revoke the RIR if any of the following findings are made:

a. Approval was obtained by fraud, deceit or misrepresentation.

b. The applicant is not or has not been in compliance with the mitigation measures contained in the RIR or with the provisions of this Section.

c. A revocation shall be effective fifteen (15) days after the date of the action by the Commission unless an appeal is filed in accordance with CMC 9173.4. An appeal shall be considered by the Council as provided in CMC 9173.4.

d. Upon revocation, the applicant shall not be entitled to convert or change the use of the park until such time as a new RIR is filed and accepted as complete by the Director, a new written notice of change of use is given to park residents and a new RIR is approved by the Commission.

J. Time Limits. The time limits set forth in subsections A through I of this Section may be extended with the applicant’s consent and waiver of the applicable time limits in writing or orally on the record during a public hearing.

K. Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of subsections A through I of this Section is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions. The City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted said sections and each subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more of said sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional.

Effect on Pending Applications. Any completed RIR application pending upon the effective date of this Section shall continue to be processed and the applicant shall have thirty (30) days in which to provide any further information required by this Section. (Ord. 82-589U, § 1; Ord. 82-618, § 2; Ord. 89-882, §§ 1 – 12; Ord. 92-965, §§ 1 – 9; Ord. 92-966, § 6)

Subdivision Directional Signs

9128.31 Regulation.
No sign providing travel directions to a subdivision or other development shall be located or erected in any zone unless authorized by the Director in accordance with the provisions of CMC 9128.32 through 9128.35.

Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Section shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 2 of Article I of this Code. (Ord. 79-479, § 6)

9128.32 Application.
A person desiring to erect and maintain one (1) or more subdivision directional signs shall apply therefor to the Director concurrently with one (1) or more building permit applications for construction in the development to which the signs refer.

In the application, the applicant shall quote exactly the message to be placed upon each sign and shall list all existing subdivision directional signs for the same subdivision development. A plot plan and elevation plan shall be provided showing the location and design of each sign. Both the owner of the sign and the applicant shall sign the application. No fee shall be required for such application.

9128.33 Specifications.
The written and illustrative message on each subdivision directional sign shall be the same as quoted in the application and as shown on the elevation plan except as otherwise permitted or required by the Director, and shall be limited to necessary travel directions, the name of the land development project to which it pertains, a characteristic trademark or insignia and other such information describing the character of the development as may be specifically approved by the Director, provided, however, that such information shall be auxiliary to said sign’s primary purpose of providing travel directions. Said sign shall not contain any other advertising.

An unobstructed open space shall be maintained to a height of eight (8) feet below each sign except for structural supports. Where topographic features create an unnecessary hardship or unreasonable regulation or make it obviously impractical to require compliance with this provision, the Director may modify this requirement.

Not more than four (4) sign structures containing not more than a total of eight (8) sign faces shall be permitted at any one time for a development, regardless of the number of units, tract maps or phases within the total development.

Such signs shall be located only within four (4) miles from the exterior boundary of the development to which they relate.

Such signs shall not be located within the right-of-way of any street or alley, or along an established or existing freeway which has been designated as a freeway route by the State of California, or along a scenic highway.

Identification shall be placed on each such sign indicating the permit number, sign owner and expiration date.

9128.34 Agreement and Deposit.
The Director shall require with each application, as a condition of approval, the deposit of a cash performance bond in the amount of $600.00 per sign structure and an agreement signed by the applicant, the owner of the sign and the owner of the property on which the sign is to be placed, by which such persons agree that the City may enter the property upon which the sign is located and remove it if such sign is not removed and the site thereof restored to a neat and orderly condition within five (5) days after the termination of the permit. The said applicant and owners also shall agree that if such sign is not so removed by them within said five (5) days and the site restored, the City may retain the deposit as liquidated damages.

9128.35 Time Limit.
No subdivision directional sign shall be permitted for a period of more than two (2) years, except the Director may grant time extensions of one (1) year each.

Home Occupations

9128.4 Home Occupations.
Home occupations may be conducted by the occupants of a dwelling, provided:

The home occupation is secondary and incidental to the principal use of the property for residential purposes.

The character of the structure and premises is not changed from a residential character. The appearance of the structure shall not be altered in any way, nor may the conduct of the occupation within the structure be such that the structure can be recognized as serving a nonresidential use (either by color, materials of construction, lighting, sounds or noises, vibrations, electrical interference or otherwise).

There is no storage of materials and/or supplies either indoors or outdoors and no accessory building or space outside the main building is used for home occupational purposes, except that the garage may be used for storage; provided, that such storage does not interfere with required off-street parking spaces.

No persons, other than members of the resident family, are employed in such occupation.

No equipment is used which will increase the need for utilities or community facilities beyond that usually required for residential purposes.

Not more than one (1) room in the dwelling is used for the home occupation.

No sale of goods is made on the premises.

There is no stock in trade nor display maintained on the premises.

No sign and/or structure is exhibited other than those otherwise permitted in the zone in which located.

The use does not require material or equipment recognized as not being normally used by residents or hobbyists in households, except that light business machines are permitted.

The use does not generate pedestrian or vehicular traffic beyond that normal to the zone in which it is located.

The use does not involve deliveries of materials to or from the premises by commercial delivery vehicles.

Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Section shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 2 of Article I of this Code. (Ord. 79-479, § 6; Ord. 88-836, § 2; Ord. 11-1479, § 5)

Multiple-Family Dwelling

9128.51 Multiple-Family Dwelling.
Every Conditional Use Permit for a multiple-family dwelling shall be subject to the development standards and criteria set forth in CMC 9128.54 through 9128.55 regardless of whether such conditions are specifically set forth in the Conditional Use Permit. In granting a Conditional Use Permit, additional conditions may be imposed. (Added by Ord. 85-720, § 10)

9128.52 Existing Multiple-Family Dwellings.
Existing multiple-family dwellings which do not comply with the provisions of CMC 9128.54 shall be nonconforming uses and shall be allowed to continue operation without a Conditional Use Permit and without complying with the development standards set forth in CMC 9128.54. (Added by Ord. 85-720, § 10)

9128.53 Application for Conditional Use Permit.
The application for a Conditional Use Permit for a proposed multiple-family dwellings project shall include the following information, in the number of copies and degree of detail which the Director determines to be sufficient for the Commission to evaluate the project:

A complete legal description of the property and a boundary map showing the existing topography of the site and the location of all existing easements, structures and other improvements, and trees over six (6) inches in diameter.

Dimensioned schematic development plans consisting of at least a site plan, garage plan, typical floor plan, building elevations showing natural grades, transverse and longitudinal sections showing natural grades, transverse and longitudinal sections showing natural grades and a conceptual landscaping plan for the project as a whole.

A tabular analysis showing how the project compares to the minimum standards for multiple-family dwellings.

Typical detailed sections of the types of wall and floor/ceiling construction that would be used in both common and interior partition walls within the project, including either published data from a recognized testing laboratory or a statement from a licensed acoustical engineer or the City Building Official as to the STC (Sound Transmission Class) and IIC (Impact Insulation Class) of the proposed type of construction.

Such other information which the Commission or Director determines is necessary to evaluate the proposed project. (Added by Ord. 85-720, § 10)

9128.54 Development Standards.
The Commission shall require, except as noted above, that all multiple-family dwellings conform to all ordinances of the City and all of the following multiple-family dwelling Development Standards:

Private Open Space. Notwithstanding the minimum total amount of usable open space required for a multiple-family dwelling project and the minimum dwelling unit size, each of the individual units shall have an appurtenant private patio, deck, balcony, atrium or solarium with a minimum area of one hundred fifty (150) square feet, except that one (1) bedroom and zero bedroom units shall have a minimum of one hundred thirty (130) square feet. Such space shall have a configuration that will allow a horizontal rectangle or square of one hundred (100) square feet in area and a minimum dimension of seven (7) feet to be placed in said space. The space shall be designed for the sole enjoyment of the unit tenant(s) and guests, and shall have at least one (1) weatherproofed, duplex electrical convenience outlet. Additionally, such space shall be at the same level as, and immediately accessible from, either a kitchen, dining room, family room or living room within the unit. The Commission may evaluate each project on its own merit in regard to the type, configuration and characteristics of the development, including unit mix pertaining to the number of bedrooms per unit and percentage thereof, and may allow variations from the above dimensional standards where it can be shown that the required private open space meets the intent and purpose of this Section.

Length of and Separation Between Buildings. Each detached residential building within a multiple-family dwelling project shall have a linear horizontal distance no greater than six (6) units in length. The spacing between main residential buildings within multiple-family dwelling projects shall be at least ten (10) feet, except where a parking space is proposed therein, in which case there shall be at least fifteen (15) feet between main buildings. Where an individual unit fronts on an interior courtyard, the separation from an adjacent main residential building shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet. When main residential buildings are proposed to be separated by less than twenty (20) feet, the buildings shall not have windows, balconies, or patios directly opposing each other except for windows which open into stairwells or are located within vaulted ceiling areas where the height of the bottom of the window is no less than six (6) feet from the floor. When a project is designed with windows, balconies or patios that are part of an individual unit and the separation between buildings is less than fifteen (15) feet, the Commission shall evaluate the project to ensure that adequate light, air, ventilation, and privacy of all the residential units is provided and may require additional spacing up to twenty (20) feet to ensure the provision of these elements, and allow for separation of building masses and higher quality of design.

Landscaping Requirements. One (1) specimen-size tree (thirty (30) inch box tree) shall be provided for each unit. Specimen trees existing on a site prior to development shall be identified on the proposed site plan and shall not be removed without prior written approval from the Director of Community Development. Existing specimen trees may be used to satisfy the landscaping requirement.

Recreational Facilities. All projects one-half (1/2) acre or larger shall contain a children’s playground with an area based on the following formula: seventy (70) square feet for each two (2) bedroom unit and one hundred forty (140) square feet for each three (3) or more bedroom unit in the project. In no event shall the playground be less than thirteen hundred (1,300) square feet. All projects one (1) acre or larger shall contain a clubhouse or meeting room in addition to the aforementioned playground. Individual features of said playground and club house or meeting room are subject to the approval of the Director of Community Development.

Private Storage Space. Each unit within the project shall have at least two hundred (200) cubic feet of enclosed, weatherproofed and lockable storage space for the sole use of the unit tenant(s).

Such space shall have a minimum horizontal interior dimension of three and one-half (3-1/2) feet. The space, if a reach-in type, shall have an opening of three and one-half (3-1/2) feet by six (6) feet, or if a walk-in type, shall have a minimum clear access opening of two and one-half (2-1/2) feet by six and two-thirds (6-2/3) feet.

Such space may be provided within individual storage lockers, cabinets or closets in any location approved by the Commission, but shall not be split among two (2) or more locations. Moreover, since it is the intent of this standard to require space over and above that normally associated with the day-to-day functioning of the unit, the Commission shall exercise reasonable discretion in differentiating between such required private storage space and guest, linen or clothes closets or food pantries that are customarily within the unit. Thus, while providing such private storage space within the limits of the unit is not precluded, it shall be over and above that which would otherwise be provided within the unit.

If such space is located within a common area within the project, the property’s owner shall be responsible for the care and maintenance of the exterior surface of the space in order to assure that the surface is maintained in a manner compatible with the architectural treatment of the project. Regardless of the location, the precise architectural treatment of such space shall be approved by the Planning Division to ensure that such areas are safe, convenient and unobtrusive to the functional and aesthetic qualities of the project.

Off-Street Parking. Each multiple-family dwelling project shall provide off-street parking in accordance with the provisions of CMC 9162.21.

Not more than thirty (30) percent of the total required spaces designated for guests may be designed and reserved for the parking of compact automobiles. Such spaces shall be so designated either by signing or marking.

Treatment of Utilities.

Plumbing Shut-off Valves. Water supply lines to each unit within the project shall be fitted with shut off valves of either a hand valve or screw stop type. If there are extenuating circumstances which make the installation of such valves impractical, the Commission may approve a system which provides individual shut-off valves ahead of each fixture within the unit. A shut-off valve shall also be provided ahead of each water supplied appliance not contained within a unit.

Drip Pans. Hot water heaters and any other appliances which the Building Official determines to be a potential source of water leakage or flooding shall be installed with built-in drip pans and a one and one-quarter (1-1/4) inch minimum diameter drain line leading to a safe point of disposal outside the building. The end of said drain shall be provided with a removable screen to prevent insect entrance to the unit. Drip pans may be omitted where appliances are located in the garages that are constructed such that any water leakage cannot damage the common wall between units or find its way into an adjoining unit.

Utility Meters. With the exception of water supply and central heating and/or air conditioning, each utility that is controlled and consumed within the individual unit shall be separately metered in such a way that the unit owner can be separately billed for its use.

Circuit Breaker. Each unit shall have its own circuit breaker panel for all electrical circuits and outlets which serve the unit. Such panel shall be accessible without leaving the unit.

Isolation of Vibration and Sources of Structure-borne Noise in Multiple-family Dwelling Projects Where Units Have Common Walls and/or Floor and Ceiling.

Shock Mounting of Mechanical Equipment. All permanent mechanical equipment such as motors, compressors, pumps and compactors which, because of their rotation, reciprocation, expansion and/or contraction, turbulence, oscillation, pulsation, impaction or detonation, are determined by the Building Official to be a source of structural vibration or structure-borne noise shall be shock mounted with inertia blocks or bases and/or vibration isolators in a manner approved by the Building Official. Domestic appliances which are cabinet installed or built into the individual units, such as clothes washers and dryers, or other appliances which are determined by the Building Official to be a source of structural vibration or structure-borne noise, shall be isolated from cabinets and the floor or ceiling by resilient gaskets and vibration mounts approved by the Building Official. The cabinets in which they are installed should be offset from the back wall with strip gasketing of felt, cork or similar material approved by the Building Official. Where such appliances utilize water, flexible connectors shall be installed on all water lines. If provision is made within the units for the installation of nonpermanent appliances such as clothes washers and dryers, then permanent rubber mounting bases and surface plates shall be installed in a manner approved by the Building Official.

Location of Plumbing Fixtures. No plumbing fixture, except pullman mounted lavatories, shall be located on a common wall between two (2) separate units where it would back up to a living room, family room, dining room, den or bedroom of an adjoining unit.

Separation of Vents and Lines. No common water supply lines, vents, or drain lines shall be permitted for contiguous units unless there is at least eight and one-half (8-1/2) feet of pipe between the closest plumbing fixtures within the separate units. The Building Official may approve other methods of isolating sound transmission through plumbing lines where their effectiveness can be demonstrated.

Isolation and Insulation of Lines. All water supply lines within the project shall be isolated from wood or metal framing with pipe isolators specifically manufactured for that purpose and approved by the Building Official. In multistory projects, all vertical drainage pipe, except piping serving only one (1) unit that is located in a wall that is not common to any other unit, shall be surrounded by three-quarters (3/4) inch thick dense insulation board or full thick fiberglass or wool blanket insulation for its entire length except the sections that pass through wood or metal framing.

Attenuation of Noise.

General. Wall and floor/ceiling assemblies separating units from each other or from public or quasi-public spaces such as interior corridors, laundry rooms, recreation rooms and garages shall provide airborne sound insulation for walls, and both airborne and impact sound insulation for floor/ceiling assemblies.

Airborne Sound Insulation. All wall assemblies enumerated or alluded to in the previous paragraph shall be of a type of construction that has a minimum rating of 58 STC (Sound Transmission Class). All floor/ceiling assemblies enumerated or alluded to in the previous paragraph shall be of a type of construction that has a minimum rating of 50 STC. Wood floor joists and subflooring shall not be continuous between separate units. Penetrations or openings in the construction for piping, electrical outlets and devices, recess cabinets, bathtubs, soffits and heating, ventilating and/or air conditioning intake and exhaust ducts, and the like, shall be sealed, lined, insulated or otherwise treated to maintain the required rating and such treatment shall be approved by the Building Official. Entrance doors to the unit shall be of solid construction and, together with perimeter seals, shall have a minimum rating of 30 STC. Such perimeter seals shall be maintained in effective operating condition.

Impact Sound Insulation. All separating floor/ceiling assemblies enumerated or alluded to above shall be of a type of construction that has a minimum rating of 69 IIC (Impact Insulation Class). Floor coverings may be included in the assembly to obtain the required ratings, but must be retained as a permanent part of the assembly and may only be replaced by another floor covering that provides the same or greater impact insulation.

Verification of Sound Class. STC and IIC ratings shall be based on the results of laboratory measurements and will not be subjected to field testing. The STC rating shall be based on the American Society for Testing and Materials system specified in ASTM B90-66t or equivalent. The IIC rating shall be based on the system in use at the National Bureau of Standards or equivalent. Ratings obtained from other testing procedures will require adjustment to the above rating systems. (Added by Ord. 85-720, § 10; Ord. 92-977, § 3)

9128.55 Development Criteria.
There are important considerations relative to each proposal for multiple-family development usage and to each proposed site that do not lend themselves to specific development standards. The following criteria shall apply to proposals for multiple-family development usage made pursuant to the provisions of CMC 9128.51 through 9128.55, and shall serve as a basis for the evaluation of accepted and appropriate planning and architectural techniques necessary for the orderly development of the City, and concurrently shall give substance to the policies necessary to achieve the purposes of these sections:

The project should be a comprehensive and integrated design, providing for its own open space, off-street parking and amenities for contemporary living. Insofar as the scale of the project allows, open space, walkways and other areas for people should be separated from parking areas, driveways and other areas for automobiles.

Architectural unit and harmony should be achieved both within the project and between the project and the surrounding community so that the project does not constitute a disruption to the established fabric of the community.

The layout of structures and other facilities should effect a conservation in street, driveway, curb cut, utility and other public or quasi-public improvements. Structures should be designed to minimize, within the context of accepted architectural practice, the consumption of natural resources either directly or indirectly (e.g., gas, water, electricity).

The project should be designed to maintain as much of the natural topography, large trees and environment as practical.

The configuration and orientation of the project should respect reasonable design limits imposed by the natural and manmade environment. Structures should be situated to take advantage of view, topography, sun and wind, while at the same time not destroying these advantages for adjacent properties. Structures should also be situated to minimize or buffer any undesirable characteristics of the site such as street noise and nearby obnoxious commercial or industrial uses.

The layout of units and open space within the project should establish, through the use of structure and landscape materials, a perceptible spatial transition from the public street, through the semi-privacy of the common areas, to the privacy of the unit. Most importantly, the environment of each unit should be private and free from visual, audible and other intrusions. (Added by Ord. 85-720, § 10)

Reserved

9128.6 Reserved.
Repealed by Ord. 16-1590. (Added by Ord. 1079, Exh. A.)

Single-Room Occupancy Housing

9128.7 Single-Room Occupancy Housing.
A. Transitional housing, including efficiency residential units, also known as single-room occupancy (“SRO”), shall be subject to and comply with the standards and regulations as follows:

1. Each SRO shall comply with all applicable development standards for the applicable zoning district and minimum standards contained hereinbelow.

2. Units shall have a minimum size of one hundred fifty (150) square feet and a maximum of four hundred (400) square feet.

3. Each unit shall accommodate a maximum of two (2) persons.

4. Exterior lighting shall be provided for the entire outdoor and parking area of the property per the lighting standards described in CMC 9127.1 (Exterior Lighting).

5. Laundry facilities must be provided in a separate enclosed room at the ratio of one (1) washer and one (1) dryer for every twenty (20) units or fractional number thereof, with at least one (1) washer and dryer per floor.

6. A cleaning supply room or utility closet with a wash tub with hot and cold running water shall be provided on each floor of the SRO facility.

7. Each unit is required to provide a separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.

8. Each unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, functioning cooking appliance and a refrigerator, each having a clear working space of not less than thirty (30) inches in front.

9. Each SRO unit shall have a separate interior closet.

10. SRO units shall comply with all requirements of the California Building Code. All units shall comply with all applicable accessibility and adaptability requirements. All common areas shall be fully accessible.

11. An SRO facility shall not be located within five hundred (500) feet of any other SRO facility, emergency shelter, or other similar program, unless such program is located within the same building or on the same lot.

12. An SRO facility with ten (10) or more units shall provide on-site management. A facility with less than ten (10) units may provide a management office off site.

13. Tenancy of SRO units shall not be less than thirty (30) days and maximum period of twelve (12) months.

14. Parking shall be provided as follows:

a. One (1) uncovered parking space for every three (3) SRO units.

b. Two (2) uncovered parking spaces for an on-site manager unit.

c. Each SRO unit shall be provided at least one (1) lockable bicycle parking space in a location that is adjacent to that SRO unit.

15. Applications for an SRO unit or facility shall be processed in a manner consistent with procedures for multiple-family residential projects. (Ord. 13-1525, § 6)

9128.11 Intent and Purpose.
Residential condominium projects may require that numbers of householders, with vested ownership in their respective dwelling units, live in close proximity to one another. Condominium projects also require that such owners be bound together in an Association which is responsible for the maintenance, management and possible reconstruction of improvements within the common area of the project. This mix of individual and common ownership is different from conventional and familiar patterns of housing in the City. The unique status of residential condominium projects tends to magnify the effects associated with higher urban densities to the point where they may lead to conditions of mismanagement, neglect and blight that impact upon the public health, safety, welfare and economic prosperity of the larger community. To ensure that such problems are avoided in both the short and long term, it is the express intent of the City to treat residential condominiums differently from apartments and other like structures. Pursuant to such intent and in order to provide guidance in the consideration of proposed condominium projects, the purposes of CMC 9128.11 through 9128.17 are as follows:

To ensure that the significance of the fragmented pattern of condominium ownership with respect to long-range planning, unforeseen change and maintenance of the City’s housing stock is not superficially discounted in favor of short-term and expedient financial considerations.

To establish reasonable procedures for the dissolution of the condominium and demolition of the structures at the end of their economic, functional or physical life and thus obviate conditions of residential obsolescence and blight and their pernicious effects upon both immediate occupants and the larger community.

To ensure that the potentially deleterious effects resulting from a lack of continuous and centralized management do not impact upon the public health, safety and welfare and, at the same time, ensure that there is democratic and effective management of the project that does not allow, over time, a majority of the unit owners to effectively contravene the initial commitments made to the project at the time of its inception and thus undercut the good faith of any minority of unit owners.

To ensure that the project developer provides adequate private outdoor living space, storage space and parking space to meet the expectations and changing needs of property owners over a long period of time.

To ensure that the project developer is attentive to the performance characteristics of the structure and mitigates such problems as vibration and noise transmission which may not be apparent to the buyer without living in the unit but which, if not adequately attenuated, may nevertheless render the living environment within the project undesirable and the transfer of unit ownership difficult.

To ensure that the project developer uses contemporary and environmentally sensitive concepts of site planning and architectural design in the creation of the project and to ensure that the project, once completed, maintains its integrity over time not only to preserve the long-term financial commitment of the unit owner, but also to optimize the utilitarian and aesthetic qualities that make the project a viable home for him in the future.

To ensure that, when appropriate, governmental entities have the right to enter into specified areas of the project to protect the public health, safety and welfare and preserve the public peace. (Ord. 84-700, § 3)

9128.12 Existing Residential Condominiums.
Existing residential condominiums which do not comply with the provisions of CMC 9128.11 through 9128.17 shall be nonconforming uses and shall be allowed to continue operation subject to the following provisions:

Except for strictly interior modifications to individual condominium units, no structural or architectural alterations, except incidental maintenance, shall be made to any existing residential condominium or its common areas within the City, unless and until a Conditional Use Permit is obtained therefor.

The Commission may grant a Conditional Use Permit if it finds that compliance with the provisions of CMC 9128.14 through 9128.17 would impose a cost or other hardship disproportionate to the proposed structural or architectural alteration; provided, that the applicant is making reasonable efforts to conform to those provisions and the purposes delineated in CMC 9128.11.

9128.13 Application for Conditional Use Permit.
The application for a Conditional Use Permit for a proposed residential condominium project shall include the following information, in the number of copies and degree of detail which the Director determines to be sufficient for the Commission to evaluate the project:

A complete legal description of the property and a boundary map showing the existing topography of the site and the location of all existing easements, structures and other improvements, and trees over six (6) inches in diameter.

Dimensioned schematic development plans consisting of at least a site plan, garage plan, typical floor plan, building elevations showing natural grades, transverse and longitudinal sections showing natural grades and a conceptual landscaping plan for the project as a whole. In instances where the project involves the conversion of an existing structure to condominium usage, complete as-built drawings shall be provided.

A tabular analysis showing how the project compares to the minimum standards for condominium projects in the zone in which it would be located.

Typical detailed sections of the types of wall and floor/ceiling construction that would be used in both common and interior partition walls within the condominium project, including either published data from a recognized testing laboratory or a statement from a licensed acoustical engineer or the City Building Official as to the STC (Sound Transmission Class) and IIC (Impact Insulation Class) of the proposed type of construction.

The proposed condominium documents including the Declaration of Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions, Description of Project Elements and tentative Condominium Plan that would apply to the conveyance of units, the assignment of parking and the management of common areas within the project.

Such other information which the Commission or Director determines is necessary to evaluate the proposed project.

9128.14 Development Policy.
The Commission shall review all proposals for residential condominium usage in order to determine their degree of compliance with both the Development Standards and Development Criteria delineated in CMC 9128.15 and 9128.16. A condominium proposal which does not comply with all of the precise development standards in these sections may be approved where the Commission finds that there are unusual circumstances regarding the development’s location, site or configuration; that the project is in substantial compliance with both the Development Standards and Development Criteria and that there are mitigating features incorporated in the project which tend to further the expressed intent and purpose of CMC 9128.11 through 9128.17.

Recognizing that the conversion of existing multiple residential structures to condominium usage presents unique problems with respect to the requirements of this Section, the Commission is empowered to vary any and all requirements contained herein in regard to a particular conversion proposal upon a finding that the creation of the proposed condominium will not have the potential to contravene the intent and purpose of CMC 9128.11 through 9128.17. Project characteristics of critical importance in determining whether a proposed conversion has that potential include the age of the structure and the degree to which the proposal varies from the required standards for the following:

Parking

Unit size

Sound transmission characteristics

Private open space

Storage space

The Commission also is empowered to impose conditions on its approval of the Conditional Use Permit which would require that specified modifications, designed to bring a structure more nearly into compliance with the condominium Development Standards contained herein, be made to the structure proposed for conversion.

9128.15 Development Standards.
The Commission shall require, except as noted above, that all residential condominium projects conform to all ordinances of the City and all of the following condominium Development Standards.

Private Open Space. Notwithstanding the minimum total amount of usable open space required for a project and the required minimum dwelling unit size, all of the units shall have an appurtenant private patio, deck, balcony, atrium or solarium with a minimum area of one hundred fifty (150) square feet, except that one (1) bedroom and zero bedroom units shall have a minimum of one hundred thirty (130) square feet. Such space shall have a configuration that would allow a horizontal rectangle or square of one hundred (100) square feet in an area and a minimum of seven (7) feet to be placed in said space. The space shall be designed for the sole enjoyment of the unit owner and guests, and shall have at least one (1) weatherproofed, duplex receptacle electrical convenience outlet. Additionally, such space shall be at the same level as, and immediately accessible from, either a kitchen, dining room, family room or living room within the unit. The Commission may evaluate each project on its own merit in regard to the type, configuration and characteristics of the development, including condominium unit mix pertaining to the number of bedrooms per unit and percentage thereof, and may allow variations from the above dimensional standards where it can be shown that the required private open space meets the intent and purpose of this Section. (Ord. 80-536, § 1; Ord. 84-705, § 7)

Length of and Separation Between Buildings. Each detached residential building within a condominium project shall have a linear horizontal distance no greater than six (6) units in length. The spacing between main residential buildings within condominium projects shall be at least ten (10) feet, except where a parking space is proposed therein, in which case there shall be at least fifteen (15) feet between main buildings. Where an individual unit fronts on an interior courtyard, the separation from an adjacent main residential building shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet. When main residential buildings are proposed to be separated by less than twenty (20) feet, the buildings shall not have windows, balconies or patios directly opposing each other except for windows which open into stairwells or are located within vaulted ceiling areas where the height of the bottom of the window is no less than six (6) feet from the floor. When a project is designed with windows, balconies or patios that are part of an individual unit and the separation between buildings is less than fifteen (15) feet, the Commission shall evaluate the project to ensure that adequate light, air, ventilation and privacy of all the residential units is provided and may require additional spacing up to twenty (20) feet to ensure the provision of these elements, and allow for separation of building masses and higher quality of design. (Ord. 84-705, § 7; Ord. 85-720, § 9; Ord. 92-977, § 2)

Landscaping Requirements. One (1) specimen size tree (thirty (30) inch box tree) shall be provided for each unit. Specimen trees existing on a site prior to development shall be identified on the proposed site plan and shall not be removed without prior written approval from the Director of Community Development. Existing specimen trees may be used to satisfy the landscaping requirement. (Ord. 84-705, § 7)

Recreational Facilities. All projects one-half (1/2) acre or larger shall contain a children’s playground with an area based on the following formula: seventy (70) square feet for each two (2) bedroom unit and one hundred forty (140) square feet for each three (3) or more bedroom unit in the project. In no event shall the playground be less than thirteen hundred (1,300) square feet. All projects one (1) acre or larger shall contain a clubhouse or meeting room in addition to the aforementioned playground. Individual features of said playground and clubhouse or meeting room are subject to the approval of the Director of Community Development. (Ord. 84-705, § 7; Ord. 85-720, § 9)

Private Storage Space. Each unit within the project shall have at least two hundred (200) cubic feet of enclosed, weather-proofed and lockable storage space for the sole use of the unit owner.

Such space shall have a minimum horizontal interior dimension of three and one-half (3-1/2) feet. The space, if a reach-in type, shall have an opening of three and one-half (3-1/2) feet by six (6) feet, or, if a walk-in type, shall have a minimum clear access opening of two and one-half (2-1/2) feet by six and two-thirds (6-2/3) feet.

Such space may be provided within individual storage lockers, cabinets or closets in any location approved by the Commission, but shall not be split among two (2) or more locations. Moreover, since it is the intent of this standard to require space over and above that normally associated with the day-to-day functioning of the unit, the Commission shall exercise reasonable discretion in differentiating between such required private storage space and guest, linen or clothes closets or food pantries that are customarily within the unit. Thus, while providing such private storage space within the limits of the unit is not precluded, it shall be over and above that which would otherwise be provided within the unit.

If such space is located within a common area within the project, the Association shall be responsible for the care and maintenance of the exterior surface of the space in order to assure that the surface is maintained in a manner compatible with the architectural treatment of the project. Regardless of the location, the precise architectural treatment of such space shall be approved by the Planning Division to ensure that such areas are safe, convenient and unobtrusive to the functional and aesthetic qualities of the project.

Off-Street Parking. Each condominium project shall provide off-street parking in accordance with the provisions of CMC 9162.21.

Not more than thirty (30) percent of the total required spaces designated for guests may be designed and reserved for the parking of compact automobiles. Such spaces shall be so designated either by signing or marking. (Ord. 78-452; Ord. 85-720, § 9)

Treatment of Utilities.

Plumbing Shut-off Valves. Water supply lines to each unit within the project shall be fitted with shut-off valves of either a hand valve or screw-stop type. If there are extenuating circumstances which make the installation of such valves impractical, the Commission may approve a system which provides individual shut-off valves ahead of each fixture within the unit. A shut-off valve shall also be provided ahead of each water-supplied appliance not contained within a unit.

Drip Pans. Hot water heaters and any other appliances which the Building Official determines to be a potential source of water leakage or flooding shall be installed with built-in drip pans and a one and one-quarter (1-1/4) inch minimum diameter drain line leading to a safe point of disposal outside the building. The end of said drain shall be provided with a removable screen to prevent insect entrance to the unit. Drip pans may be omitted where appliances are located in garages that are constructed such that any water leakage cannot damage the common wall between units or find its way into an adjoining unit. (Ord. 80-536, § 1)

Utility Meters. With the exception of water supply and central heating and/or air conditioning, each utility that is controlled and consumed within the individual unit shall be separately metered in such a way that the unit owner can be separately billed for its use.

Circuit Breaker. Each unit shall have its own circuit breaker panel for all electrical circuits and outlets which serve the unit. Such panel shall be accessible without leaving the unit.

Isolation of Vibration and Sources of Structure-borne Noise in Condominium Projects Where Units Have Common Walls and/or Floor and Ceiling.

Shock Mounting of Mechanical Equipment. All permanent mechanical equipment such as motors, compressors, pumps and compactors which, because of their rotation, reciprocation, expansion and/or contraction, turbulence, oscillation, pulsation, impaction, or detonation, are determined by the Building Official to be a source of structural vibration or structure-borne noise shall be shock-mounted with inertia blocks or bases and/or vibration isolators in a manner approved by the Building Official. Domestic appliances which are cabinet-installed or built into the individual units, such as clothes washers and dryers, or other appliances which are determined by the Building Official to be a source of structural vibration or structure-borne noise, shall be isolated from cabinets and the floor or ceiling by resilient gaskets and vibration mounts approved by the Building Official. The cabinets in which they are installed should be offset from the back wall with strip gasketing of felt, cork or similar material approved by the Building Official. Where such appliances utilize water, flexible connectors shall be installed on all water lines. If provision is made within the units for the installation of nonpermanent appliances such as clothes washers and dryers, then permanent rubber mounting bases and surface plates shall be installed in a manner approved by the Building Official.

Location of Plumbing Fixtures. No plumbing fixture, except pullman-mounted lavatories, shall be located on a common wall between two (2) separate units where it would back up to a living room, family room, dining room, den or bedroom of an adjoining unit. (Ord. 80-536, § 1)

Separation of Vents and Lines. No common water supply lines, vents, or drain lines shall be permitted for contiguous units unless there is at least eight and one-half (8-1/2) feet of pipe between the closest plumbing fixtures within the separate units. The Building Official may approve other methods of isolating sound transmission through plumbing lines where their effectiveness can be demonstrated.

Insulation and Insulation of Lines. All water supply lines within the project shall be isolated from wood or metal framing with pipe isolators specifically manufactured for that purpose and approved by the Building Official. In multi-story condominium projects, all vertical drainage pipe, except piping serving only one (1) condominium unit that is located in a wall that is not common to any other unit, shall be surrounded by three-quarters (3/4) inch thick dense insulation board or full thick fiberglass or wool blanket insulation for its entire length except the sections that pass through wood or metal framing. (Ord. 80-536, § 1)

Attenuation of Noise.

General. Wall and floor/ceiling assemblies separating units from each other or from public or quasi-public spaces such as interior corridors, laundry rooms, recreation rooms and garages shall provide airborne sound insulation for walls, and both airborne and impact sound insulation for floor/ceiling assemblies.

Airborne Sound Insulation. All wall assemblies enumerated or alluded to in the previous paragraph shall be of a type of construction that has a minimum rating of 58 STC (Sound Transmission Class). All floor/ceiling assemblies enumerated or alluded to in the previous paragraph shall be of a type of construction that has a minimum rating of 50 STC. Wood floor joists and sub-flooring shall not be continuous between separate condominium units. Penetrations or openings in the construction for piping, electrical outlets and devices, recess cabinets, bathtubs, soffits and heating, ventilating and/or air conditioning intake and exhaust ducts, and the like, shall be sealed, lined, insulated or otherwise treated to maintain the required rating and such treatment shall be approved by the Building Official. Entrance doors to the unit shall be of solid construction and, together with perimeter seals, shall have a minimum rating of 30 STC. Such perimeter seals shall be maintained in effective operating condition.

Impact Sound Insulation. All separating floor/ceiling assemblies enumerated or alluded to above shall be of a type of construction that has a minimum rating of 69 IIC (Impact Insulation Class). Floor coverings may be included in the assembly to obtain the required ratings, but must be retained as a permanent part of the assembly and may only be replaced by another floor covering that provides the same or greater impact insulation.

Verification of Sound Class. STC and IIC ratings shall be based on the results of laboratory measurements and will not be subjected to field testing. The STC rating shall be based on the American Society for Testing and Materials system specified in ASTM B90-66t or equivalent. The IIC rating shall be based on the system in use at the National Bureau of Standards or equivalent. Ratings obtained from other testing procedures will require adjustment to the above rating systems. (Ord. 78-452)

9128.16 Development Criteria.
There are important considerations relative to each proposal for residential condominium usage and to each proposed site that do not lend themselves to specific development standards. The following criteria shall apply to proposals for condominium usage made pursuant to the provisions of CMC 9128.11 through 9128.17, and shall serve as a basis for the evaluation of accepted and appropriate planning and architectural techniques necessary for the orderly development of the City, and concurrently shall give substance to the policies necessary to achieve the purposes of these sections:

The project should be a comprehensive and integrated design, providing for its own open space, off-street parking and amenities for contemporary living. Insofar as the scale of the project allows, open space, walkways and other areas for people should be separated from parking areas, driveways and other areas for automobiles.

Architectural unit and harmony should be achieved both within the project and between the project and the surrounding community so that the project does not constitute a disruption to the established fabric of the community.

The layout of structures and other facilities should effect a conservation in street, driveway, curb cut, utility and other public or quasi-public improvements. Structures should be designed to minimize, within the context of accepted architectural practice, the consumption of natural resources either directly or indirectly (e.g., gas, water, electricity).

The project should be designed to maintain as much of the natural topography, large trees and environment as practical.

The configuration and orientation of the project should respect reasonable design limits imposed by the natural and man-made environment. Structures should be situated to take advantage of view, topography, sun and wind, while at the same time not destroying these advantages for adjacent properties. Structures should also be situated to minimize or buffer any undesirable characteristics of the site such as street noise and nearby obnoxious commercial or industrial uses.

The layout of units and open space within the project should establish, through the use of structure and landscape materials, a perceptible spatial transition from the public street, though the semi-privacy of the common areas, to the privacy of the unit. Most importantly, the environment of each condominium unit should be private and free from visual, audible and other intrusions.

9128.17 Declaration of Covenants – Conditions and Restrictions.
To achieve the purposes of CMC 9128.11, the Declaration of Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions relating to the management of the common area and facilities shall accompany all proposals for residential condominium usage made pursuant to the provisions of CMC 9128.11 through 9128.17. In addition to such covenants, conditions and restrictions that may be required by the Department of Real Estate of the State of California or pursuant to Title 6 of Part IV of Division II of the California Civil Code or other State laws or policies, such declaration shall provide for the following, none of which, after acceptance in final form by the City, shall be amended, modified or changed without first obtaining the written consent of the City:

Assignment or Conveyance of Private Open Space. The surface area and appurtenant airspace or private open space areas, including but not limited to the private patio, deck, balcony, solarium or atrium required by CMC 9128.15, and any integral portion of that space that may exceed the minimum area requirements, shall be described and irrevocably assigned to its respective unit, except that where the private open space is totally within the boundary described by the interior surfaces of the unit, it shall be conveyed as an integral part of the unit.

Assignment or Conveyance of Private Storage Areas. The surfaces and appurtenant airspace of private storage areas, including but not limited to the private storage space required by CMC 9128.15, shall be described and irrevocably assigned by the Declaration or Condominium Plan to its respective unit, except that where the private storage space is totally, within the boundary described by the interior surfaces of the unit, as it would be in a closet opening upon a unit’s room or hallway, it shall be conveyed as an integral part of the unit.

Assignment or Conveyance and Use of Required Off-Street Parking Spaces. Required off-street, enclosed parking spaces, except guest parking spaces, shall be permanently and irrevocably assigned to particular units within the project on the basis of two (2) spaces per unit, except that where two (2) parking spaces are totally within the boundary described by the interior surfaces of the unit, as they would be in townhouse development with a private entrance from the parking garage to the unit, they shall be conveyed as an integral part of the unit. To the maximum practical extent, the two (2) spaces assigned to each unit shall be contiguous. In no case shall the private storage area of one (1) unit overhang or take its access from the required off-street parking space of another unit. All parking spaces shall be used solely by unit owners, members of their families, their guests or lessees of the owner’s unit, except that a unit occupant within the project may rent one (1) space to another unit occupant or to the Association. All parking spaces shall be solely for the purpose of parking motor vehicles as defined by the California Vehicle Code.

Maintenance of Impact Insulation Class. The Impact Insulation Class (IIC) rating of all separating floor/ceiling assemblies, as required by CMC 9128.15, shall be described in the Declaration. Where the minimum IIC rating is obtained through the use of floor covering(s), the Declaration should provide that said covering(s) shall not be removed for any purpose except cleaning or replacement, and shall further provide that any replacement covering(s) shall furnish not less than the degree of impact insulation afforded by covering(s) originally installed.

Right of Public Entry to Common Area. The City of Carson, the County of Los Angeles, the State of California, and the Government of the United States, and any department, bureau or agency thereof, shall have the right of immediate access to all portions of common areas of the project not assigned for the exclusive use of the owner of a particular unit at all times. Notice of such right of governmental agency access shall be prominently displayed in the common areas of the project.

Television and Radio Antenna. Individual television and radio antennas shall be prohibited outside of any owner’s unit. The Declaration shall provide either for a central antenna with connections to each unit via underground or internal wall wiring, or each unit shall be served by a cable antenna service provided by a company licensed to provide such service within the City.

Voting. For the purpose of voting, including without limitation voting to set the amount of regular or special assessments and for the purpose of amending the Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions, one (1) vote shall be allocated for each unit within the project. The amount of regular and special assessments may be made proportional to the gross square footage of each unit within the project.

Partition and Sale of the Project. An action may be brought by one (1) or more owners of units within the project for partition thereon by sale of the entire project as if the owners of all the condominiums in such project were tenants-in-common in the entire project in the same proportion as their interests in the common areas provided, however, that a partition shall be made only upon a showing of the existence of one (1) or more of the conditions set forth in Section 752b of the California Code of Civil Procedure, or that:

Two years after damage or destruction to the project which renders a material part thereof unfit for its use, the project has not been rebuilt or repaired substantially to its state prior to its damage or destruction; or

One-half or more of the project has been destroyed or substantially damaged and condominium owners holding in aggregate more than fifty (50) percent interest in the common areas are opposed to repair or restoration of the project; or

The most recently constructed dwelling structure has been in existence in excess of the number of years shown in the following table, the project is obsolete and uneconomic, and the percentage of condominium owners holding in aggregate a percentage interest in the common areas as set forth in the following table are opposed to repair or restoration of the project.

Age of Structure

Percentage of Interest in Common Areas Held by Condominium Owners

30 years

70 percent

40 years

60 percent

50 years

50 percent

60 years

40 percent

70 years

30 percent

For purposes of this Section, multiple owners of a single unit shall not be deemed possessed, in the aggregate, of any greater interest in the common areas than that possessed by a single owner of a unit.

Maintenance. The Declaration shall contain a provision establishing the obligation and duty of the governing body of the condominium to maintain the common areas in good condition.

Enforcement. The Declaration shall contain a provision ensuring the right of any owner to enforce the terms of the Declaration.

Maintenance of Common Areas and Facilities.

Obligation. No Conditional Use Permit shall be granted for a residential condominium development unless the obligation for care, upkeep and management of the common element is imposed on a nonprofit corporation (the Association).

Assessments. In order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, provision shall be made both for annual assessments for maintenance and special assessments for capital improvements. The amount of the regular annual assessment, and the procedure for its change, shall be specified. The manner in which special assessments may be levied for the purpose of defraying, in whole or part, the cost of any construction, reconstruction, repair or replacement of a capital improvement upon the common area shall be specified. The amount of regular and special assessments may be made proportional to the gross square footage to each unit within the project. Both annual and special assessments may be collected on a monthly basis. The remedies which the Association may bring for the nonpayment of assessments shall be specified and may include penalties for late payment.

Veto Right and Authority of the City. In consideration for the City’s approval of a condominium project, including without limitation any approval of a conversion to condominium usage, the Declaration shall provide that the City, at its option, has the right and authority to veto any action of the Association which would tend to decrease the amount of the regular annual assessment upon a finding by the City that such a decrease could or would adversely affect the long-run maintenance of the condominium structures and/or common areas. To enable the City to exercise said optional veto, the Declaration shall provide that Association actions to decrease the annual assessment do not become effective until sixty (60) days after written notice of such action is given to the City.

Utility Easements Over Private Streets and Other Areas. If the condominium project contains private streets, provision shall be made for public utility easements in or adjacent to such private streets, adjacent to public streets or over other portions of the project to accommodate fire hydrants, water meters, street furniture, storm drainage, sanitary sewers, water and gas mains, electrical lines and similar urban infrastructure. The Commission may also require access routes necessary to assure that fire fighting equipment can reach and operate efficiently in all areas of the project.

Amendment of the Declaration. Any amendment to the Declaration which would amend, modify, delete or otherwise affect any provision required by this Section shall require the prior written approval of the City. To that end, no such amendment of the Declaration shall be effective unless: (1) the text thereof shall have been submitted to the City thirty (30) days prior to its adoption by the owners; (2) either the City has approved the amendment or failed to disapprove it within said thirty (30) day period; and (3) the recorded instrument effecting such amendment shall recite that it was so submitted and approved or not disapproved.

Mobile Home Parks

9128.2 Mobile Home Parks.
Every Conditional Use Permit for a mobile home park shall be subject to the following conditions regardless of whether such conditions are specifically set forth in the Conditional Use Permit. In granting a Conditional Use Permit, additional conditions may be imposed but may not change or modify any of the following conditions:

Area. A mobile home park shall have a net area of not less than two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet.

Mobile Home Site Size. The average size of the mobile home sites shall not be less than twenty-two hundred (2,200) square feet. No mobile home site may have an area of less than twelve hundred (1,200) square feet. The area of a mobile home site covered by a mobile home and any other structure(s) shall not exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the site area.

Yards. The required front yard of the mobile home park shall be the same as required in the zone in which it is located but in no event less than fifteen (15) feet. No mobile home or structure, other than a fence or wall, shall be located within five (5) feet of the front, side or rear lot line of a mobile home site.

Distance Between Mobile Homes. There shall be a distance of not less than ten (10) feet between mobile homes.

Driveways. Each mobile home site shall have access upon a driveway of not less than twenty-five (25) feet in clear width, exclusive of required parking areas. All driveways shall be improved with macadam, asphalt or concrete surfacing, and shall have clear and unobstructed access to a public street.

Parking Requirements. There shall be not less than two (2) parking spaces at least nine (9) feet by twenty (20) feet in size for each mobile home site, and in addition thereto, not less than one (1) such parking space for each four (4) mobile home sites for guest parking. Tandem parking is permitted for the two (2) required parking spaces for each mobile home site.

Walls. A wall at least six (6) feet in height shall be built and maintained to completely enclose all mobile home park facilities. Such walls shall be located so as to be in compliance with the yard requirements of the applicable zone.

Landscaping. Such areas of a mobile home park shall be landscaped as the Commission finds necessary to prevent the mobile home park from being materially detrimental to the public welfare or to the property of other persons located in the vicinity thereof.

Signs. Signs shall not be used in conjunction with a mobile home park except:

One sign, not over twenty (20) square feet in area, solely for the purpose of identifying the name of the mobile home park may be erected for each street frontage. No sign is permitted along a freeway frontage.

Directional or informational signs relating solely to the operation of the mobile home park may be erected, not exceeding four (4) square feet in area per sign and not exceeding four (4) feet in height.

One park directory sign may be provided at each vehicular entrance to the mobile home park. Such directory sign shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in area per sign.

Recreation Facilities. Recreation facilities shall be provided sufficient for the reasonable use and enjoyment of the residents of the mobile park.

Prohibitions:

A recreational vehicle shall not be occupied in a mobile home park.

A mobile home shall not support a building.

Recreational facilities shall not be used by any person other than residents of the mobile home park and their guests.

A mobile home park shall have no dwelling units other than one (1) dwelling unit for the use of a caretaker or a manager responsible for maintaining or operating the property.

Vehicles shall not be parked within required driveways.

A mobile home shall not be used for any commercial purpose other than a permitted home occupation pursuant to CMC 9128.4.

There shall be no commercial uses in a mobile home park, other than home occupations, except those uses approved by the Commission upon a finding that such uses are appurtenant and necessary to facilitate the operation of a mobile home park.

Other Regulations. The mobile home park shall comply with all other applicable statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations.

9128.21 Relocation Impact Report (RIR).
For the purpose of this Section, any closure of a mobile home park or trailer park or any part thereof or any change of the park’s status to a vacant use shall be deemed to be conversion of the park.

Prior to the conversion of a mobile home park or trailer park or any part thereof to any other use or to a vacant use, the person or entity (hereinafter “the applicant”) proposing such conversion shall file an application with the City and obtain approval from the City of a relocation impact report (RIR) in accordance with the provisions contained in this Section.

For the purpose of this Section, the term “Mobile Home” shall mean a vehicle designed or used for human habitation and shall include camping trailers, motor homes, slide-in campers and travel trailers, when used as the occupant’s primary place of residence as established by nine (9) months’ continuous residency, and mobile homes as defined in the California Mobile Home Residency Law, Civil Code Section 798, et seq.

No sign stating that the mobile home park or trailer park is closing, may be closing or has been closed, and no sign concerning a proposed new use of the park, may be placed on or adjacent to a mobile home park or trailer park before the City has adopted a final resolution approving the RIR for the park and the applicant has executed and recorded a certificate of acceptance of the conditions of the resolution approving the RIR and given the required six (6) months’ notice of termination of tenancy.

A. Time for Filing RIR. An RIR shall be filed by the applicant and approved by the Commission prior to the giving of the written notice of change in use of a mobile home park or trailer park or any portion thereof required by Section 798.56 of the California Civil Code. The RIR shall constitute an application for a permit requesting a change of use within the meaning of Section 798.56 of the California Civil Code.

If the applicant files a tentative tract or parcel map to a subdivision to be created upon the conversion of a mobile home park or a trailer park to another use prior to giving the written notice under Section 798.56 of the California Civil Code, then the RIR shall be filed concurrently with the filing of the map.

B. Application and Resident Questionnaire. The City may require that the applicant file an application on a form, provided by the City, concurrently with the filing of an RIR.

The City may also require that the applicant give to each affected mobile home owner a questionnaire, provided by the City, which includes, but is not limited to:

1. The purchase price and date of purchase of the mobile home by the resident. (Information may be provided at the option of the resident.)

2. The amount and terms of any remaining amount due on a mortgage on the mobile home.

3. The cost incurred by the resident in making any improvements, such as additions to or enlargement of the mobile home, patios, porches, carports, landscaping, and related amenities.

4. Any circumstances, including but not limited to job location, which would restrict the area in which the resident is able to relocate.

All questionnaires shall be given to each resident by the applicant at least forty (40) days prior to filing the proposed RIR with the City and shall be returned by each resident to the applicant within thirty (30) days. All completed questionnaires shall be submitted to the City by the applicant concurrently with the filing of an RIR.

Said questionnaires shall be kept separate from the RIR and will not be included in the RIR sent to each resident. The identity of a resident and his or her individual responses shall be confidential and shall not be divulged except as necessary to determine the relocation assistance to be received by that particular resident or to settle disputes concerning the relocation assistance approved by the City. The City may also require information, such as that in the questionnaire, directly from the resident.

C. Content of RIR. The RIR shall contain the following:

1. A description of the proposed new use.

2. A timetable for conversion of the park.

3. A legal description of the park.

4. The number of spaces in the park, length of occupancy by the current occupant of each space, and current rental rate for each space.

5. The date of manufacture and size of each mobile home.

6. The appraised on-site value and off-site value of each of the mobile homes in the park. The appraiser is to be selected by the City and the cost is to be borne by the applicant.

7. The total number of mobile home residents, broken down space by space, to identify owner or renter occupancy, principal or second home occupancy, resident under sixteen (16) years of age, residents sixty-two (62) years of age or over, and the number of residents who are handicapped and/or disabled.

8. The name and mailing address of each mobile home resident and each nonresident mobile home owner.

9. A list of known available spaces in the South Bay-Long Beach area of Los Angeles County, the Orange County area and other areas of Los Angeles County within a fifty (50) mile radius from the park, including any written commitments from mobile home parks and trailer park owners willing to accept displaced residents, the comparability of such parks and the rental rates for such spaces.

a. If comparable spaces are not available for the mobile homes of the residents within the above described areas, the RIR shall contain information on the location and rental rates of available spaces in other areas, if any, within a reasonable distance from the mobile home park, the purchase price of comparable mobile homes in place in a comparable park within a reasonable distance, the purchase and installation cost of a new mobile home if spaces are available for new mobile homes in a comparable park within a reasonable distance, the rental rates in such parks.

b. If comparable spaces are not available within a reasonable distance, the purchase price of condominiums similar in size to the mobile homes within a reasonable distance, and the rental rates and moving costs involved in moving to an apartment or other rental unit within a reasonable distance.

10. Estimates from two (2) moving companies as to the minimum and per mile cost of moving mobile homes of various sizes, including tear-down and setup of mobile homes and moving of improvements such as porches, carports, patios, and other moveable amenities installed by the residents. Said moving companies shall be approved by the Director of Community Development (hereinafter “Director”) prior to inclusion with the RIR.

11. Proposed measures to mitigate the adverse impacts of the conversion upon the park residents.

12. The City may require that the applicant hire a Relocation Specialist to find alternate housing. The specialist shall be selected by the applicant, subject to the City’s approval, and shall be paid for by the applicant.

13. Information whether residents have been offered the option of a long-term lease of the land and purchase of the improvements if the park is to be sold.

D. Hearing and Notice. Upon filing of an RIR, the Director shall examine the same and advise the applicant within thirty (30) days after receipt thereof whether it is complete. When a complete RIR has been filed it shall be accepted by the Director, and the Director shall set a time, date and place for review of the RIR by the Commission not later than forty-five (45) days after the date of acceptance. The Director shall mail a copy of the RIR to all residents of the mobile home park or trailer park and any nonresident owners of mobile homes in the park and shall give notice by certified mail or personal delivery to the applicant, the residents, and any nonresident owners of mobile homes in the park of the date, time and place of the hearing at least thirty (30) days prior thereto. The RIR sent to each resident and nonresident mobile home owner shall not include the resident questionnaire, however it shall include the individual appraisal of that resident’s mobile home. The notice shall also contain a general explanation of the matters to be considered by the Commission. The Director may give such additional notice as the Commission deems necessary or desirable. The hearing shall be conducted and the decision made in accordance with CMC 9173.23, 9173.31, 9173.32 and 9173.33.

E. Commission Findings and Decision. Upon review of the RIR and consideration of the written and oral evidence received at the hearing, the Commission shall, by resolution, render its decision within forty-five (45) days of the date first set for hearing. The Commission shall approve the RIR if it is able to make an affirmative finding that reasonable measures have been provided in an effort to mitigate the adverse impact of the conversion on the ability of the park residents to be displaced to find alternative housing. If the Commission does not make this finding and is unable to impose reasonable measures to mitigate the adverse impact, the Commission may disapprove the RIR. No other permit or approval shall be granted in furtherance of the proposed conversion and no change of use shall occur until and unless an RIR has been approved.

In approving an RIR, the Commission may impose reasonable measures not exceeding the reasonable costs of relocation to mitigate adverse impacts created by the conversion, which may include, but not be limited to, any of the following:

1. Provision for payment of the cost of physically moving the mobile home to a new site, including tear-down and setup of mobile homes, including, but not limited to, movable improvements such as patios, carports and porches.

2. Payment of a lump sum to compensate for payment of the first and last month’s rent and any security deposit at the new mobile home park.

3. Payment of a lump sum to compensate for any differential between rental rates at the closing mobile home park and the new mobile home park during the first year of the new tenancy.

4. For those mobile home residents who move to apartments or other rental housing alternatives, provision for the first and last month’s rent, plus security deposit, cleaning fees, not to exceed the Fair Market Rents for new construction and substantial rehabilitation for the Los Angeles area as established by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. Mobile home households may be compensated based on the number of bedrooms in the mobile home so that a one (1) bedroom mobile home may be compensated based on a one (1) bedroom apartment, a two (2) bedroom mobile home based on a two (2) room apartment, etc.

5. For those mobile home residents who move to apartments or other rental housing alternatives, a lump sum payment to compensate for any differential between rental rates at the closing mobile home park and the rental housing alternative during the first year of tenancy. Mobile home households may be compensated based on the Fair Market Rents for new construction and substantial rehabilitation for the Los Angeles area as established by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. Mobile home households may be compensated based on the number of bedrooms in the mobile home so that a one (1) bedroom mobile home may be compensated based on a one (1) bedroom apartment, a two (2) bedroom mobile home based on a two (2) bedroom apartment, etc.

6. Provision of a replacement space within a reasonable distance of the mobile home park or trailer park.

7. A requirement that a resident whose mobile home cannot be relocated within a reasonable distance to a comparable park be compensated by a lump sum payment based upon consideration of the fair market value of the mobile home on-site, including resident improvements (i.e., landscaping, porches, carports, etc.), any mortgage obligations of the resident on the mobile home, and the costs of purchasing a mobile home on-site in a comparable park or acquiring other comparable replacement housing.

8. A provision for setting aside a certain number of units for the residents of the park if the park is to be converted to another residential use.

The total of the mitigation measures required shall be subject to and shall not exceed the limitation in Government Code Section 65863.7 which provides: the steps required to be taken to mitigate shall not exceed the reasonable costs of relocation.

F. Effective Date of Commission – Decision and Appeal. The decision of the Planning Commission shall become effective and final fifteen (15) days after the date of its decision unless an appeal is filed in accordance with CMC 9173.4. An appeal shall be considered by the Council as provided in CMC 9173.4 except that the Director shall advise the appellant within fifteen (15) days after receipt thereof whether it is complete, shall set a date for the appeal hearing not later than thirty (30) days after it is accepted as complete, shall give fifteen (15) days’ notice of the hearing to all affected parties in the manner required by subsection D of this Section and the Council shall, by resolution, render its findings and decision thereon within forty-five (45) days after the date first set for hearing on the appeal.

G. Subsequent Modification of Mitigation Measures.

1. After an RIR has been approved and after the applicant has executed and recorded a certificate of acceptance of the conditions of the RIR, modification of the mitigation measures imposed, including additions and deletions, may be considered upon the filing of a written application by the applicant, or the applicant’s authorized representative. Modification may be granted on the grounds that there has been a change in circumstances or new information, which could not reasonably have been known or considered at the time of the hearings on the RIR, has become available. Examples of such new information or changed circumstances include, but are not limited to, revised plans by the applicant and a change in the availability of relocation spaces. Modification shall not be granted when it would unreasonably prejudice the ability of the residents to relocate to comparable housing.

2. Any application for modification shall be subject to the notice and hearing procedures set forth in subsection D of this Section. The decision and any appeal in connection with a modification request shall take place as with the initial approval.

H. Performance of Mitigation Measures. The applicant shall execute and record a certificate accepting the mitigation measures imposed on the approval of an RIR within thirty (30) days of the final resolution approving the RIR and imposing the mitigation measures and shall give the six (6) month notice of the termination of tenancy and closure of the park within forty-five (45) days of the adoption of that resolution. A resolution approving an RIR shall automatically become null and void if the certificate accepting the conditions is not filed and executed and the notice of termination not given within forty-five (45) days of the date of the final resolution approving the RIR. All mitigation measures imposed in the approval of an RIR shall be fully performed as to each resident prior to that resident’s required vacation of the mobile home park or trailer park, unless otherwise provided in the mitigation measure. No resident shall be required to vacate a mobile home/trailer space unless the applicant is in full compliance with all mitigation measures imposed pertaining to such resident, and has otherwise fulfilled the notice requirements of the California Mobile Home Residency Law relating to “Termination of Tenancy” and the notice required in CMC 4700 through 4709.

I. Expiration, Extension and Revocation of RIR.

1. Expiration. An RIR shall become automatically null and void if the conversion of the mobile home park has not occurred within twelve (12) months of its effective date unless extended as provided in subsection (I)(2) of this Section or unless otherwise provided in the RIR or the resolution of approval of the RIR.

2. Extension. Upon application by the applicant filed with the Director on or before the date of expiration of the RIR, an RIR may be extended by the Commission, or the Council on appeal, if the Commission finds that the termination of the RIR would constitute an undue hardship to the applicant and that the continuation of the RIR would not be detrimental or have any further adverse impact on the residents in the park. An application for an extension shall be subject to the hearing and notice procedures set forth in subsection D of this Section. In approving an extension, the Commission may subject the RIR to any additional mitigation measures deemed necessary to mitigate any adverse impacts resulting from the extension. Multiple extensions may be granted, but no one (1) extension shall be issued for more than twelve (12) months.

3. Revocation. Proceedings for the revocation of an RIR may be initiated by the Council, the Commission or the Director. Upon initiation of a revocation, the Commission shall conduct a hearing with notice given in the same manner set forth in subsection D of this Section, except that notice to the applicant shall be by certified mail or personal service. After the hearing, the Commission may, by resolution, revoke the RIR if any of the following findings are made:

a. Approval was obtained by fraud, deceit or misrepresentation.

b. The applicant is not or has not been in compliance with the mitigation measures contained in the RIR or with the provisions of this Section.

c. A revocation shall be effective fifteen (15) days after the date of the action by the Commission unless an appeal is filed in accordance with CMC 9173.4. An appeal shall be considered by the Council as provided in CMC 9173.4.

d. Upon revocation, the applicant shall not be entitled to convert or change the use of the park until such time as a new RIR is filed and accepted as complete by the Director, a new written notice of change of use is given to park residents and a new RIR is approved by the Commission.

J. Time Limits. The time limits set forth in subsections A through I of this Section may be extended with the applicant’s consent and waiver of the applicable time limits in writing or orally on the record during a public hearing.

K. Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of subsections A through I of this Section is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions. The City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted said sections and each subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more of said sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional.

Effect on Pending Applications. Any completed RIR application pending upon the effective date of this Section shall continue to be processed and the applicant shall have thirty (30) days in which to provide any further information required by this Section. (Ord. 82-589U, § 1; Ord. 82-618, § 2; Ord. 89-882, §§ 1 – 12; Ord. 92-965, §§ 1 – 9; Ord. 92-966, § 6)

Subdivision Directional Signs

9128.31 Regulation.
No sign providing travel directions to a subdivision or other development shall be located or erected in any zone unless authorized by the Director in accordance with the provisions of CMC 9128.32 through 9128.35.

Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Section shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 2 of Article I of this Code. (Ord. 79-479, § 6)

9128.32 Application.
A person desiring to erect and maintain one (1) or more subdivision directional signs shall apply therefor to the Director concurrently with one (1) or more building permit applications for construction in the development to which the signs refer.

In the application, the applicant shall quote exactly the message to be placed upon each sign and shall list all existing subdivision directional signs for the same subdivision development. A plot plan and elevation plan shall be provided showing the location and design of each sign. Both the owner of the sign and the applicant shall sign the application. No fee shall be required for such application.

9128.33 Specifications.
The written and illustrative message on each subdivision directional sign shall be the same as quoted in the application and as shown on the elevation plan except as otherwise permitted or required by the Director, and shall be limited to necessary travel directions, the name of the land development project to which it pertains, a characteristic trademark or insignia and other such information describing the character of the development as may be specifically approved by the Director, provided, however, that such information shall be auxiliary to said sign’s primary purpose of providing travel directions. Said sign shall not contain any other advertising.

An unobstructed open space shall be maintained to a height of eight (8) feet below each sign except for structural supports. Where topographic features create an unnecessary hardship or unreasonable regulation or make it obviously impractical to require compliance with this provision, the Director may modify this requirement.

Not more than four (4) sign structures containing not more than a total of eight (8) sign faces shall be permitted at any one time for a development, regardless of the number of units, tract maps or phases within the total development.

Such signs shall be located only within four (4) miles from the exterior boundary of the development to which they relate.

Such signs shall not be located within the right-of-way of any street or alley, or along an established or existing freeway which has been designated as a freeway route by the State of California, or along a scenic highway.

Identification shall be placed on each such sign indicating the permit number, sign owner and expiration date.

9128.34 Agreement and Deposit.
The Director shall require with each application, as a condition of approval, the deposit of a cash performance bond in the amount of $600.00 per sign structure and an agreement signed by the applicant, the owner of the sign and the owner of the property on which the sign is to be placed, by which such persons agree that the City may enter the property upon which the sign is located and remove it if such sign is not removed and the site thereof restored to a neat and orderly condition within five (5) days after the termination of the permit. The said applicant and owners also shall agree that if such sign is not so removed by them within said five (5) days and the site restored, the City may retain the deposit as liquidated damages.

9128.35 Time Limit.
No subdivision directional sign shall be permitted for a period of more than two (2) years, except the Director may grant time extensions of one (1) year each.

Home Occupations

9128.4 Home Occupations.
Home occupations may be conducted by the occupants of a dwelling, provided:

The home occupation is secondary and incidental to the principal use of the property for residential purposes.

The character of the structure and premises is not changed from a residential character. The appearance of the structure shall not be altered in any way, nor may the conduct of the occupation within the structure be such that the structure can be recognized as serving a nonresidential use (either by color, materials of construction, lighting, sounds or noises, vibrations, electrical interference or otherwise).

There is no storage of materials and/or supplies either indoors or outdoors and no accessory building or space outside the main building is used for home occupational purposes, except that the garage may be used for storage; provided, that such storage does not interfere with required off-street parking spaces.

No persons, other than members of the resident family, are employed in such occupation.

No equipment is used which will increase the need for utilities or community facilities beyond that usually required for residential purposes.

Not more than one (1) room in the dwelling is used for the home occupation.

No sale of goods is made on the premises.

There is no stock in trade nor display maintained on the premises.

No sign and/or structure is exhibited other than those otherwise permitted in the zone in which located.

The use does not require material or equipment recognized as not being normally used by residents or hobbyists in households, except that light business machines are permitted.

The use does not generate pedestrian or vehicular traffic beyond that normal to the zone in which it is located.

The use does not involve deliveries of materials to or from the premises by commercial delivery vehicles.

Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Section shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 2 of Article I of this Code. (Ord. 79-479, § 6; Ord. 88-836, § 2; Ord. 11-1479, § 5)

Multiple-Family Dwelling

9128.51 Multiple-Family Dwelling.
Every Conditional Use Permit for a multiple-family dwelling shall be subject to the development standards and criteria set forth in CMC 9128.54 through 9128.55 regardless of whether such conditions are specifically set forth in the Conditional Use Permit. In granting a Conditional Use Permit, additional conditions may be imposed. (Added by Ord. 85-720, § 10)

9128.52 Existing Multiple-Family Dwellings.
Existing multiple-family dwellings which do not comply with the provisions of CMC 9128.54 shall be nonconforming uses and shall be allowed to continue operation without a Conditional Use Permit and without complying with the development standards set forth in CMC 9128.54. (Added by Ord. 85-720, § 10)

9128.53 Application for Conditional Use Permit.
The application for a Conditional Use Permit for a proposed multiple-family dwellings project shall include the following information, in the number of copies and degree of detail which the Director determines to be sufficient for the Commission to evaluate the project:

A complete legal description of the property and a boundary map showing the existing topography of the site and the location of all existing easements, structures and other improvements, and trees over six (6) inches in diameter.

Dimensioned schematic development plans consisting of at least a site plan, garage plan, typical floor plan, building elevations showing natural grades, transverse and longitudinal sections showing natural grades, transverse and longitudinal sections showing natural grades and a conceptual landscaping plan for the project as a whole.

A tabular analysis showing how the project compares to the minimum standards for multiple-family dwellings.

Typical detailed sections of the types of wall and floor/ceiling construction that would be used in both common and interior partition walls within the project, including either published data from a recognized testing laboratory or a statement from a licensed acoustical engineer or the City Building Official as to the STC (Sound Transmission Class) and IIC (Impact Insulation Class) of the proposed type of construction.

Such other information which the Commission or Director determines is necessary to evaluate the proposed project. (Added by Ord. 85-720, § 10)

9128.54 Development Standards.
The Commission shall require, except as noted above, that all multiple-family dwellings conform to all ordinances of the City and all of the following multiple-family dwelling Development Standards:

Private Open Space. Notwithstanding the minimum total amount of usable open space required for a multiple-family dwelling project and the minimum dwelling unit size, each of the individual units shall have an appurtenant private patio, deck, balcony, atrium or solarium with a minimum area of one hundred fifty (150) square feet, except that one (1) bedroom and zero bedroom units shall have a minimum of one hundred thirty (130) square feet. Such space shall have a configuration that will allow a horizontal rectangle or square of one hundred (100) square feet in area and a minimum dimension of seven (7) feet to be placed in said space. The space shall be designed for the sole enjoyment of the unit tenant(s) and guests, and shall have at least one (1) weatherproofed, duplex electrical convenience outlet. Additionally, such space shall be at the same level as, and immediately accessible from, either a kitchen, dining room, family room or living room within the unit. The Commission may evaluate each project on its own merit in regard to the type, configuration and characteristics of the development, including unit mix pertaining to the number of bedrooms per unit and percentage thereof, and may allow variations from the above dimensional standards where it can be shown that the required private open space meets the intent and purpose of this Section.

Length of and Separation Between Buildings. Each detached residential building within a multiple-family dwelling project shall have a linear horizontal distance no greater than six (6) units in length. The spacing between main residential buildings within multiple-family dwelling projects shall be at least ten (10) feet, except where a parking space is proposed therein, in which case there shall be at least fifteen (15) feet between main buildings. Where an individual unit fronts on an interior courtyard, the separation from an adjacent main residential building shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet. When main residential buildings are proposed to be separated by less than twenty (20) feet, the buildings shall not have windows, balconies, or patios directly opposing each other except for windows which open into stairwells or are located within vaulted ceiling areas where the height of the bottom of the window is no less than six (6) feet from the floor. When a project is designed with windows, balconies or patios that are part of an individual unit and the separation between buildings is less than fifteen (15) feet, the Commission shall evaluate the project to ensure that adequate light, air, ventilation, and privacy of all the residential units is provided and may require additional spacing up to twenty (20) feet to ensure the provision of these elements, and allow for separation of building masses and higher quality of design.

Landscaping Requirements. One (1) specimen-size tree (thirty (30) inch box tree) shall be provided for each unit. Specimen trees existing on a site prior to development shall be identified on the proposed site plan and shall not be removed without prior written approval from the Director of Community Development. Existing specimen trees may be used to satisfy the landscaping requirement.

Recreational Facilities. All projects one-half (1/2) acre or larger shall contain a children’s playground with an area based on the following formula: seventy (70) square feet for each two (2) bedroom unit and one hundred forty (140) square feet for each three (3) or more bedroom unit in the project. In no event shall the playground be less than thirteen hundred (1,300) square feet. All projects one (1) acre or larger shall contain a clubhouse or meeting room in addition to the aforementioned playground. Individual features of said playground and club house or meeting room are subject to the approval of the Director of Community Development.

Private Storage Space. Each unit within the project shall have at least two hundred (200) cubic feet of enclosed, weatherproofed and lockable storage space for the sole use of the unit tenant(s).

Such space shall have a minimum horizontal interior dimension of three and one-half (3-1/2) feet. The space, if a reach-in type, shall have an opening of three and one-half (3-1/2) feet by six (6) feet, or if a walk-in type, shall have a minimum clear access opening of two and one-half (2-1/2) feet by six and two-thirds (6-2/3) feet.

Such space may be provided within individual storage lockers, cabinets or closets in any location approved by the Commission, but shall not be split among two (2) or more locations. Moreover, since it is the intent of this standard to require space over and above that normally associated with the day-to-day functioning of the unit, the Commission shall exercise reasonable discretion in differentiating between such required private storage space and guest, linen or clothes closets or food pantries that are customarily within the unit. Thus, while providing such private storage space within the limits of the unit is not precluded, it shall be over and above that which would otherwise be provided within the unit.

If such space is located within a common area within the project, the property’s owner shall be responsible for the care and maintenance of the exterior surface of the space in order to assure that the surface is maintained in a manner compatible with the architectural treatment of the project. Regardless of the location, the precise architectural treatment of such space shall be approved by the Planning Division to ensure that such areas are safe, convenient and unobtrusive to the functional and aesthetic qualities of the project.

Off-Street Parking. Each multiple-family dwelling project shall provide off-street parking in accordance with the provisions of CMC 9162.21.

Not more than thirty (30) percent of the total required spaces designated for guests may be designed and reserved for the parking of compact automobiles. Such spaces shall be so designated either by signing or marking.

Treatment of Utilities.

Plumbing Shut-off Valves. Water supply lines to each unit within the project shall be fitted with shut off valves of either a hand valve or screw stop type. If there are extenuating circumstances which make the installation of such valves impractical, the Commission may approve a system which provides individual shut-off valves ahead of each fixture within the unit. A shut-off valve shall also be provided ahead of each water supplied appliance not contained within a unit.

Drip Pans. Hot water heaters and any other appliances which the Building Official determines to be a potential source of water leakage or flooding shall be installed with built-in drip pans and a one and one-quarter (1-1/4) inch minimum diameter drain line leading to a safe point of disposal outside the building. The end of said drain shall be provided with a removable screen to prevent insect entrance to the unit. Drip pans may be omitted where appliances are located in the garages that are constructed such that any water leakage cannot damage the common wall between units or find its way into an adjoining unit.

Utility Meters. With the exception of water supply and central heating and/or air conditioning, each utility that is controlled and consumed within the individual unit shall be separately metered in such a way that the unit owner can be separately billed for its use.

Circuit Breaker. Each unit shall have its own circuit breaker panel for all electrical circuits and outlets which serve the unit. Such panel shall be accessible without leaving the unit.

Isolation of Vibration and Sources of Structure-borne Noise in Multiple-family Dwelling Projects Where Units Have Common Walls and/or Floor and Ceiling.

Shock Mounting of Mechanical Equipment. All permanent mechanical equipment such as motors, compressors, pumps and compactors which, because of their rotation, reciprocation, expansion and/or contraction, turbulence, oscillation, pulsation, impaction or detonation, are determined by the Building Official to be a source of structural vibration or structure-borne noise shall be shock mounted with inertia blocks or bases and/or vibration isolators in a manner approved by the Building Official. Domestic appliances which are cabinet installed or built into the individual units, such as clothes washers and dryers, or other appliances which are determined by the Building Official to be a source of structural vibration or structure-borne noise, shall be isolated from cabinets and the floor or ceiling by resilient gaskets and vibration mounts approved by the Building Official. The cabinets in which they are installed should be offset from the back wall with strip gasketing of felt, cork or similar material approved by the Building Official. Where such appliances utilize water, flexible connectors shall be installed on all water lines. If provision is made within the units for the installation of nonpermanent appliances such as clothes washers and dryers, then permanent rubber mounting bases and surface plates shall be installed in a manner approved by the Building Official.

Location of Plumbing Fixtures. No plumbing fixture, except pullman mounted lavatories, shall be located on a common wall between two (2) separate units where it would back up to a living room, family room, dining room, den or bedroom of an adjoining unit.

Separation of Vents and Lines. No common water supply lines, vents, or drain lines shall be permitted for contiguous units unless there is at least eight and one-half (8-1/2) feet of pipe between the closest plumbing fixtures within the separate units. The Building Official may approve other methods of isolating sound transmission through plumbing lines where their effectiveness can be demonstrated.

Isolation and Insulation of Lines. All water supply lines within the project shall be isolated from wood or metal framing with pipe isolators specifically manufactured for that purpose and approved by the Building Official. In multistory projects, all vertical drainage pipe, except piping serving only one (1) unit that is located in a wall that is not common to any other unit, shall be surrounded by three-quarters (3/4) inch thick dense insulation board or full thick fiberglass or wool blanket insulation for its entire length except the sections that pass through wood or metal framing.

Attenuation of Noise.

General. Wall and floor/ceiling assemblies separating units from each other or from public or quasi-public spaces such as interior corridors, laundry rooms, recreation rooms and garages shall provide airborne sound insulation for walls, and both airborne and impact sound insulation for floor/ceiling assemblies.

Airborne Sound Insulation. All wall assemblies enumerated or alluded to in the previous paragraph shall be of a type of construction that has a minimum rating of 58 STC (Sound Transmission Class). All floor/ceiling assemblies enumerated or alluded to in the previous paragraph shall be of a type of construction that has a minimum rating of 50 STC. Wood floor joists and subflooring shall not be continuous between separate units. Penetrations or openings in the construction for piping, electrical outlets and devices, recess cabinets, bathtubs, soffits and heating, ventilating and/or air conditioning intake and exhaust ducts, and the like, shall be sealed, lined, insulated or otherwise treated to maintain the required rating and such treatment shall be approved by the Building Official. Entrance doors to the unit shall be of solid construction and, together with perimeter seals, shall have a minimum rating of 30 STC. Such perimeter seals shall be maintained in effective operating condition.

Impact Sound Insulation. All separating floor/ceiling assemblies enumerated or alluded to above shall be of a type of construction that has a minimum rating of 69 IIC (Impact Insulation Class). Floor coverings may be included in the assembly to obtain the required ratings, but must be retained as a permanent part of the assembly and may only be replaced by another floor covering that provides the same or greater impact insulation.

Verification of Sound Class. STC and IIC ratings shall be based on the results of laboratory measurements and will not be subjected to field testing. The STC rating shall be based on the American Society for Testing and Materials system specified in ASTM B90-66t or equivalent. The IIC rating shall be based on the system in use at the National Bureau of Standards or equivalent. Ratings obtained from other testing procedures will require adjustment to the above rating systems. (Added by Ord. 85-720, § 10; Ord. 92-977, § 3)

9128.55 Development Criteria.
There are important considerations relative to each proposal for multiple-family development usage and to each proposed site that do not lend themselves to specific development standards. The following criteria shall apply to proposals for multiple-family development usage made pursuant to the provisions of CMC 9128.51 through 9128.55, and shall serve as a basis for the evaluation of accepted and appropriate planning and architectural techniques necessary for the orderly development of the City, and concurrently shall give substance to the policies necessary to achieve the purposes of these sections:

The project should be a comprehensive and integrated design, providing for its own open space, off-street parking and amenities for contemporary living. Insofar as the scale of the project allows, open space, walkways and other areas for people should be separated from parking areas, driveways and other areas for automobiles.

Architectural unit and harmony should be achieved both within the project and between the project and the surrounding community so that the project does not constitute a disruption to the established fabric of the community.

The layout of structures and other facilities should effect a conservation in street, driveway, curb cut, utility and other public or quasi-public improvements. Structures should be designed to minimize, within the context of accepted architectural practice, the consumption of natural resources either directly or indirectly (e.g., gas, water, electricity).

The project should be designed to maintain as much of the natural topography, large trees and environment as practical.

The configuration and orientation of the project should respect reasonable design limits imposed by the natural and manmade environment. Structures should be situated to take advantage of view, topography, sun and wind, while at the same time not destroying these advantages for adjacent properties. Structures should also be situated to minimize or buffer any undesirable characteristics of the site such as street noise and nearby obnoxious commercial or industrial uses.

The layout of units and open space within the project should establish, through the use of structure and landscape materials, a perceptible spatial transition from the public street, through the semi-privacy of the common areas, to the privacy of the unit. Most importantly, the environment of each unit should be private and free from visual, audible and other intrusions. (Added by Ord. 85-720, § 10)

Reserved

9128.6 Reserved.
Repealed by Ord. 16-1590. (Added by Ord. 1079, Exh. A.)

Single-Room Occupancy Housing

9128.7 Single-Room Occupancy Housing.
A. Transitional housing, including efficiency residential units, also known as single-room occupancy (“SRO”), shall be subject to and comply with the standards and regulations as follows:

1. Each SRO shall comply with all applicable development standards for the applicable zoning district and minimum standards contained hereinbelow.

2. Units shall have a minimum size of one hundred fifty (150) square feet and a maximum of four hundred (400) square feet.

3. Each unit shall accommodate a maximum of two (2) persons.

4. Exterior lighting shall be provided for the entire outdoor and parking area of the property per the lighting standards described in CMC 9127.1 (Exterior Lighting).

5. Laundry facilities must be provided in a separate enclosed room at the ratio of one (1) washer and one (1) dryer for every twenty (20) units or fractional number thereof, with at least one (1) washer and dryer per floor.

6. A cleaning supply room or utility closet with a wash tub with hot and cold running water shall be provided on each floor of the SRO facility.

7. Each unit is required to provide a separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.

8. Each unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, functioning cooking appliance and a refrigerator, each having a clear working space of not less than thirty (30) inches in front.

9. Each SRO unit shall have a separate interior closet.

10. SRO units shall comply with all requirements of the California Building Code. All units shall comply with all applicable accessibility and adaptability requirements. All common areas shall be fully accessible.

11. An SRO facility shall not be located within five hundred (500) feet of any other SRO facility, emergency shelter, or other similar program, unless such program is located within the same building or on the same lot.

12. An SRO facility with ten (10) or more units shall provide on-site management. A facility with less than ten (10) units may provide a management office off site.

13. Tenancy of SRO units shall not be less than thirty (30) days and maximum period of twelve (12) months.

14. Parking shall be provided as follows:

a. One (1) uncovered parking space for every three (3) SRO units.

b. Two (2) uncovered parking spaces for an on-site manager unit.

c. Each SRO unit shall be provided at least one (1) lockable bicycle parking space in a location that is adjacent to that SRO unit.

15. Applications for an SRO unit or facility shall be processed in a manner consistent with procedures for multiple-family residential projects. (Ord. 13-1525, § 6)

PART 3. COMMERCIAL ZONES
Sections:

Division 1. Uses Permitted

§ 9131.1    Uses Permitted.

§ 9131.12    Uses Permitted on Organic Refuse Landfill Sites.

§ 9131.13    Uses Permitted within a Mixed-Use Residential (MUR) Overlay District.

§ 9131.2    Interpretation of Uses Permitted.

§ 9131.3    Prohibited Uses.

Division 2. Accessory Uses

§ 9132.1    Processing Activities.

§ 9132.2    Vehicle Sales and Service.

§ 9132.3    Laboratories.

§ 9132.4    Storage.

§ 9132.5    Outdoor Display.

§ 9132.6    Service and Repair.

§ 9132.7    Amusement Machines.

§ 9132.8    Fairs and Bazaars.

§ 9132.9    Small Collection Recycling Facility.

Division 3. Conditional Use Criteria

§ 9133    Conditional Use Criteria.

Division 4. (Reserved)

Division 5. Site Requirements

§ 9135.1    Applicability.

§ 9135.2    Minimum Lot Area.

§ 9135.3    Street Frontage and Access.

§ 9135.4    Minimum Lot Width.

Division 6. Site Development Standards

Buildings and Structures

§ 9136.11    Buildings Required.

§ 9136.12    Height of Buildings and Structures.

§ 9136.13    Uses Permitted in Residential Structures.

Yards and Open Spaces

§ 9136.21    Reserved.

§ 9136.22    Future Rights-of-Way.

§ 9136.23    Front Yard.

§ 9136.24    Side Yards.

§ 9136.25    Rear Yard.

§ 9136.26    Reserved.

§ 9136.27    Space Between Buildings.

§ 9136.28    Reserved.

§ 9136.29    Encroachments.

Other Site Developments Standards

§ 9136.3    Fences, Walls and Hedges.

§ 9136.4    Trash and Recycling Areas.

§ 9136.5    Reserved.

§ 9136.6    Parking, Loading, Truck Maneuvering and Driveways.

§ 9136.7    Signs.

§ 9136.8    Utilities.

§ 9136.9    Site Planning and Design.

Division 7. Environmental Effects

§ 9137.1    Exterior Lighting.

Division 8. Special Requirements for Certain Uses

§ 9138.10    Reserved.

§ 9138.11    General Provisions.

§ 9138.12    Convenience Store.

§ 9138.13    Reserved.

§ 9138.14    Automobile/Vehicle Services.

§ 9138.15    Commercial, Automotive (CA) Development Standards.

§ 9138.16    Communications Facilities.

§ 9138.17    Mixed-Use – Carson Street (MU-CS).

§ 9138.18    Mixed-Use – Sepulveda Boulevard (MU-SB).

§ 9138.19    Discount Stores.

§ 9138.2    Vehicle Service and Repair.

§ 9138.21    Vehicle Auctions.

§ 9138.22    Church Uses Within the CR (Commercial, Regional) Zone.

§ 9138.3    Golf Facilities.

§ 9138.4    Arcade Facilities.

§ 9138.5    Alcoholic Beverage Sales and Services.

§ 9138.6    Small Collection Recycling Facility.

§ 9138.7    Mixed-Use or Residential Development in a Mixed-Use Residential (MUR) Overlay District.

§ 9138.71    Outdoor Advertising Signs in an Electronic Marquee Signage (EMS) Overlay District.

§ 9138.72    Sex Offender Residency Restrictions.

§ 9138.8    Sidewalk, Parking Lot and Tent Sales.

§ 9138.9    Adult Business.

§ 9138.91    Massage Service.

§ 9138.92    Tattoo Service.

Division 1. Uses Permitted
9131.1 Uses Permitted.
Uses are permitted in the commercial zones as indicated in the following table:

USES PERMITTED IN COMMERCIAL ZONES

Legend

X.

Automatically permitted use.

L.

Automatically permitted use provided special limitations and requirements are satisfied as noted herein or in Division 8 of this Part.

D.

Use permitted subject to the approval of the Director.

LD.

Use permitted provided special limitations and requirements are satisfied as noted herein, in Division 8 of this Part and in Division 8 of Part 2, and subject to the approval of the Director.

C.

Use permitted upon approval of a conditional use permit.

CC.

Use permitted upon approval of the City Council as prescribed, under other provisions of the Carson Municipal Code.

 

All commercial uses permitted by this Part shall be subject to the requirements contained in CMC 9172.23, Site Plan and Design Review, except temporary uses. (See CMC 9131.1.) (Ord. 84-704)

DA.

Use permitted upon approval of a development agreement by the City Council subject to the requirements contained in Chapter 15 of Article VI.

 

ZONES

 

CN

CR

CG

CA

MU-CS

MU-SB

Retail Sales:*

 

 

 

 

 

 

* Alcoholic beverage sales, food services, and vehicle services are listed under separate headings.

Department stores, variety stores, and specialized stores for apparel, items for personal use, household items, plants and flowers, and supplies and small equipment for businesses, including antiques** but no other secondhand items. Swap meets and flea markets, as defined in CMC 9191.670, are prohibited.

X

X

X

 

X

X

** Incidental restoration permitted.

Convenience stores.

C

C

 

 

C

 

Discount stores.

 

C

C

 

 

 

Indoor mini-mart, auction house. (Ord. 86-763U, § 1; Ord. 87-813, § 1)

C

 

C

 

 

 

Building materials other than ornamental brick, stone, tile, or flagstone. (Incidental storage of sand, gravel, or rock limited to 2,000 tons total.)

 

L

L

 

 

 

Ornamental brick, stone, tile or flagstone. (See CMC 9133.)

 

 

C

 

 

 

Monuments, tombstones, statuary.

 

 

X

 

 

 

Feed and grain.

 

 

X

 

 

 

Secondhand store, pawn shop.

 

 

X

 

 

 

Retail Services:*

 

 

 

 

 

 

* Alcoholic beverage services, food services, and vehicle services are listed under separate headings.

Personal Services:

 

 

 

 

 

 

Barber shop, beauty shop, reducing salon, manicure parlor.

X

X

X

 

X

X

Clothing services – laundry or dry cleaning agency, self-service laundry or dry cleaning, hand laundry, sponging and pressing, tailor, dressmaker, seamstress, shoe repair.

X

X

X

 

X

X

Animal services – dog clip and wash, veterinary office or clinic (no animal hospital or kennel). (See CMC 9131.13(D).)

X

X

X

 

C

C

Animal hospital or clinic.

X

X

X

 

 

 

Mortuary. (See CMC 9133.)

 

 

C

 

 

 

Adult business. (See CMC 9133 and 9138.9; in MUR overlay district, see CMC 9131.13(D).)

 

C

C

 

 

 

Massage service. (See CMC 63134, 63135, 9133 and 9138.91.)

C

C

C

 

C

 

Tattoo service. (See CMC 9133 and 9138.92.)

 

C

C

 

C

 

Mechanical and repair services:

 

 

 

 

 

 

Locksmith,* watch repair, small appliance repair, radio and television repair, computer repair, bicycle repair.

X

X

X

 

X

X

Fix-it shop.*

X

 

X

 

 

X

Furniture redecorating, restoration and upholstering; glass repair, installation or glazing; screen repair; plumbing shop; lawnmower sharpening.

 

 

X

 

 

X

* Incidental lawnmower sharpening permitted.

Parcel delivery service.

 

X

X

 

 

X

Graphic arts services:

 

 

 

 

 

 

Copying, addressographing, mimeographing, photostating, instant printing, blueprinting, silk screening, photography,** picture framing.***

X

X

X

 

X

X

Photo-finishing, film developing.

 

 

X

 

 

 

** Incidental photo-finishing and film developing permitted.

*** Incidental frame construction permitted.

Studios:

 

 

 

 

 

 

Costume design, interior decoration, photography, writing, drama, dance, music, arts and crafts (including stained glass).

X

X

X

 

X

X

Stained glass assembly.

 

 

X

 

 

 

Radio, television, recording.

 

X

X

 

 

 

Motion pictures – indoor. (See CMC 9133.)

 

 

C

 

 

 

Offices:

 

 

 

 

 

 

Business, professional, financial, insurance, real estate, utility payments, telegraph, telephone answering service, messenger service, advertising, newspaper or publishing (no printing), ticket agency, travel agency, employment agency, collection agency, detective agency, security service, bail bondsman, check cashing. (See CMC 9138.17 and 9138.18.)

X

X

X

 

L

L

Payday loans. (See CMC 9182.28.)

C

C

C

 

 

 

Drive-through banks.

X

X

X

 

C

 

Wholesale business, manufacturer’s agent, broker (no storage or deliveries other than samples).

L

L

L

 

 

X

Food Sales and Service:*

 

 

 

 

 

 

* Alcoholic beverage sales and services are listed under separate headings.

Restaurant* (including refreshment stands, soda fountain). (See CMC 9133, 9138.17 and 9138.18.)

X

X

X

C

X

X

Drive-in or drive-through restaurants. (See CMC 9133 and 9138.17.)

X

X

X

C

C

 

Restaurant, coffee shop, snack shop with outdoor dining space within the limits of the restaurant frontage, provided there is a 7-foot minimum clear path of travel on the sidewalk without obstruction.

 

 

 

 

X

X

Food store – grocery, fish, meat, fruits and vegetables, retail bakery, pastry, candy, health food, take-out food, tobacco shop.

X

X

X

 

X

X

Poultry shop (no live poultry or slaughtering).

L

L

L

 

 

 

Food catering (only direct retail sales or retail distribution).

X

 

X

 

X

X

Dog or cat food catering (retail only).

 

 

X

 

X

X

Alcoholic Beverage Sales and Services:

 

 

 

 

 

 

Alcoholic beverage sales in conjunction with a department store or supermarket.

X

X

X

 

X

X

Alcoholic beverage sales in conjunction with variety store, drug store, mini-market, drive-through market, food store or grocery store excluding a supermarket, take-out food, liquor store (subject to the requirements of CMC 9138.5).

C

C

C

C

C

C

Alcoholic beverage sales and service in conjunction with cocktail lounge, bar, indoor theater, or an eating establishment other than a bona fide restaurant. (See CMC 9138.5 and 9138.17.)

C

C

C

 

C

 

Alcoholic beverage sales and service in conjunction with an arcade, pool hall, billiards, card room, or a bowling alley. (See CMC 9138.4 and 9138.5.)

C

C

C

 

 

 

Alcoholic beverage sales and service in conjunction with Class I entertainment per CMC 63125. (See CMC 9138.18.)

 

 

 

 

 

C

Night club. (See CMC 9138.5 and 9138.17.)

C

C

C

 

C

 

Alcoholic beverage sales and service in conjunction with a bona fide restaurant. (See CMC 9138.18.)

X

X

X

X

X

X

Vehicle Sales and Service:*

 

 

 

 

 

 

* See CMC 9131.13(D) for properties in an MUR overlay district.

Sales:

 

 

 

 

 

 

Automobile service station, subject to the requirements of CMC 9138.14. (See CMC 9133.)

C

 

C

 

 

 

Automobile/vehicle washing, subject to the requirements of CMC 9138.14.

C

C

C

 

C

 

Automobile parts (new).*

X

X

X

 

 

X

Motorcycles or motorscooters (new).* (See CMC 9138.15.)

 

X

X

L

 

 

Automobiles, recreation vehicles, and trucks not over 2-ton capacity (new).* (See CMC 9138.15.)

 

L

L

L

 

 

Automobiles, recreation vehicles, and trucks not over 2-ton capacity (used – as accessory use).* (See CMC 9138.15.)

 

 

L

L

 

 

Automobiles, recreation vehicles, and trucks not over 2-ton capacity (used – as primary use).* (See CMC 9138.15.)

 

 

C

 

 

Recreation vehicles, over 2-ton capacity (new).* (See CMC 9133 and 9138.15.)

 

X

C

L

 

 

Recreation vehicles, over 2-ton capacity (used – as accessory use).* (See CMC 9133 and 9138.15.)

 

 

C

L

 

 

Travel trailers or trailers, not over 2-ton capacity (new).*

 

L

L

 

 

 

Travel trailers or trailers, not over 2-ton capacity (used).*

 

 

L

 

 

 

Trucks, trailers, over 2-ton capacity (new).*

 

X

C

 

 

 

Trucks, trailers, over 2-ton capacity (used).*

 

 

C

 

 

 

Recreation vehicles, rental and leasing. (See CMC 9138.15(C).)

 

 

L

 

 

Boats and accessory equipment.

 

C

L

 

 

 

Auctions for used automobiles, recreational vehicles, travel trailers, trucks or trailers, motorcycles or motorscooters, and related equipment and miscellaneous goods. (See CMC 9138.21.)

 

L

L

C

 

 

* See CMC 9132.2 for incidental uses permitted. Also subject to the provisions of CMC 9138.2.

Rental and leasing:

 

 

 

 

 

 

All vehicles up to 2-ton capacity.

 

 

L

 

 

 

All vehicles over 2-ton capacity.

 

 

C

 

 

 

Repair of all vehicles up to 2-ton capacity (no boats):

 

 

 

 

 

 

Automobile/vehicle service and repair.

C

C

C

 

 

 

Transportation-Related Uses:

 

 

 

 

 

 

Automobile parking lot or parking building (no long-term vehicle storage, no storage of inoperable vehicles).

X

X

X

 

X

X

Shared parking facilities. (See CMC 9133.)

C

C

C

C

C

C

Passenger station – bus or rail; taxi stand.

X

X

X

X

 

 

Heliports, helistops.

 

C

C

 

 

 

Access to other property lawfully used for purposes not permitted on subject property:

 

 

 

 

 

 

Access to residential use.

X

X

X

D

X

X

Access to nonresidential use, provided the Director finds no available alternative access is preferable and the character of the area will not be adversely affected.

 

 

D

D

 

 

Communications and Utilities:

 

 

 

 

 

 

Post office.

X

X

X

 

 

 

Oil wells. (See CMC 9500 – 9537, Oil and Gas Code.)

 

C*

C*

 

 

 

* Development agreement provisions apply as specified in CMC 9502 and 9508.

Telephone exchange.

 

 

X

 

 

 

Amateur radio station.

X

X

X

 

 

 

Gas distribution meter or control station (landscaping or screening required to the satisfaction of the Director).

L

L

L

L

 

 

Gas measurement station (not less than 300 feet from any residential zone, public school, public park, hospital or long-term health care facility). (See CMC 9133.)

C

C

L

 

 

 

Electric distribution substation. (In the CG Zone, landscaped yard areas to the satisfaction of the Director to be provided adjacent to street rights-of-way. Facilities to be enclosed by solid fence or wall in accordance with applicable regulations of the State of California and other local regulations.) (See CMC 9133.)

C

C

L

 

 

 

Pumping station, water well. (In the CG Zone, landscaping of site and screening of facilities required to the satisfaction of the Director.) (See CMC 9133.)

C

C

L

 

C

 

Water reservoir. (See CMC 9133.)

C

C

C

 

 

 

Education:

 

 

 

 

 

 

Elementary or secondary school – public or private; professional school; business school; barber or beauty school; school of arts, crafts, dance, photography, writing, drama or music.

X

X

X

 

X

X

Physical training school – gymnastics, martial arts.

X

X

X

 

X

X

Swimming school – indoor or outdoor.

 

X

X

 

 

 

Recreation:*

 

 

 

 

 

 

* Alcoholic beverage sales and services are listed under separate headings.

Indoor team training facility. (See CMC 9162.21 and 9191.303.)

X

X

X

 

 

 

Pool hall, billiards, card room. (See CMC 9138.17 and 9138.18.)

X

X

X

 

C

C

Bowling alley. (See CMC 9131.13(D).)

X

X

X

 

 

C

Bowling alley as an accessory use.

X

X

X

 

C

C

Health club.

X

X

X

 

C

 

Arcade (subject to the requirements of CMC 9138.4).

C

C

C

 

 

 

Public park or playground.

X

X

X

 

 

 

Driving skill course.

 

C

C

 

 

 

Indoor rink – roller skating, skateboards, ice skating.

X

X

X

 

 

 

Outdoor rink – roller skating, skateboarding, ice skating.

 

X

 

 

 

 

Lawn bowling, croquet courts.

 

X

X

 

 

 

Small private recreational facilities. (Site limited to one acre or less in the CR Zone.) May include buildings, park, playground and picnic area.

 

L

X

 

 

 

Large private recreational facilities – indoor or outdoor facilities (but not more than 1,000 spectator seats total):

 

 

 

 

 

 

Gymnasium.

X

X

X

 

C

C

Badminton, handball, racquetball, squash courts.

X

 

X

 

 

 

Swimming pool.

 

X

X

 

 

 

Tennis court, volleyball court, polo field, athletic field, miniature golf.

 

 

X

 

 

 

Golf driving range, pitch-and-putt course, golf course, subject to the limitations of CMC 9138.3.

 

 

L

 

 

 

Public Assembly:*

 

 

 

 

 

 

* Alcoholic beverage sales and services are listed under separate headings.

Church, temple, or other place of religious worship. (In the CR Zone, see CMC 9138.22 and 9182.25; in an MUR overlay district, see CMC 9131.13(D).)

X

L

X

 

 

 

Auditorium, meeting hall, wedding chapel.

 

X

X

 

 

 

Community center, lodge hall, private club.

X

X

X

 

 

 

Indoor theater (motion picture or live stage), night club.

X

X

X

 

 

 

Outdoor theater (live stage, not a drive-in).

 

X

 

 

 

 

Public and quasi-public uses:

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fire station, police station, library, museum.

X

X

X

X

 

 

Archaeological dig, provided the Director determines there is a reasonable prospect that significant scientific, cultural or historical information will be obtained from the site.

D

D

D

 

 

 

Health Services:

 

 

 

 

 

 

Hospital – general acute care, acute psychiatric; long-term health care facility. (See CMC 9133.)

 

 

C

 

 

 

Medical or dental laboratory. (In the CN or CR Zones only permitted as an incidental use in a medical/dental office building or clinic.)

L

L

X

 

 

 

Medical or dental office or clinic, public health center.

X

X

X

 

X

X

Optical services (for the fitting, grinding or mounting of eyeglasses).

X

X

X

 

X

X

Pharmacy. (See CMC 9138.17 and 9138.18.)

X

X

X

 

X

X

Drive-through pharmacy. (See CMC 9131.13(D) and 9138.17.)

X

X

X

 

C

 

Ambulance service.

 

 

C

 

 

 

Day Care:

 

 

 

 

 

 

Community day care facility.

X

X

X

 

C

C

Residential Uses:

 

 

 

 

 

 

Multiple-family residential and residential condominiums within the Mixed-Use Residential (MUR) overlay district, the Mixed-Use Carson Street district, and the Mixed-Use Sepulveda Boulevard district on lots with a minimum 100-foot street frontage.

C

C

C

 

C

C

Mixed-use (commercial/residential) development within the Mixed-Use Residential (MUR) overlay district, the Mixed-Use Carson Street district, and the Mixed-Use Sepulveda Boulevard district on lots with a minimum 100-foot street frontage.

C

C

C

 

C

C

Live/work residential units. (See CMC 9138.17 and 9138.18.)

 

 

 

 

C

C

Mobile home park. (See CMC 9128.2.)

C

C

C

 

C

 

Group quarters for members of a religious order (convent, rectory, monastery, etc.).

 

 

X

 

 

 

Boarding or rooming houses, fraternity or sorority house, dormitory, residential hotel or similar group quarters, motel units with kitchens. (See CMC 9133.)

 

 

C

 

 

 

Residential community care facility.

 

 

C

 

C

C

Single-room occupancy (SRO) housing. (See CMC 9128.7.)

 

 

 

 

L

L

Supportive housing.

 

 

 

 

X

X

Transitional housing.

 

 

 

 

X

X

Transient Hotel:

 

 

 

 

 

 

Transient hotel, motel.

C

C

C

 

 

 

Agricultural Uses:

 

 

 

 

 

 

Cultivation and/or sale of plants including nursery,* orchard, vineyard, field crops, flowers, greenhouses, lathhouses and similar activities (no mushroom farm).

 

 

X

 

 

 

* Incidental lawnmower sharpening permitted. Also repair and rental of garden tools.

Signs:

 

 

 

 

 

 

Electronic message center signs. (See CMC 9136.7, also CMC 9138.15(E)(3)(c) for CA only.)

C

C

C

C

 

 

Outdoor Advertising:

 

 

 

 

 

 

Outdoor advertising sign in the Electronic Marquee Signage (EMS) overlay district, subject to the requirements of CMC 9138.71.

 

 

L

 

 

 

Recycling Facilities:

 

 

 

 

 

 

Small collection recycling facility. (See CMC 9132.9 and 9138.6.)

L

L

L

 

L

 

Communications Facilities:

 

 

 

 

 

 

Minor communications facilities, subject to the requirement of CMC 9138.16.

L

L

L

L

L

L

Major communications facilities, subject to the requirement of CMC 9138.16.

C

C

C

C

C

C

Temporary Uses:

 

 

 

 

 

 

Election campaign office in a trailer. (Not permitted earlier than 90 days before the election. To be removed within 14 days after the election.)

 

 

L

 

 

 

Office or other permitted commercial use in a trailer or other mobile unit. (Permitted for a period not exceeding 6 months during construction of a building on the same lot while a building permit is in effect. The Director may approve reasonable time extensions if he finds construction is proceeding in good faith.)

L

L

L

L

L

L

Storage of construction materials and equipment at a construction site without the screening which would be required for permanent outdoor storage (only during the period a building permit is in effect).

L

L

L

 

L

L

Subdivision directional sign. (See CMC 9128.31 – 9128.35.)

LD

LD

LD

 

LD

LD

Sidewalk, parking lot and tent sales, and special events. (See CMC 9138.8.)

D

D

D

 

D

D

Fireworks stand. (See CMC 3101.0 – 3101.10.)

CC

CC

CC

 

CC

CC

Carnival, mechanical rides, pony rides, outdoor festival and similar uses. (See CMC 63119 and 63119.1.)

CC

CC

CC

 

 

 

Circus, rodeo. (See CMC 63120; and Animal Control Ordinance, CMC 3300 – 3301.)

 

CC

 

 

 

 

Christmas tree sales, pumpkin sales.

X

X

X

 

D

D

Yard sales. (See CMC 4600 – 4606.)

L

L

L

 

L

L

Tent revival.

CC

CC

CC

 

 

 

Commercial Cannabis (See Chapter 15 of Article VI)

 

DA

DA

DA

 

 

Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Section shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 2 of Article I. (Ord. 79-479, § 7; Ord. 78-438; Ord. 78-431; Ord. 78-446; Ord. 80-517, § 1; Ord. 80-532, § 4; Ord. 81-585, § 2; Ord. 82-602, § 2; Ord. 82-621, § 1; Ord. 83-637U, § 1; Ord. 83-643, § 1; Ord. 84-685, § 1; Ord. 88-857, § 1; Ord. 90-915, § 1; Ord. 92-985, § 1; Ord. 93-1001, § 1; Ord. 94-1035U, §§ 2, 3; Ord. 94-1037, §§ 2 – 4; Ord. 94-1039, § 2; Ord. 96-1085, § 1; Ord. 97-1115, § 1; Ord. 02-1245, § 2; Ord. 02-1251, § 1; Ord. 03-1279, § 2; Ord. 03-1284, § 2; Ord. 04-1322, § 1; Ord. 06-1349, § 1; Ord. 06-1363, § 9; Ord. 07-1392, § 9; Ord. 08-1404, § 1; Ord. 09-1419, § 3; Ord. 09-1420, § 1; Ord. 11-1473, § 1; Ord. 11-1479, § 8; Ord. 11-1480, § 1; Ord. 12-1488, § 1; Ord. 13-1525, § 2; Ord. 14-1536, § 1; Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 6); Ord. 16-1602, § 2; Ord. 16-1603, § 2; Ord. 18-1823, § 2)

9131.12 Uses Permitted on Organic Refuse Landfill Sites.
A. No use except as hereinafter provided, shall be permitted on property designated as ORL (Organic Refuse Landfill) without the approval of a conditional use permit by both the Commission and the Council. Such conditional use permit shall require, as a condition precedent to use of the property under the conditional use permit, approval by the Building and Safety Division and the Council of a report submitted by the applicant pursuant to the applicable provisions of the Building Code, prepared by a licensed civil engineer designated by the applicant and approved by the City, which shall provide and include plans for a protective system or systems designated to eliminate or mitigate the potential hazards and environmental risks associated with the proposed use. Approval of such report by the Building and Safety Division shall be in the discretion of the Building Official, who shall evaluate any risks and hazards associated with the site and proposed use and who may grant approval only if he finds that the report and plans adequately provide for protection against such associated risks and hazards. The Building Official’s approval shall be submitted to the Council for final approval which will be in the discretion of the Council.

The following uses are exempt from the provisions of this Section:

1. Uses which do not involve buildings or structures, including but not limited to outdoor storage, display and outdoor recreational facilities.

2. Construction of structures which are unoccupiable, such as signs, flagpoles, walls, fences and towers, but not including oil wells and storage tanks.

3. Paving of no more than twenty (20) percent of the site.

4. Repair or minor alteration to existing structures which do not increase floor area. (Ord. 78-449; Ord. 81-560, § 1; Ord. 82-586, § 1)

B. An application for a conditional use permit required by subsection A shall be considered in accordance with CMC 9172.21, except that the Commission’s decision shall be referred to the Council for review as if an appeal had been filed pursuant to CMC 9173.4.

C. Every conditional use permit for a use located on property designated as ORL (Organic Refuse Landfill) shall be subject to the following conditions in addition to any other conditions that the Commission or the Council may impose:

1. Approval by the Building Official of the report provided for in subsection A of this Section.

2. The applicant shall comply with a development schedule approved by the Community Development Director.

3. All measures to eliminate or mitigate the hazards and environmental risks associated with the site proposed in the report approved by the Building Official provided for in subsection A of this Section shall be subject to approval by the Council and shall be incorporated into the project. Such measures shall include monitoring, evaluation and control of methane gas produced by the site as the City shall determine to be necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare with respect to the production or migration of methane gas.

4. Monitoring and regular inspections and reports by a licensed civil engineer designated by the applicant and monitored, evaluated and approved by the Building Official shall be done and filed with the City from time to time as directed by the Building Official at the applicant’s cost.

5. The mitigation measures required by subsection (C)(3) of this Section shall be implemented to the satisfaction of the Building Official and City Council. In the event that the Building Official or Council finds that such measures when implemented are inadequate to protect the public health, safety, or welfare, the Building Official or Council may (1) require additional mitigation measures to be incorporated into the project, or (2) after notice to the applicant and an opportunity to be heard, declare the conditional use permit null and void if the Council finds that the public health, safety or welfare cannot be adequately protected to the satisfaction of the Council.

6. Adequate measures shall be taken to eliminate odors from the site to the satisfaction of the Building Official.

7. The applicant shall, at the applicant’s own expense, carry public liability insurance during the existence of the conditional use permit, with a company and policy to be approved by the City Attorney, covering liability for injuries or death arising out of or in connection with the use of the site pursuant to said permit in an amount not less than $5,000,000. The City shall be named as an additional assured under such insurance policy.

D. Whenever both subsection A and any other section of this Chapter require a conditional use permit for a particular property, only one (1) conditional use permit shall be required, which shall be applied for, processed and considered pursuant to the provisions of subsection B. The application and conditional use permit, if approved, shall refer to both sections which are applicable.

E. Subsection A of this Section shall not apply to the following:

1. Any lawfully established existing use.

2. An expansion of an existing, lawfully established use on a lot on which such existing use was approved provided that the existence of an organic refuse landfill in such lot is shown by the record to have been considered by the granting body in connection with the approval of such existing use.

3. Any proposed use for which a conditional use permit requiring approval of methane gas control measures by the Council either (1) has been granted, or (2) has been applied for and is being processed on the effective date of this Section; provided, that subsection A shall apply if such conditional use permit which has been granted expires, is declared to be null and void or is otherwise terminated or if such conditional use permit for which an application is being processed is thereafter denied. (Ord. 78-449; Ord. 79-471; Ord. 81-560, § 1)

9131.13 Uses Permitted within a Mixed-Use Residential (MUR) Overlay District.
A. All uses permitted in accordance with CMC 9131.1, except as prohibited or regulated by this Section, are permitted within a Mixed-Use Residential (MUR) Overlay District.

B. In addition, multiple-family residential, residential condominiums, and mixed-use (commercial/residential) developments are permitted, subject to the approval of a Conditional Use Permit by the Planning Commission pursuant to CMC 9172.21 and the requirements of CMC 9138.7.

C. Home occupations are permitted in accordance with CMC 9128.4.

D. The following commercial uses are prohibited on properties with mixed-use (commercial/residential) development located thereon or within buildings or structures designed and intended for mixed use (commercial/residential) occupancy:

1. Animal services;

2. Arcade;

3. Bowling alley, as a primary use;

4. Drive-in establishment (any establishment where goods or services are rendered directly to occupants of motor vehicles while in vehicles);

5. Driving skill course;

6. Indoor mini-mart or auction house;

7. Public assembly uses, including but not limited to churches, temples or other places of religious worship, not associated with recreational areas designated for the exclusive use of permitted residential uses;

8. Sexually oriented business establishments; and

9. Vehicle sales and service.

E. Vehicle repair and service is permitted for non mixed-use commercial/residential developments, subject to the approval of a Conditional Use Permit by the Planning Commission pursuant to CMC 9172.21 and the requirements of CMC 9138.2. (Added by Ord. 94-1039, § 3; Ord. 04-1322, § 2)

9131.2 Interpretation of Uses Permitted.
Further definition and enumeration of uses permitted in the various residential zones shall be determined by means of Interpretation in accordance with CMC 9172.24.

9131.3 Prohibited Uses.
All uses are prohibited except as expressly permitted by the provisions of this Chapter.

Division 2. Accessory Uses
9132.1 Processing Activities.
If not otherwise permitted as principal uses, the following uses are permitted as minor uses if related to and incidental to the indicated principal permitted use on the same site:

Film developing or photo-finishing is permitted with a camera shop or photography studio.

Picture frame construction is permitted with the sale of picture frames.

Glass edging, beveling or silvering is permitted with the sale of glass or mirrors.

Electroplating of precious metals is permitted with the sale of jewelry or silver items.

Restoration of antiques is permitted with the sale of antiques.

Fish barbecuing or smoking is permitted with a restaurant or fish market.

9132.2 Vehicle Sales and Service.
If not otherwise permitted as principal uses, the following vehicle sales and service activities are permitted as minor uses if related to and incidental to the indicated principal permitted use on the same site:

A miscellaneous retail petroleum outlet is permitted with any compatible principal use. (See CMC 9138.11.)

Minor repairs and services (as defined in CMC 9138.11) are permitted with an automobile service station or automobile laundry other than a self-service automobile laundry. (See CMC 9138.14) and (CMC 9133 for CR Zone, MUR Overlay District and properties in all zones within 100 feet of residential zones.)

Minor repairs and services (as defined in CMC 9138.11) incidental to the sale of new automobile parts, and including the installation of seat covers, are permitted with the sale of new automobile parts subject to the requirements of CMC 9138.2. (See CMC 9133 for CR Zone, MUR Overlay District and properties in all zones within 100 feet of residential zones.)

Major repairs and services (as defined in CMC 9138.11), as well as minor repairs and services are permitted with motor vehicle sales, subject to the requirements of CMC 9138.2 and 9138.15(C). (See CMC 9133 for CR Zone, MUR Overlay District and properties in all zones within 100 feet of residential zones.)

Sale of used vehicles which have been received as trade-ins is permitted with the sale of new vehicles.

Rental or leasing of new or used vehicles is permitted with the sale of new or used vehicles.

Minor repairs and services (as defined in CMC 9138.11(A)(4) are permitted with a vehicle auction. (See CMC 9133 for CR Zone, MUR Overlay District and properties in all zones within 100 feet of residential zones.) (Ord. 96-1085, § 4; Ord. 03-1279, § 3; Ord. 04-1322, § 3)

9132.3 Laboratories.
A medical or dental laboratory is permitted as a minor use if related to and incidental to a medical or dental clinic or office building in the CN or CR Zones (in addition to being permitted as an independent use in the CG Zone).

9132.4 Storage.
Storage of materials in the commercial zones is limited to the inventories, supplies and equipment needed in order to conduct retail sales or other permitted activities on the same premises or for retail delivery from the premises. In addition, the following specific limitations apply (refer to CMC 9138.15 for CA Zone):

Except for use in construction on the same premises, sand, gravel or rock storage is limited to two thousand (2,000) tons total and is permitted only with the sale of building materials.

Petroleum or petroleum products storage is limited to twenty-five hundred (2,500) barrels and is permitted only with a retail petroleum outlet.

Outdoor storage is not permitted in the CN, CR or CA Zones. Outdoor storage in the CG Zone is subject to the requirements of CMC 9136.29(I).

Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Section shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 2 of Article I of this Code. (Ord. 79-479, § 7; Ord. 03-1279, § 4)

9132.5 Outdoor Display.
Outdoor display in the commercial zones is limited to the following items:

Vehicles (automobiles, motorcycles, motorscooters, bicycles, recreation vehicles, trucks, mobile homes, or other vehicles).

Boats.

Agricultural produce.

Nursery stock.

Flowers and plants.

Christmas trees.

Garden equipment and supplies.

Building materials.

Monuments, tombstones, statuary.

Similar items as determined in accordance with the Interpretation procedure of CMC 9172.24.

Outdoor displays are subject to the provisions of CMC 9136.29(H).

Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Section shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 2 of Article I of this Code. (Ord. 79-479, § 7)

9132.6 Service and Repair.
Except as otherwise regulated under the provisions of this Chapter and other applicable laws and regulations, service and repair of materials and equipment are only permitted in the commercial zones as minor uses, related to and incidental to principal permitted uses on the same premises and limited in scope and degree to that which is customary in connection with retail trade and retail service.

The following service and repair activities are specifically permitted:

Lawnmower sharpening is permitted with a fix-it shop, locksmith or nursery.

Repair and rental of garden tools is permitted with a nursery.

9132.7 Amusement Machines.
The operation of three (3) or fewer amusement machines shall be permitted only in connection with a cocktail lounge, bar, bona fide restaurant, or theater. Any business legally containing three (3) or fewer amusement machines on January 3, 1983, shall eliminate all amusement machines on or before December 31, 1984. No person may increase the number of amusement machines in such a business. (Ord. 83-637, § 2; Ord. 84-685, § 2)

9132.8 Fairs and Bazaars.
Fairs and bazaars when conducted by a church, school or other nonprofit public service organization are a permitted accessory use provided the fair or bazaar is located on the same site as the subject facility, does not occupy more than fifty (50) percent of the required parking area or obstruct circulation and that said events do not occur more than four (4) times in any one (1) year unless approved by the Director for additional events. (Ord. 87-813, § 3; Ord. 98-1135, § 2)

9132.9 Small Collection Recycling Facility.
A small collection recycling facility is permitted as a minor use within the CN, CR, CG, and MU-CS zones if incidental to an existing primary commercial use and if within a designated convenience district as defined in CMC 9191.508. A small collection recycling facility shall comply with the requirements of CMC 9138.6. (Ord. 87-819, § 1; Ord. 11-1479, § 9)

Division 3. Conditional Use Criteria
9133 Conditional Use Criteria.
In addition to the general criteria for the approval of a conditional use permit pursuant to CMC 9172.21(D)(1), special criteria and limitations as indicated below shall be considered in acting upon a conditional use permit in a commercial zone:

Retail sale of ornamental brick, stone, tile, flagstone:

The size of the site, the amount of materials on hand, and the appearance thereof shall not create the character of an industrial or outdoor storage use.

Adult business:

The business shall satisfy the requirements of CMC 9138.9.

Massage service:

The business shall satisfy the requirements of CMC 9138.91 and 63134 et seq.

Tattoo service:

The business shall satisfy the requirements of CMC 9138.92.

Mortuary:

The use shall be compatible with surrounding uses.

Motion picture studio:

The activity shall be entirely within buildings.

The height and bulk of buildings shall not be excessive in relation to the site and surrounding development.

Restaurants, including drive-thru, cafes, dinner houses, or establishments offering food for in-house or take out consumption in the CA Zone:

Compliance with CMC 9138.15.

Automobile laundry:

Ability to comply with the provisions of CMC 9138.14.

Sale, rental or lease of trucks or trailers over two (2) ton capacity (new or used):

The number and size of vehicles on hand and the appearance thereof shall not create the character of a truck yard or industrial use.

Major repair as defined in CMC 9138.11 for CA Zone only:

Compliance with CMC 9138.15.

Automobile service stations in the CA Zone:

Compliance with CMC 9138.14 and 9138.15.

Transmitter, receiver or repeater station – radio, television, microwave:

No excessive electronic interference shall be generated.

No unusual or unnecessary hazards to aircraft shall be created.

The height and appearance of structures shall not be detrimental to the character of the surrounding area.

Electric distribution substation, gas measurement station, pumping station, water well, water reservoir:

The facility shall be necessary for the safe or efficient functioning of a public utility or pipeline system.

The location in a commercial zone shall be necessary to serve commercial or residential uses in the vicinity, or no suitable alternative location shall be available.

Driving skill course:

In addition to the provisions of CMC 9162.21(C), parking shall be provided at a ratio of fifteen (15) spaces per four hundred (400) yards of track, plus one (1) space per employee on the largest shift.

In addition to the provisions of CMC 9162.52, lawns or landscaping shall be installed on all unpaved areas of the site.

In addition to the provisions of CMC 9136.2, the track shall maintain a twenty-five (25) foot setback from any property line adjacent to another property or public street.

Adequate steps shall be taken to prevent excessive noise from emanating from the site.

Hospital, long-term health care facility, community residential care facility:

The facility shall become licensed pursuant to Division 2 of the California Health and Safety Code or, if exempt from licensure, shall meet standards equivalent to those prescribed by State law.

The surrounding area does not provide an environment detrimental to health care or residential care.

Mobile home park:

Ability to comply with the provisions of CMC 9128.2.

Alcoholic beverage sales and services:

Ability to comply with the provisions of CMC 9138.5.

Shared parking facilities:

Ability to comply with the provisions of CMC 9162.24.

Arcades:

Compliance with the provisions of CMC 9138.4.

Boarding or rooming house, residential hotel, motel with kitchens:

The surrounding area does not provide an environment detrimental to long-term residence.

Fraternity or sorority house, dormitory:

The surrounding area does not provide an environment detrimental to residence.

The location shall be conveniently accessible in relation to the college or institution attended by residents.

Multiple-family residential, residential condominiums, mixed-use developments:

Compliance with the provisions of CMC 9138.7, 9138.17 and 9138.18.

Oil well:

Ability to comply with the provisions of CMC 9500 – 9537, Oil and Gas Code.

Vehicle repair and service:

Compliance with the provisions of CMC 9138.2.

Vehicle repair and service (as primary use*) for those properties fronting Avalon Boulevard and within the CA Zone only:

Ability to comply with CMC 9138.15* and 9138.2*.

Sales of used automobiles, recreation vehicles, and trucks not over two (2) ton capacity (as primary use) in the CA Zone only:

The business shall occupy property a minimum of two (2) acres in area.

Ability to comply with CMC 9138.15.

Automotive and equipment auction for those properties fronting Avalon Boulevard and within the CA Zone:

Ability to comply with CMC 9138.15 and 9138.2.

Lawfully established automotive and equipment auctions in the CA Zone shall cease operations and discontinue business on or before July 1, 2017. After that date, no new auctions are permitted in the CA Zone. (Ord. 78-431; Ord. 82-621, § 3; Ord. 83-637U, § 3; Ord. 83-654, § 1; Ord. 85-685, § 3; Ord. 93-1001, § 2; Ord. 94-1035U, § 4; Ord. 94-1037, § 5; Ord. 94-1039, § 4; Ord. 95-1079, Exh. A.; Ord. 03-1279, § 5; Ord. 04-1322, § 4; Ord. 06-1349, § 2; Ord. 06-1363, § 9; Ord. 07-1392, § 9; Ord. 08-1404, § 2; Ord. 11-1473, § 2; Ord. 11-1480, § 2; Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 7))

* Lawfully established automotive repair facilities on property fronting Avalon Boulevard shall discontinue operations on or before July 1, 2017.

Division 4. (Reserved)
Division 5. Site Requirements
9135.1 Applicability.
The provisions of this Division do not apply to the individual lots within planned developments wherein the owners or lessees of individual lots also hold an undivided interest in common areas within the same development, nor to a lease of less than four hundred (400) square feet of land.

9135.2 Minimum Lot Area.*
No lot shall be created which has a net area less than that shown in the following table:

Zone

Minimum Net Lot Area

CN, CR

20,000 square feet*

CG

5,000 square feet*

CA

43,560 square feet (one acre)**

MU-CS

See CMC 9138.17

MU-SB

See CMC 9138.18

Any existing lawfully established lot (including a leased area of land during the term of the lease) is deemed to have the required lot area.

A lot may be reduced to less than the required lot area if such a reduction is the result of an acquisition for public purposes. (Ord. 94-1039, § 5; Ord. 03-1279, § 6; Ord. 06-1363, § 9; Ord. 07-1392, § 9)

* See special requirement for retail petroleum outlets in CMC 9138.11, mobile home parks in CMC 9128.2, and mixed-use developments, multiple-family residential and residential condominiums in CMC 9138.7.

** Lot minimum in CA Zone applies to vehicle dealerships only, other commercial uses subject to CG standards.

9135.3 Street Frontage and Access.*
No lot shall be created unless it is capable of being provided with vehicular access directly from a public street or alley and has a street frontage of at least thirty (30) feet.* See CMC 9138.17 and 9138.18 for special requirements in the Mixed-Use – Carson Street (MU-CS) Zone and the Mixed-Use – Sepulveda Boulevard (MU-SB) Zone.

A new or additional use shall not be developed on an existing lawfully established lot (including a leased area of land during the term of the lease) unless there is vehicular access from a public street or alley, and such access has a width of at least twenty (20) feet. The required vehicular access shall be either directly from a public street or alley or by means of a right-of-way easement.* (Ord. 79-460; Ord. 94-1039, § 6; Ord. 06-1363, § 9; Ord. 07-1392, § 9)

* See special requirement for mobile home parks in CMC 9128.2, and mixed-use developments, multiple-family residential and residential condominiums in CMC 9138.7.

9135.4 Minimum Lot Width.
No lot shall be created which has a width less than that shown in the following table:

Zone

Minimum Lot Width

CN, CR, CA

150 feet*

CG

50 feet

MU-CS

See CMC 9138.17

MU-SB

See CMC 9138.18

Any existing lawfully established lot (including a leased area of land during the term of the lease) is deemed to have the required width.

A lot may be reduced to less than the required width if such reduction is the result of an acquisition for public purposes. (Ord. 03-1279, § 7; Ord. 06-1363, § 9; Ord. 07-1392, § 9)

* Applies only to vehicle dealerships. Other commercial uses subject to CG standard.

Division 6. Site Development Standards
Buildings and Structures

9136.11 Buildings Required.
Except as otherwise required, permitted or limited by this Chapter, all activities and facilities other than the following shall be located within a permanent building:

Sidewalk, parking lot, and tent sales.

Outdoor recreation, carnival, mechanical rides, pony rides outdoor festival, circus, rodeo.

Outdoor theater.

Outdoor seating in connection with a restaurant or other building housing a food sales or service establishment.

Vehicular access, parking areas, loading areas, taxi stands.

Mechanical, electrical, and other utility facilities.

Signs, outdoor displays, outdoor storage.

Agricultural cultivation and sales.

Archaeological dig.

Outdoor activities customarily incidental to the permitted use, subject to the approval of the Director.

Similar activities or facilities as determined in accordance with the Interpretation procedure of CMC 9172.24. (Ord. 88-857, § 2)

9136.12 Height of Buildings and Structures.
In the CN and CG Zones (except in a Mixed-Use Residential (MUR) Overlay District), no building or structure shall have more than two (2) stories, including a basement but excluding a cellar, nor shall it exceed a height of thirty (30) feet.

In the MU-CS Zone, see CMC 9138.17; for the MU-SB Zone, see CMC 9138.18.

In the CA Zone, no building or structure shall exceed forty (40) feet in height.

In the CR Zone (except in a Mixed-Use Residential (MUR) Overlay District), there is no height limit provided additional yard spaces are provided as required in CMC 9136.21 through 9136.29.

In a Mixed-Use Residential (MUR) Overlay District, no building or structure shall have more than three (3) stories, including a basement but excluding a cellar, nor shall it exceed a height of forty-five (45) feet, except for residential projects for affordable or senior households permitted in accordance with CMC 9126.91. In cases to which CMC 9126.91 is applicable, no building or structure shall have more than four (4) stories, including a basement but excluding a cellar, nor shall the height exceed fifty-five (55) feet.

A transmitter, receiver or repeater station (radio, television, microwave) tower may exceed the height limits established by this Section if such height is approved in connection with a conditional use permit.

For the purposes of this Section, a subterranean or partial subterranean garage shall not be considered to be a story. (Ord. 94-1039, § 7; Ord. 03-1279, § 8; Ord. 06-1363, § 9; Ord. 07-1392, § 9)

9136.13 Uses Permitted in Residential Structures.
No uses except residential uses shall be permitted in residential structures, unless the conversion of such structures meets the requirements of CMC 9182.09. (Added by Ord. 93-1021, § 1)

Yards and Open Spaces

9136.21 Reserved.
9136.22 Future Rights-of-Way.
This Section is applicable only where portions of a lot are within areas planned to be part of future streets, alleys or public rights-of-way, as determined by the Director.

In cases to which this Section is applicable, unless otherwise approved by the Commission, the portions of any lot within such future right-of-way areas shall not be occupied by structures other than those encroachments allowed in future right-of-way areas as provided in CMC 9136.29. All other required setbacks, yards and open spaces shall be provided in addition, to the future right-of-way areas and the future right-of-way lines shall be considered to be lot lines for purposes of measuring such other setbacks, yards and open spaces.

9136.23 Front Yard.
Each lot shall have a front yard with a required depth of twenty (20) feet or twenty (20) percent of the lot depth, whichever is less. For any building or structure over thirty (30) feet in height in the CR Zone the required front yard setback shall be increased by one (1) foot for each two (2) feet of height above thirty (30) feet.

Each lot used for vehicle dealerships in the CA Zone shall have a front yard setback as described in CMC 9138.15(D). Other commercial uses as defined in CMC 9138.15 shall comply with abovementioned standards from the CR Zone.

Each lot in the MU-CS Zone shall have a front yard setback as described in CMC 9138.17, and each lot in the MU-SB Zone shall have a side yard as described in CMC 9138.18.

Notwithstanding the above requirements, each lot in a Mixed-Use Residential (MUR) Overlay District shall have a front yard setback as follows:

 

Minimum Setback

Subterranean garage

1'

On grade parking or partial subterranean garage

10'

First floor – Commercial

10'

First floor – Residential

20'

Second floor – Commercial

10'

Residential

20'

Third floor

20'

Fourth floor

30'

A required front yard shall not be occupied except as provided in CMC 9136.29. (Ord. 94-1039, § 8; Ord. 03-1279, § 9; Ord. 06-1363, § 9; Ord. 07-1392, § 9)

9136.24 Side Yards.
Where the side of a lot abuts a street, there shall be a side yard with a width of at least ten (10) feet. For any building or structure over thirty (30) feet in height in the CR Zone, the required side yard setback shall be increased by one (1) foot for each foot of height above thirty (30) feet.

Where the side yard of a lot abuts a lot in a residential zone there shall be a side yard with a width of at least ten (10) percent of the subject lot width except that such side yard shall be at least five (5) feet and not greater than ten (10) feet in width. For any building or structure over thirty (30) feet in height in the CR Zone, the required side yard setback shall be increased by one (1) foot for each foot of height above thirty (30) feet.

Where the side of a lot abuts a lot in other than a residential zone and the height of the building or structure is not over thirty (30) feet, no side yard is required. If any side yard greater than approximately one (1) inch is required or provided, it shall be at least three (3) feet. For any building or structure over thirty (30) feet in height in the CR Zone, the required side yard setback shall be three (3) feet plus one (1) foot for each two (2) feet of height above thirty (30) feet.

Each lot used for vehicle dealerships in the CA Zone shall have a side yard setback as described in CMC 9138.15(D). Other commercial uses as defined in CMC 9138.15 shall comply with abovementioned standards from the CR Zone.

Each lot in the MU-CS Zone shall have a side yard setback as described in CMC 9138.17, and each lot in the MU-SB Zone shall have a side yard as described in CMC 9138.18.

Notwithstanding the above requirements, each lot in a Mixed-Use Residential (MUR) Overlay District shall have side yard setbacks as follows:

 

Minimum Setback

 

Interior Side

Street Side

Subterranean garage

1''

1''

On grade parking or partial subterranean garage

1'' or 3'

10'

First or Second floor –
Commercial

1'' or 3'

10'

First floor – Residential

10'

10'

Second floor – Residential

10'

20'

Third floor

10'

20'

Fourth floor

10'

30'

Required side yards shall not be occupied except as provided in CMC 9136.29. (Ord. 94-1039, § 9; Ord. 03-1279, § 10; Ord. 06-1363, § 9; Ord. 07-1392, § 9)

9136.25 Rear Yard.
Where the rear of a lot abuts a lot in a residential zone, there shall be a rear yard with a depth of at least ten (10) percent of the lot depth, except that such rear yard shall be at least five (5) feet and need not be greater than ten (10) feet. For any building or structure over thirty (30) feet in height in the CR and CA Zones, the required rear yard setback shall be increased by one (1) foot of height for each foot of height above thirty (30) feet.

Where the rear of a lot abuts a lot in other than a residential zone and the height of the building or structure is not over thirty (30) feet, no rear yard is required. If any rear yard greater than approximately one (1) inch is required or provided, it shall be at least three (3) feet. For any building or structure over thirty (30) feet in height in the CR and CA Zones, the required rear yard shall be three (3) feet plus one (1) foot for each two (2) feet of height above thirty (30) feet.

Each lot in the MU-CS Zone shall have a rear yard setback as described in CMC 9138.17, and each lot in the MU-SB Zone shall have a rear yard setback as described in CMC 9138.18.

Notwithstanding the above requirements, each lot in a Mixed-Use Residential (MUR) Overlay District shall have a rear yard setback as follows:

 

Minimum Setback

Subterranean garage

1'

On grade parking or partial subterranean garage

1'' or 3'

First or Second floor – Commercial

10'

First floor – Residential

15'

Second floor – Residential

15'

Third floor

30'

Fourth floor

30'

A required rear yard shall not be occupied except as provided in CMC 9136.29. (Ord. 94-1039, § 10; Ord. 03-1279, § 11; Ord. 06-1363, § 9; Ord. 07-1392, § 9)

9136.26 Reserved.
9136.27 Space Between Buildings.
Buildings on the same lot shall be either abutting each other or there shall be a separation of at least six (6) feet. Where there is a separation and both buildings are more than thirty (30) feet in height (CR Zone and MUR Overlay District only), the required separation shall be increased by one (1) foot for each two (2) feet of height above thirty (30) feet on the lower building. (Ord. 94-1039, § 11)

9136.28 Reserved.
9136.29 Encroachments.
Every part of a required yard or open space shall be open and unobstructed from finished grade to the sky except for facilities and activities as follows:

A. Projections from buildings (such as eaves, awnings and shading devices; signs; architectural features; utility meters, conduits and pipes; unenclosed and unroofed stairways, landings, porches, and balconies; chimneys; and mechanical equipment) may project into a required yard not more than one-half of the width of the required yard, except that the only such projections permitted into a required front yard or a required side yard abutting a street shall be for eaves, awnings, shading devices, architectural features and signs. No projections are permitted into future right-of-way areas as determined under CMC 9136.22.

B. Free-standing mechanical equipment is not permitted in any required yard except those additional yard areas required because of building or structure height greater than thirty (30) feet (CR Zone only.)

C. Utility-owned facilities are permitted in any required yard if also located in an approved utility easement.

D. Signs are permitted in required yards other than in existing or future street rights-of-way if in accordance with the provisions of CMC 9136.7.

E. Swimming pools are permitted in required yards other than future right-of-way areas provided the pool is set back from the front lot line at least twenty (20) feet or twenty (20) percent of the lot depth, whichever is less, and is not less than five (5) feet from any other lot line.

F. Fences, walls and hedges are permitted as required by other laws or regulations or as a condition of a tract or parcel map approval, or shall not be higher than six (6) feet above finished grade in a future right-of-way area, front yard, side yard abutting a street, or yard abutting a residential zone. In a required front yard and any abutting future right-of-way area, any portion of a fence, wall or hedge above three and one-half (3-1/2) feet in height shall not impair vision by obscuring more than ten (10) percent of the area in the vertical plane.

G. Landscaping (other than hedges) is permitted in any required yard or open space.

H. Outdoor display of goods for sale or rental. The following items may be displayed in any required yard area, but not in a required parking area:

Vehicles (automobiles, motorcycles, motorscooters, bicycles, recreational vehicles, trucks, mobile homes or other vehicles).

Boats.

Agricultural produce.

Nursery stock.

Flowers and plants.

Christmas trees.

Similar items as determined in accordance with the Interpretation procedure of CMC 9172.24.

The following items may be displayed in yard areas other than a required front yard and any abutting future right-of-way area, but not in a required parking area:

Garden equipment and supplies.

Building materials.

Monuments, tombstones, statuary.

Similar items as determined in accordance with the Interpretation procedure of CMC 9172.24.

I. Outdoor storage is permitted only in the CG Zone and only in yards other than a required front yard and abutting future right-of-way area, but not in a required parking area. Outdoor storage area shall be screened from view from any adjoining public street or walkway.

J. Parking is permitted in required yards except the area within five (5) feet of an existing or future right-of-way. (See CMC 9162.52.)

K. Building encroachments may be permitted in the front yard setback subject to the approval of a Development Plan by the Planning Commission pursuant to CMC 9172.23 (Site Plan and Design Review) for properties within the Mixed-Use Residential (MUR) overlay zone district only. A building encroachment shall not exceed five (5) feet provided that the development provides affordable housing opportunities as defined by this Chapter.

L. Vehicle dealerships may have encroachments, see CMC 9138.15(D) for encroachments in the CA Zone. (Ord. 95-1074, § 1; Ord. 03-1279, § 12)

Other Site Developments Standards

9136.3 Fences, Walls and Hedges.
A solid masonry wall shall be placed along any lot line abutting or separated only by an alley from property in a residential zone. Except in a required front yard area and any abutting future right-of-way area, such wall shall be six (6) feet in height. In a required front yard area and any abutting future right-of-way area, such wall shall be three and one-half (3-1/2) feet in height, except fencing material of any type may extend above the three and one-half (3-1/2) foot solid masonry portion to a height not exceeding six (6) feet, provided such extended portion does not impair vision by obscuring more than ten (10) percent of the area in the vertical plane.

Except as required by other laws and regulations or as a condition of a tract or parcel map approval, no fence, wall or hedge in a commercial zone shall exceed a height of eight (8) feet.

The height of fences, walls and hedges shall be measured from the finished grade at each point along the fence, wall or hedge. Where there is a difference between the grade on the two (2) sides of the fence, wall or hedge, the higher grade shall be used.

The height and design of fences and walls within the CA Zone district shall be subject to CMC 9138.15(D). (Ord. 03-1279, § 13)

9136.4 Trash and Recycling Areas.
Trash and recycling areas shall be provided in accordance with Division 4 of Part 6 of this Chapter. (Ord. 93-1013, § 2)

9136.5 Reserved.
9136.6 Parking, Loading, Truck Maneuvering and Driveways.
Parking spaces and loading areas for each use and the areas required for access and truck maneuvering shall be provided in accordance with Division 2 of Part 6 of this Chapter.

Parking, loading and driveways within the CA Zone district shall be subject to CMC 9138.15(D). (Ord. 03-1279, § 14)

9136.7 Signs.
A. Outdoor advertising signs are not permitted in commercial zones except as authorized pursuant to CMC 9138.71.

B. Business signs are permitted, subject to the following:

1. All business signs and sign structures shall be permitted in conformance with development plans which have been approved pursuant to the Site Plan and Design Review procedures (including the number of signs and sign structures to be permitted) as provided in CMC 9172.23. All signs and sign structures shall also comply with the minimum requirements, as outlined in this Section of the Zoning Ordinance. (Ord. 89-873, § 2)

2. The total sign area per lot shall not exceed an area in square feet equal to two (2) times the linear feet of lot frontage on a public street or streets. Window signage shall not exceed ten (10) percent of window area. Lot frontage on a freeway shall not be considered in computing this figure.

When the total frontage of a lot is less than the square root of the lot’s area, said frontage shall be deemed to be equal to the square root of the lot’s area for the purpose of determining the permitted sign area. (Ord. 79-473)

3. A ground sign in excess of six (6) feet in height shall not be permitted. The distance between ground elevation and the bottom of a ground sign shall not exceed one (1) foot. Not more than one (1) ground sign shall be permitted on a lot. No ground sign shall be erected until written approval is obtained from the City Traffic Engineer. Such signs shall be in conformance with development plans which have been approved pursuant to the Site Plan and Design Review procedure as provided in CMC 9172.23. (Ord. 80-531, § 1)

4. A sign may be affixed to a building but shall not project above the height of the building wall or roof fascia.

5. A sign shall not project into an existing or future right-of-way.

6. No “A” frame or “sandwich” sign, or scintillating, flashing or revolving sign shall be permitted.

7. Electronic message center signs are permitted, subject to the following:

(a) Such sign shall be at least one hundred (100) feet from a residential zone.

(b) Such sign shall be at least five hundred (500) feet from any other electronic message center sign.

(c) A conditional use permit (CUP) shall be required for all electronic message center signs in accordance with the provisions set forth in CMC 9172.21. Approval shall not be granted if the Commission finds that the proposed sign would interfere with the traffic signals, disrupt normal traffic flows or otherwise create a safety hazard. (Ord. 80-513, § 1; Ord. 90-915, § 2)

8. All business signs for vehicle dealerships shall be permitted in conformance with development standards as provided in CMC 9138.15(E).

9. All business signs within the MU-CS Zone shall be permitted in conformance with development standards as provided in CMC 9138.17.

10. All business signs within the MU-SB Zone shall be permitted in conformance with development standards as provided in CMC 9138.18.

C. Streamers, banners, pennants, and similar displays are permitted subject to the following:

1. Streamers, banners, pennants, and similar displays may be exhibited in connection with grand openings and other special events upon written approval of the Planning Officer. Requests for such displays shall be submitted to the Planning Officer, in writing, thirty (30) days prior to the event. All approvals shall be limited to a total of sixty (60) consecutive days at any one (1) time with a minimum of thirty (30) days in between the next display period for a total of one hundred twenty (120) days of display per calendar year per business. An additional thirty (30) days of display is permitted; provided, that a new banner permit is issued and a fee is paid. Temporary business signs for department stores or regional shopping centers with a gross floor area of at least one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet located in the CR Zoning District and in a Mixed-Use Residential (MUR) Overlay District may be allowed to deviate from the provisions of this Section as it pertains to display size, location, orientation, material, length of time, and content pursuant to an approved sign program. Signs must show content related to businesses, events, products or services provided at the department store or regional shopping center.

2. Any streamer, banner, pennant, or similar display shall be suspended so as to maintain at least seven (7) foot clearance.

3. In any event, no streamer, banner, pennant, or similar displays shall be exhibited if, in the opinion of the Director, such displays are not adequately maintained.

4. Christmas decorations displayed between thirty (30) days prior to and fifteen (15) days after December 25th, and those displayed during official public events, are not subject to this subsection.

5. Streamers, banners, pennants and similar displays may be attached directly upon the structure of a lawfully erected fireworks stand (see CMC 3101.0 through 3101.10) without necessity of a banner permit.

6. All temporary signs and similar displays for vehicle dealerships shall be permitted in conformance with development standards as provided in CMC 9138.15(E).

D. Real Estate Advertising. Real estate advertising signs are permitted, subject to the following:

1. One (1) unlighted sign structure is permitted per lot; except, on parcels larger than five (5) acres, one (1) such sign structure is permitted for each street frontage of the parcel.

2. A sign structure may have any number of sign faces, but the total sign area shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet per sign structure.

3. All portions of a sign structure shall be not less than ten (10) feet from the inside line of the sidewalk, or if there is no sidewalk, from the lot line, except, if the building setback is less than ten (10) feet, the sign structure shall be not less than one-half (1/2) the setback from the inside line of the sidewalk or lot line.

4. A freestanding real estate advertising sign shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in height.

5. A sign may be affixed to a building but shall not project above the height of the building wall or roof fascia.

6. Advertising copy shall pertain only to the premises upon which the sign is located.

7. Any such signs shall be removed within two (2) weeks after the execution of a sales agreement, escrow instructions or lease agreement.

8. Off-site open house signs for residential properties may be placed on commercial properties with the permission of the commercial property’s owner, and consistent with the provisions of Section 9126.7(A)(8).

9. Violations.

a. Violations of this subsection (D) shall be subject to the following civil fines within a calendar year: (a) $50.00 for the first violation; (b) $75.00 for the second violation; and (c) $100.00 for the third and any subsequent violation.

b. Fines shall be payable within thirty (30) days of issuance. Late payment shall incur a late penalty equal to the amount of the fine. The failure of any person, within sixty (60) days of the date of issuance of a fine, to pay the fine and any applicable late penalty, may result in the matter being referred to the Director of Finance to file a claim with the small claims court. Alternatively, the City may pursue any other legal remedy to collect the civil fines. The City may also recover its collections costs according to proof.

c. Violations shall be recorded by realtor office address, rather than by individual property for sale; provided, that if the property is being sold by its owner, the violations shall be recorded against the property that is for sale.

d. The remedies provided in this Section are in addition to any other remedies and penalties that may be available under the Carson Municipal Code and the laws of the State of California.

E. Except as provided for violations of subsection (D) of this Section, any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Section shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 2 of Article I. (Ord. 79-479, § 7; Ord. 88-856, § 1; Ord. 01-1225, § 4; Ord. 02-1245, § 4; Ord. 03-1279, §§ 15, 16; Ord. 07-1392, § 9; Ord. 09-1421, § 2; Ord. 11-1475, §§ 1, 2; Ord. 15-1563, §§ 5, 6; Ord. 16-1602, § 3)

9136.8 Utilities.
All new utility lines, other than major transmission lines, shall be placed underground. This requirement may be waived by the Commission where topography, soil, undue financial hardship or other conditions make such underground installation unreasonable or impractical. Undergrounding shall be in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations of the utility, as currently on file with the California Public Utilities Commission.

All aboveground equipment (other than pole lines when permitted), such as transformers and pedestal terminals, which are visible from an adjacent public street or walkway, shall be within a solid enclosure or otherwise screened from public view. Such enclosure/screening shall be in accordance with the utility’s service requirement. (Amended by Int. No. 3-79)

9136.9 Site Planning and Design.
In case of a commercial use located on a corner lot, no public pedestrian entrance from a side street shall be located less than one hundred (100) feet from any residential zone.

Roof-mounted structures and equipment shall not extend more than ten (10) feet above the roof, measured from the point of attachment. If such roof projections are not incorporated in the building design as architectural features, they shall be screened from view from any adjoining public street or walkway.

Mechanical equipment not enclosed within a building shall be screened from view from any adjoining public street or walkway.

Within any D (Design Overlay) designated area, all development subsequent to the date of such designation shall be in conformance with development plans which have been approved pursuant to the Site Plan and Design Review procedure as provided in CMC 9172.23. No permit shall be issued for grading or construction involving significant exterior changes, as determined by the Director, which is not in conformance with such approved development plans.

See additional requirements in CMC 9138.15 for vehicle dealerships within the CA Zone. (Ord. 03-1279, § 17)

Division 7. Environmental Effects
9137.1 Exterior Lighting.
All lighting in buildings, landscaping, parking lots and similar facilities shall be directed away from all adjoining and nearby residential property. Such lighting shall be arranged and controlled so as not to create a nuisance or hazard to traffic or to the living environment. This Section is also applicable to arc lights, search lights and similar lighting devices.

Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Section shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 2 of Article I of this Code.

See specific requirements in CMC 9138.15(D) for vehicle dealerships within the CA Zone. (Ord. 79-479, § 7; Ord. 03-1279, § 18)

Division 8. Special Requirements
For Certain Uses
9138.10 Reserved.
Repealed by Ord. 16-1590. (Added by Ord. 95-1079, Exh. A.)

9138.11 General Provisions.
A. Definitions.

1. Petroleum Product. Any product used in the operation of motor vehicles as a fuel or lubricant, including diesel fuel and liquid petroleum gas (LPG).

2. Retail Petroleum Outlet. Any retail outlet whose business includes the retail sale of petroleum products.

3. Automobile Service Station. Any retail petroleum outlet whose primary business is the retail sale of petroleum products and the provision of minor repairs and services and/or the retail sale of accessories normally associated with this use.

4. Minor Repairs and Services. Minor repairs and services include major engine overhaul (any operation requiring pulling the head, intake or exhaust manifold, or the pan); transmission, muffler, and radiator work; lubrication; repair of brakes, generators, water pumps, batteries and other minor accessories; replacement of wiper blades, fuses, radiator caps, lamps and other minor accessories, changing oil and transmission fluid; patching, changing or mounting of tires; wheel alignment; tune-up; minor electrical repairs; and similar repairs and services.

5. Major Repairs and Services. Major repairs and services include body and fender work; repair of tops, seat covers and upholstery; painting; rebuilding batteries; and similar work (no tire recapping or retreading). In the CA Zone, only auto body paint and/or upholstery shops are permitted as accessory uses to new vehicle sales, subject to conditional use permit.

B. No building permit for a retail petroleum outlet shall be issued until required right-of-way dedications for adjacent streets, in accordance with the City’s current General Plan, have been made and accepted by the City. Such dedicated property shall not be deemed to be part of the minimum lot area required of a retail petroleum outlet.

C. Any existing retail petroleum outlet not in compliance with the standards provided for in CMC 9138.15 shall be considered a legal nonconforming use.

Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Section shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 2 of Article I of this Code. (Ord. 79-479, § 7; Ord. 03-1279, § 19)

9138.12 Convenience Store.
A. Use Classification. A small retail self-service store selling a limited line of fast-moving food and nonfood items, usually with extended hours of operation, a high volume of customer traffic, and either standalone or associated with auto service stations.

B. Minimum Lot Area. New convenience markets shall not be permitted on lots less than thirty-two thousand, six hundred seventy (32,670) square feet net area.

C. Minimum Separation Requirement. New convenience stores shall be not less than one-half (1/2) mile from an existing convenience store.

D. Hours of Operation. Business hours, including truck loading hours, shall be limited to 5:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m., seven (7) days a week.

E. Parking Requirement. One (1) space per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area.

F. Alcohol Sales. Alcohol sales could be considered as part of a separate conditional use permit application for convenience stores; however, the hours of operation would be limited to 5:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., seven (7) days a week. In addition, alcohol sales shall not be permitted within three hundred (300) feet of residences, schools, and parks. (Ord. 79-479, § 7; Ord. 79-467; Ord. 81-552, § 1; Added by Ord. 81-554, § 1, 2; Ord. 84-679, § 1; Ord. 03-1279, §§ 20, 21; Ord. 04-1322, § 5; Ord. 08-1400, § 1; Ord. 11-1479, § 10; Ord. 16-1602, § 4)

9138.13 Reserved.
Reserved. (Ord. 79-479, § 7; Ord. 03-1279, § 22; Ord. 16-1602, § 5)

9138.14 Automobile/Vehicles Services.
A. Use Classifications.

1. Automobile/Vehicle Service and Repair. Repairs and services include major engine overhaul (any operation requiring pulling the head, intake or exhaust manifold, or the pan); transmission, muffler, and radiator work; lubrication; repair of brakes, generators, water pumps, batteries and other minor accessories; replacement of wiper blades, fuses, radiator caps, lamps and other minor accessories, changing oil and transmission fluid; patching, changing or mounting of tires; wheel alignment; tune-up; minor electrical repairs; and similar repairs and services. In the CA Zone, auto body and fender work and auto body paint are permitted as accessory uses to new vehicle sales, subject to conditional use permit.

2. Automobile/Vehicle Washing. Washing, waxing, vacuuming, or cleaning of automobiles or similar light vehicles, including self-serve washing facilities.

3. Automobile Service Station. Establishments primarily engaged in retailing automotive fuels or retailing these fuels in combination with activities, such as providing automobile/vehicle repair services, selling automotive oils, replacement parts, and accessories, and/or providing incidental food, retail sales.

B. Landscaping and Screening.

1. A masonry wall at least six (6) feet in height shall be provided along all lot lines adjacent to a residential use or district.

2. At least ten (10) percent of the site must be landscaped.

3. A landscaped planter with a minimum inside width of ten (10) feet and enclosed within a six (6) inch high curb shall be provided along the front and streetside property lines, except for vehicular circulation openings. A landscaping buffer with a minimum inside width of at least five (5) feet shall be provided along all other property lines.

4. A three hundred (300) square foot planter with a minimum dimension of ten (10) feet shall be provided at the corner of intersecting streets unless a building is located at the corner.

5. Additional screening and landscaping may be required where necessary to prevent visual impacts on adjacent properties.

C. Application Review and Findings for Approval. The decision-making authority shall approve a use permit for an automobile/vehicle service facility only if it finds that:

1. The project is designed so that form and scale are harmonious and consistent with the character of the specific site, the adjacent uses and structures, and the surrounding neighborhood.

2. The site design, including the location and number of driveways, will promote safe and efficient on-site and off-site traffic circulation.

3. Service bay openings are designed to minimize the visual intrusion on surrounding streets and properties.

4. Lighting is designed to be low-profile, indirect or diffused and to avoid adverse impacts on surrounding uses.

D. Conditions of Approval. Conditions of approval may include limitations on operational characteristics of the use; restrictions on outdoor storage and display, location of pump islands, canopies and service bay openings; and/or requirements for buffering, screening, lighting, planting areas, hours of operation or other site elements in order to avoid adverse impacts on adjacent lots or the surrounding area.

E. Automobile/Vehicle Service and Repair. Automobile/vehicle service and repair uses, as well as any other uses, such as service stations, that perform auto servicing as an accessory activity, are subject to the following standards:

1. Noise. All body and fender work or similar noise-generating activity shall be conducted within an enclosed masonry or similar building with sound-attenuating construction to absorb noise. Air compressors and other service equipment shall be located inside a building.

2. Work Areas. All work shall be conducted within an enclosed building except: pumping motor vehicle fluids, checking and supplementing various fluids, and mechanical inspection and adjustments not involving any disassembly.

3. Vehicle Storage. Vehicles being worked on or awaiting service or pick-up shall be stored within an enclosed building or in a parking lot on the property and shall be screened from the public right-of-way. Unattended vehicles may not be parked or stored on the sidewalk adjoining the property, in the street, or in any portion of the public right-of-way within the City.

4. Litter. The premises shall be kept in an orderly condition at all times. No used or discarded automotive parts or equipment or permanently disabled, junked, or wrecked vehicles may be stored outside a building.

F. Automobile/Vehicle Washing. Automobile/vehicle washing facilities are subject to the following standards:

1. Minimum Lot Area. Automobile service stations shall contain not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of net lot area.

2. Washing Facilities. No building or structure shall be located within thirty (30) feet of any public street or within twenty (20) feet of any interior property line of a residential use or residential district. Vehicle lanes for car wash openings shall be screened from public streets to a height of forty (40) inches. Screening devices shall consist of walls and/or berms with supplemental plant materials.

3.  Hours of Operation. Limited to 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., seven (7) days a week. When abutting a residential district, the hours of operation shall be between 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., seven (7) days a week.

G. Automobile Service Station. Automobile service stations and any other commercial use that includes fuel pumps for retail sales of gasoline are subject to the following standards. An automobile service station with a convenience store shall comply with the standards set forth in CMC 9138.12 (Convenience Store):

1. Minimum Lot Area. Automobile service stations shall not be permitted on lots containing less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet of net lot area.

2. Minimum Street Frontage. Each lot shall have a minimum frontage of not less than one hundred (100) feet on each abutting street.

3. Pump Islands. Pump islands shall be located a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from any property line to the nearest edge of the pump island. A canopy or roof structure over a pump island may encroach up to ten (10) feet within this distance.

4. Minimum Separation Requirement. New automobile service stations shall be not less than five hundred (500) feet from an existing service station use.

5. Abandonment. Any service station shall in the case of abandonment or nonoperation of the primary use be dismantled and the site cleared within six (6) months subsequent to the close of the last business day. (Ord. 79-479, § 7; Ord. 16-1602, § 6)

9138.15 Commercial, Automotive (CA) Development Standards.
A. Description of Boundaries. The City of Carson Commercial Automotive District (CAD) is generally located on the south side of the 405 San Diego Freeway on 223rd Street, between Lucerne Street to the west and Alameda Street to the east. Also included in the CAD is the Don Kott Auto Center on Avalon Boulevard, north of 213th Street and south of the 405 Freeway; and Altman’s RV Center on Recreation Road, north of the 405 Freeway.

B. Purpose and Intent. The CAD is intended to maximize retail sales of new automobiles at dealerships located within the City of Carson and promote the development of a Commercial Automotive District consisting of automobile and light truck sales facilities with consistent and appealing landscaping, lighting, signage and compatible architectural elements. The use of the regulations and development standards contained herein is intended to fulfill the following objectives:

1. Encourage the consolidation of automobile sales franchises within a designated Commercial Automotive District.

2. Provide signage standards designed to meet the needs of automobile retailing, while remaining aesthetically pleasing to the public.

3. Provide flexible design standards to encourage compatible site design, while encouraging a range of architectural aesthetic styles to create a sense of excitement and vitality.

4. Provide consistent design standards to which all development within the CAD must adhere.

5. Establish the cooperation and coordination of the participants in the development and operation of the CAD.

6. Establish a long-range and ongoing source of economic strength to the community in terms of employment and tax revenue for community services.

7. Encourage the rehabilitation of existing structures and overall site upgrades so that existing land uses become unified with new developments, enhancing the overall CAD image.

8. Establish innovative and quality site planning and architectural design maintaining a prosperous and marketable specialized automobile commercial complex, unique and individual in itself.

Certain development considerations associated with the planning and implementation of this development district are unique to the City of Carson and this district in particular. The implementation of a marketable complex for automobile sales and services requires a district which provides: (1) opportunities for high visibility and accessibility to the dealerships from the 405 Freeway and 223rd Street; (2) available parcels of land under the ownership of several individuals and the redevelopment agency; (3) incentives for development such as public improvements (i.e., streets, gutters, lighting, off-site signage, etc.), redevelopment agency opportunities, and community goals and standards; and (4) the previous establishment of existing uses and compatibility with proposed new automobile and other related retail commercial uses.

C. Permitted and Conditional Uses. The CAD permits the following principal, secondary and conditional uses:

1. Principal Uses.

a. New vehicle dealerships, principally geared toward the sale of new passenger vehicles and light duty trucks.

b. New recreational vehicle sales.

c. New motorcycle sales.

d. Renting and leasing of recreational vehicles.

2. Accessory Uses. As an integral, but secondary part of the operation of a new vehicle franchise, the following uses shall be permitted:

a. Used vehicle sales; provided, that the used vehicle sales are in conjunction with new vehicle sales and are not primary.

b. Vehicle repair and service, in conjunction with new vehicle sales; see CMC 9138.2.

c. Vehicle parts and supply sales, in conjunction with new vehicle sales.

d. Vehicle leasing, in conjunction with new vehicle sales.

e. Vehicle washing and detailing; see CMC 9138.14.

f. Public and private parking lots.

3. Conditional Uses. The following uses are permitted only after a valid conditional use permit (CUP) has been approved by the City:

a. Auto body, paint and/or upholstery shops as an integral but secondary part of operating a new automobile franchise; see CMC 9138.2.

b. Restaurants, including drive-thrus, cafes, dinner houses, or establishments offering food for in-house or take-out consumption.

c. Automobile service stations; see CMC 9138.14.

d. Transmitters, receivers and repeater stations (cell towers/monopoles).

e. Sales of used automobiles, recreation vehicles, and trucks not over two (2) ton capacity, as a primary use; see CMC 9133.

f. Minor and major repair and service as a primary use located on properties fronting Avalon Boulevard and within the CA Zone; see CMC 9138.2.

1. Lawfully established automotive repair facilities on property fronting Avalon Boulevard shall discontinue operations on or before July 1, 2017.

g. Automotive and equipment auction as a primary use located on properties fronting Avalon Boulevard and within the CA zone; see CMC 9138.21.

1. Lawfully established automotive and equipment auctions on property fronting Avalon Boulevard shall discontinue operations on or before July 1, 2017.

4. Interpretation of Uses Permitted. Other similar automobile and commercial related uses when interpreted by the Planning Commission as to performance standards as set forth in this Section and determined by means of interpretation in accordance with CMC 9172.24.

5. Prohibited Uses.

a. Any uses not fully enclosed within a building, except:

(1) Vehicle sales.

(2) Vehicle storage.

(3) Vehicle washing and detailing, which shall be screened from public right-of-way along streets within the CAD Zone and residential areas.

b. Dismantling of vehicles or the storage of vehicles for parts.

c. Outside storage of equipment, parts, inoperable vehicles or outside vehicle repair and maintenance.

d. All uses are prohibited except as expressly permitted by the provision of this Section.

D. Minimum Site Development Standards. The applicable minimum site developments listed below shall apply to automobile and other related dealerships and uses. Other standard commercial uses shall abide by development standards in the CR (Commercial, Regional) Zone and the General Development Standards, Part 6.

1. Building Setbacks.

a. No structure of any kind, and no part thereof, shall be placed on any site closer to a property line than herein provided. The following structures and improvements are specifically excluded from these setback provisions:

(1) Roof overhangs and approved architectural embellishments.

(2) Canopy; provided, it does not impact line of sight of adjacent vehicle dealerships or is set back fifty-two (52) feet from the front property line if impact occurs.

(3) Steps, paving and walks associated with vehicle display areas.

(4) Paving and associated curbing in relationship to landscaped areas.

(5) Landscaping and security bollards located within landscaped areas.

(6) Signs and displays identifying owner, lessee or occupant constructed pursuant to CMC 9138.15(E).

(7) Light fixtures, not to exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height.

(8) Raised vehicle display areas.

(9) Subterranean parking or basements.

b. Setback from side and rear property lines: No building setback is required from interior property lines, providing that the building wall does not exceed thirty (30) feet in height, or fifty (50) percent of the length of the property line. Buildings not in conformance with the aforementioned criteria shall be set back ten (10) feet from interior property lines.

c. Setback from street property line:

(1) Sales or display buildings shall be set back a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet from street property line, so as to allow for a ten (10) foot front landscaped setback area, vehicle display area, driveway, further vehicle display or customer parking, and vehicle display or landscaped planter area in front of building.

(2) Service and storage buildings shall be set back a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet from street property line. Service bays shall be screened from public view along 223rd Street and the 405 Freeway. Service “write-up” areas may be visible from 223rd Street to serve as a visual guide for customers entering the property.

(3) Vehicle display (other than raised vehicle display) and on-site parking shall be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from street property line. A two (2) foot vehicle overhang is permitted within front setback area.

(4) Raised vehicle display areas within front yard shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from street property line; see subsections (D)(2) of this Section.

(5) Raised vehicle display areas in excess of forty (40) percent of lot frontage shall be subject to review and approval by the Planning Commission.

2. Street – Elevated Vehicle Display Area.

a. Elevated vehicle display is encouraged within front setback areas within the CAD and should be sloped for better visibility.

b. Height of the elevated vehicle display area shall not exceed four (4) feet, unless specifically approved by the Planning Division.

c. Elevated vehicle display areas shall be designed in a way so that they are in proportion to and complement the public way. The use of terraces, landscape buffers or water elements shall be considered.

d. Interesting paving surfaces such as grasscrete, stamped concrete, etc., in lieu of asphalt, shall be considered.

e. Elevated display areas shall be designed so that no individual vertical element exceeds thirty (30) inches without terracing or other transitional elements such as landscaping, etc.

f. Street-oriented elevated vehicle display areas shall have special lighting (overhead or up-lighting) in order to accent display areas. See subsection (D)(9) of this Section.

g. Elevated vehicle display within front setback areas shall not create a visual obstruction for vehicles accessing driveways or infringe on showroom visibility.

h. The use of mechanical equipment, lifts, and industrial imagery for the elevated display area along 223rd Street and other streets within the CAD is discouraged. Designs that blend with the front landscaped setback area, and are more organic in nature, shall be utilized.

3. Freeway – Elevated Vehicle Display Area.

a. Rooftop elevated vehicle display areas shall not be a nuisance or create visual clutter and infringe on adjacent properties.

b. Elevated vehicle display along the freeway should be sloped toward the freeway to provide for optimum vehicle display visibility. Use of reflective materials is prohibited.

c. The use of a mesh wall and climbing plants should be applied to buildings or structures supporting roof-mounted displays facing the 405 Freeway. This provides aesthetic contrast and transition from the freeway to the display area.

d. Raised display areas should not have a skeletal structural frame, which is exposed to the public. All structural framework should be enclosed by a wall facing the freeway, and shall blend with the architectural building aesthetics or be designed to accommodate the mesh wall with climbing plants.

e. Rooftop lighting shall not create a glare or hazard to approaching freeway traffic and shall comply with subsection (D)(9) of this Section.

f. The backdrop wall for the elevated vehicle display area should be designed so as to integrate with the dominant aesthetic theme of the dealership.

g. Backdrop wall heights may vary depending on the relationship of the freeway and site elevations. Such backdrop wall (including building height and elevated vehicle displays) shall not exceed a height of forty (40) feet.

h. Letters and logos for the elevated freeway display should be backlit or up lit, and comply with subsection (E) of this Section.



4. Building Height.

a. Buildings shall be a maximum of forty (40) feet in height. No building shall provide vision into an adjacent residential structure or an adjacent residential yard.

b. Automobile, motorcycle or recreational vehicle display shall be allowed on top of a building facing the 405 Freeway, pursuant to subsection (D)(3) of this Section.

c. Automobile storage in the second level of a building shall be permitted and may be viewed from the 405 Freeway.

5. Lot Size.

a. The minimum lot size for each site shall be one (1) acre.

6. Parking. Vehicle dealerships shall provide employee and customer parking on the dealership site or on a common parking facility especially established for such purposes as follows:

a. Each auto dealer shall provide a minimum of six (6) parking spaces reserved and labeled accordingly for customers of new vehicle purchases. The parking spaces shall be located in an area that will allow for customer flow into the dealership facility through designated main entrance.

b. Parking shall be provided at a ratio of one (1) space for every:

(1) One thousand (1,000) square feet of interior or exterior covered display floor area;

(2) Four hundred (400) square feet for buildings used for supplies and vehicle storage;

(3) Two (2) spaces per repair and service bay, plus one (1) space per five hundred (500) square feet of nonservice bay area; and

(4) Three hundred (300) square feet for buildings used for office and administration.

c. All on-site customer parking shall be clearly identified, either by special paint (i.e., curb painting) or signage.

d. If employee parking is provided in a common parking facility shared by one (1) or more merchants, a recorded document shall be filed with the Planning Department and shall be signed by the legal owner of the common site, stipulating the permanent reservation of use of the site for employee parking purposes.

e. On-site disabled parking shall be required per all applicable codes.

f. Parking of display vehicles for sale is exempt from municipal code standards for striping, stall size and aisle width; provided, that its design layout does not conflict with Fire Department or other agency regulations.

g. Trucks and recreational vehicles displayed within fifty-two (52) feet of the front yard line shall not impact the line of sight of adjacent vehicle dealerships.

7. Landscaping. The following standards shall be applied:

a. A minimum ten (10) foot landscaped setback is required along the front setback area, measured from the rear of the sidewalk to the display area. A two (2) foot vehicle overhang is allowed within the ten (10) foot setback. Setback area shall include unobstructive trees, low growing shrubs, groundcover and turf.

b. A minimum ten (10) foot wide island shall be required at the end of all display area parking adjacent to the main entry drive lane. Islands shall have a mixture of trees, shrubs and groundcover.

c. On-site landscaping shall be compatible with subsection (I) of this Section, which is contained herein to coordinate the species of plant materials and provide continuity of landscaping within the CAD.

d. A minimum five (5) percent interior landscaping shall be required, excluding building footprint and front setback areas.

e. Undeveloped areas reserved for future expansion, such as any parcel not promptly built out, shall be maintained in a weed-free condition but need not be landscaped. Such sites shall be maintained in such a manner to prevent dust from blowing onto adjacent properties.

8. Driveways.

a. Single driveways shall be a minimum twenty-six (26) feet wide and maximum thirty (30) feet wide.

b. Driveways over thirty (30) feet in width shall require a minimum five (5) foot wide center landscaped island, with minimum twenty (20) foot clearance per side.

c. Stamped and terra-cotta colored concrete shall be installed at all driveway entry areas, a minimum distance of twenty (20) feet from property line.

9. Lighting. Intent – to provide consistent, uniform lighting, of architectural integrity and capacity to be compatible with adjacent businesses, residential areas, 223rd Street and the 405 Freeway.

a. On-site exterior lighting shall comply with CAD lighting criteria, as set forth in this Section.

b. On-site lighting plans, including photometric plan, shall be submitted showing the exterior lighting layout, light pole and fixture mounting details, performance fixture description and wattage proposed by each auto dealer.

c. All light fixtures shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height, measured from grade level. Roof- or deck-mounted light fixtures not to exceed sixteen (16) feet in height.

d. Exterior lighting shall consist of metal halide lamps.

e. All fixtures shall be ninety (90) degree cut-off, to prohibit spillage above the ninety (90) degree vertical plane. Such fixtures shall be arranged and shielded so that there shall be no glare or reflection onto adjacent properties or public rights-of-way.

f. Front-row on-site lighting standards adjacent to public streets shall have no more than two (2) fixtures per standard at a minimum of thirty-six (36) feet on center.

g. The interior of the display area may be illuminated by fixtures not closer than sixty (60) feet to the front line of display lights. These fixtures shall be spaced no closer than sixty (60) feet on center, and shall have no more than four (4) fixtures per pole.

h. Creative lighting design and reinforcement of lighting intensity to provide varying degrees of light intensity for merchandising and highlighting purposes are encouraged, so long as they comply to the following standards:

(1) All fixtures are to be installed in a horizontal attitude.

(2) Pole luminaries shall be bronze “shoebox” type, Spaulding “Cordova II” or equal (no stripes).

(3) Ground level poles shall be bronze with minimum four (4) inch square steel.

(4) Upper level parking deck poles shall be bronze and not exceed sixteen (16) feet in height with minimum four (4) inch square steel.

(5) All “sales” lot luminaries shall be provided with one thousand (1,000) watt metal halide lamps.

(6) All “support” area luminaries shall be provided with a maximum of four hundred (400) watt metal halide lamps.

(7) Poles shall be mounted on thirty (30) inch high by twenty-four (24) inch diameter round concrete bases with brushed concrete finish.

i. Strings of incandescent fixtures shall not be allowed in any exterior area, except lights associated during December holiday season.



10. Walls/Fencing. Walls constructed on an interior lot line or at the rear of a required landscape setback of the CAD shall be in keeping with the regulations contained herein.

a. Interior lot line walls shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height and rear walls shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height. Use of barbed, razor or similar wire is prohibited.

b. All service, storage and trash areas shall be screened from view from any public street by a wall. Trash enclosures shall be constructed to the City of Carson enclosure standards on file in the Planning Division.

c. All walls shall be decorative, consisting of splitface masonry, slumpstone, stuccoed block, stone, wrought iron, or a combination thereof.

d. Chainlink fencing is prohibited.

11. Gates.

a. Security gates located at entrance areas shall not exceed forty-two (42) inches height.

12. Security Bollards.

a. Security bollards, if utilized, shall be placed within the front ten (10) foot landscaped setback area, not to encroach within vehicle display areas. Design and placement shall be subject to Planning Division review.

13. Sound Attenuation.

a. All body repair work (if permitted) and all compressor work shall be performed in a fully enclosed area only. Access doors to such enclosures shall be screened or face away from all public rights-of-way.

b. Air compressor exhaust stacks shall contain a muffling device.

c. Exterior loudspeakers shall not be mounted more than ten (10) feet above finish grade and shall be oriented toward the interior of each parcel.

d. Rooftop-mounted air conditioning and mechanical equipment must be screened from public view and adjacent properties by a screening technique involving integrated architectural design elements.

E. Signage.

1. Introduction. The purpose of this Section is to guide automobile dealers in the selection and placement of their signage. It is the intent to provide a reasonable number of signs, as well as size specifications, in order to provide aesthetic harmony among dealerships. It is further intended to limit the number and size to that required for proper conduct of business, yet controlling and managing the design, aesthetics and placement of all signage. It is desired that artistic flexibility be allowed while maintaining continuity and appropriate scale to the center as a whole. The information contained in these development standards as adopted by the City of Carson establishes mandatory criteria to which each sign must conform. Each business will be responsible for the construction, installation and maintenance of its signage, and must submit for design review approval to the City of Carson pursuant to this Section. Submitted drawings must indicate location, materials, finishes, height, square footage and method of installation for all proposed signage.

2. Vehicle Dealers’ Signs.

a. General Criteria.

(1) Signs will be allowed for the purpose of identifying the buildings, the premises, the uses and special events.

(2) All permanent and temporary signs are to receive the proper permits prior to construction.

(3) Each new dealership shall submit and have approved a plan showing their entire permanent sign program prior to construction of the signs.

(4) All permanent signs, including pole-mounted “product identity,” shall be for the purpose of identification or direction only, and shall not contain any promotional advertising.

(5) Billboards or wall-painted signs are prohibited.

(6) Exposed raceways, ballast boxes or transformers are prohibited.

(7) Illuminated signs shall be internally lighted by fluorescent, LED or neon tubes. No luminous or reflective background or script may be attached or applied.

(8) Sign company names or stamps shall be concealed.

(9) Locations, type and size of all permanent signs shall be indicated on the drawings submitted during the design review process for approval by the City.

(10) No roof-mounted signs will be permitted, excluding roof-mounted display areas.

(11) If dealers’ sign program is mandated by the vehicle manufacturer and is inconsistent with this Section, specific design review shall be required and approved by the Planning Commission.

3. Freestanding Monument and Pylon Signs.

a. One (1) street-front sign shall be permitted per franchise in the form of a monument and/or pylon type, placed no closer than two hundred (200) feet apart, to identify the dealership name or product. The sign may not contain any temporary, promotional advertising.

b. Monument and pylon signs may contain the following information:

(1) Brand(s) of vehicle sold;

(2) Manufacturer’s logo;

(3) Dealer’s name;

(4) Identification of used cars and/or trucks.

c. Electronic message signs are prohibited along streets within the CAD, unless they are freeway-oriented.

d. Nonfreeway-oriented pylon sign faces along 223rd Street and other affected streets within the CAD may not exceed sixty (60) square feet in area per side, nor exceed a height of twenty-five (25) feet measured from adjacent natural grade.

e. In addition, one (1) pylon sign per automobile dealership shall be permitted at the rear of the property facing the 405 Freeway. Pylon sign shall not exceed a height of thirty (30) feet measured from freeway grade and shall be architecturally consistent with site development. Freeway pylon sign shall be subject to Planning Commission approval.

f. Monument signs shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height, including base as measured from adjacent natural grade. Base shall be minimum eighteen (18) inches in height.

g. Monument signs are to be located at major public entrance to the site in an area, which will not obstruct the vision of motorists so as to create a safety hazard. Pylon signs are to be located in the center of the front setback area. The signs will be perpendicular to the street and located five (5) feet away from the front property line.

h. Monument and pylon signs are to be located in a landscaped planter of at least 200 square feet.

4. Building-Mounted (Wall) Signs.

a. Primary signs may contain manufacturer’s logos, brand of vehicle sold and dealer identity. Secondary signs shall include service, parts or other associated name.

b. Wall-mounted signs shall consist of channel letters/numbers, internally illuminated or back lit with trim caps. Letters for primary building signage (dealer name) shall not exceed thirty-six (36) inches in height nor twenty-four (24) inches in height for secondary signage (i.e., service, parts). Illumination optional for secondary signage. All letters must be securely attached to the wall surface and may not extend beyond the roofline.

c. No more than two (2) rows of letters are permitted.

d. One (1) logo shall be permitted per manufacturer, not to exceed forty-eight (48) inches in height, unless authorized by the Planning Commission.

e. Wall signs shall not exceed seventy (70) percent of building frontage and shall provide a minimum ten (10) percent gap above and below all wall-mounted signs.

5. Information Signs.

a. Signs shall be single-sided, mounted flat on a building or wall, and shall not protrude out from the building. Such informational signs shall be permitted to identify types of services, hours of operation, or other specific functions of a given dealership.

b. Area shall not exceed four (4) square feet.

6. Street Directional Signs.

a. Signage information may include directions to Entrance, Service, Parts, Customer Parking, etc.

b. These signs shall be no more than twelve (12) square feet in dimensional area. Any such freestanding signs shall be a maximum of four (4) feet above grade, unless attached to a building. Design shall be compatible to overall signage program.

c. A maximum of one (1) sign may be permitted per driveway accessing a public street.

d. Signs shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from the front property line, unless otherwise approved pursuant to a development plan.

7. Pole-Mounted “Product Identity” Signs.

a. “Product identity” signs, which identify individual auto makes, are to be mounted to auto display lighting poles and may consist of “banner” and/or flag style signs.

b. The maximum dimensions of “banner” style signs will be three (3) feet wide by six (6) feet long having no more than eighteen (18) inches extending on either side of the centerline of the pole. The minimum ground clearance shall be a vertical distance of eight (8) feet measured from the bottom of the sign to the ground surface. “Banner” style signs shall be constructed of a high quality combination of metal and vinyl.

c. The maximum dimension of “flag” style signs will be three (3) feet wide by three (3) feet long mounted on the top of the pole. “Flag” style signs shall be constructed of a high quality combination of metal, vinyl, and/or nylon.

d. “Banner” and “flag” style product identity signs are to be replaced when they show signs of unattractive wear and/or fading as determined by the City.

e. Each dealership is limited to one (1) product identity sign per lighting pole on the first row of lighting poles parallel to the street curb of the dealership. No product identity signs are permitted on any other poles.



 

8. Temporary Identification Signs.

a. Automobile dealerships within the CAD will be allowed temporary signage eight (8) time periods per year for special events including, but not limited to, the standard holiday sale periods of Presidents’ Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, and Labor Day. Each time period for the eight (8) special events will not exceed sixteen (16) days. Each special event time period must be separated from the previous event by at least fourteen (14) days.

b. Each individual auto dealership facility (not each auto make) will be allowed temporary signage two (2) time periods per year for special events. These two (2) special events are in addition to the eight (8) special events permitted by the CAD.

c. Temporary signs are limited to banners, balloons, and/or window painted signs.

d. The maximum number of temporary banners is two (2) per dealership. Banners shall be mounted on buildings with minimum seven (7) foot clearance from grade.

e. Special displays such as murals or other similar types, not specified herein, shall be approved by the Planning Commission.

f. Painted window signs shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the window area or two hundred (200) square feet, whichever is less.

g. Balloons smaller than eighteen (18) inches will be permitted only on Saturdays and Sundays and the following holidays: New Year’s Day, Presidents’ Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July and Labor Day.

h. Each individual auto dealer is responsible for the removal of all helium filled balloons as permitted by this Section on the respective dealership site by the end of the day in which balloons are authorized. No helium filled balloon shall be cut loose to fly freely; all helium filled balloons shall be discarded in a designated trash bin or receptacle.

i. Sandwich boards, pennants, streamers, and any other sign types not covered in this Section are prohibited.

j. All temporary signs must be removed within twenty-four (24) hours following the completion of each special event.

k. No temporary signs are permitted anywhere within the CAD outside of special event time periods provided for in this Section.

l. A permit for temporary signage must be obtained per calendar year for each of the dealerships, prior to placement of temporary signs by the auto dealership facility. Said permit shall be $280.00 per year, per dealership ($35.00 per display period).

m. Two (2) additional temporary signage permits can be issued independently for each dealership per calendar year, at a rate of $35.00 per permit.

9. Commercial Signs. Signage not associated with automobile and other types of dealerships shall comply with CMC 9136.7.

F. Other Government Codes. All development within the CAD must comply with all applicable governmental codes. When there is a conflict between this Section and other sections of the Municipal Zoning Code, the provisions of this Section shall take precedence.

G. Design Review Requirements. All projects within the CAD involving the construction or rehabilitation of property are required to be in compliance with these development standards and the provisions contained within the Carson Municipal Code pertaining to site plan review process pursuant to CMC 9172.23.

H. Design Guidelines.

1. Intent. This section is intended to give direction to developers of auto dealership projects within the CAD to encourage orderly, harmonious and integrated design of structures, display areas, landscaping, parking areas, lighting and accessory structures. This Section establishes a standard for design quality while maintaining flexibility for individual expression and imaginative design solutions.

2. Site Planning.

a. Buildings should be located to maximize the automobile retail environment. The site should be laid out to maximize visibility of new vehicle sales. Desirable features such as freeway visibility, street frontage and solar orientation should be used to accentuate the visibility of the product.

b. Pedestrian circulation should be direct and easily accessible while providing for a safe environment.

c. Driveway access should be located so as to minimize disturbance to future street and public way improvements, maintaining good visibility of pedestrian and vehicular off-site traffic. Fence, walls, or hedges shall not obstruct vehicles entering or exiting a driveway.

d. Vehicular access should be located so as to create direct access to the customer parking and vehicle display areas, ensuring convenient ingress and egress. Customer parking should be separated from vehicle sales display(s).

e. When locating buildings, parking, vehicle display areas and walkways on a parcel, all desirable site features (street and freeway frontage, corner lot, irregular lot) should be used to an advantage.

f. Loading zones should be located so as to be screened from the public right-of-way and to minimize the interaction between the public zone for vehicle sales and the service areas.

g. Service areas should be enclosed or screened from public right-of-way and should be conveniently located and designed for access by service vehicles, not creating a nuisance for adjacent property owners.

h. Utility equipment such as electrical panels, gas meters, etc., should be located so that they are screened from public view. On-site utility lines shall be placed underground.

i. Transformers, backflow devices and similar structures should not be the dominant element of the landscaping areas and should be screened from view wherever possible.

j. The site should be flexible in design to accommodate future possibilities for revisions/ expansions to the site due to changing demands. Such alterations can then be met with minimum impact to existing on-site and off-site improvements.

k. Buildings should be located so as to maximize vehicle display areas. Windows within the building should be oriented toward and have a clear view of the vehicle display(s) and shall be the dominating feature of the building facing 223rd Street.

l. Consideration should be given to the unique nature of the sites in that the “rear” of the sites is in fact the front view from the 405 Freeway, having a high level of drive-by visibility. This unique condition should be addressed as best as possible in the layout of the site to help identify the Auto Row District and contribute positively to the imagery and architecture of the district.

m. Buildings should be located and oriented so as to complement, not conflict, with the adjacent uses and imagery of adjacent parcels (i.e., block visibility of adjacent vehicular display areas, etc.).

n. Wherever possible, transitions between existing and new buildings or additions should be gradual. The height and mass of the new projects or construction should not create abrupt changes from those of existing buildings.

o. An adequate on-site queuing area for service customers shall be provided. On-site driveways may be used for queuing but may not interfere with access to required parking spaces. Required parking spaces may not double as queuing spaces.

3. Building Design. The CAD Development Standards do not set forth a specific design theme, but rather seek to create well thought out design solutions compatible within the CAD. The “planned” district should result from consistent site planning and landscaping rather than building design.

a. Buildings within an individual site should have common proportion, massing and details, which are consistent through the use of common colors, signs, lighting treatment and landscaping.

b. Buildings with undistinguished masses and bulk are discouraged. Efforts should be made to design the structures to a human scale of the automobile retailing environment while addressing the need to contribute to the freeway frontage and scale. Contributing factors are varying the planes of exterior walls, change of materials and varying the height of the structures.

c. Within an individual project or site, materials, colors and textures should be consistent with the design theme of the buildings and create a consistent palate. The buildings should be stylistically consistent so that the detailing reflects the traditional style of the design.

d. Building facades which face adjoining street and the 405 Freeway shall provide visual relief and shadow patterns designed to provide variety to the adjacent streetscape.

e. Building elevations and massing should be designed to reflect the orientation of the building. Only active building elevations, including windows and entrances (not blank walls or loading zones) should face the public right-of-way.

f. Special attention should be given to the top and the base of buildings. The connection between building and ground and building and sky should have a special significance and be properly addressed in detailing and choice of materials.

g. Newspaper racks and public phone booths should be integrated into the interior of a structure. Exterior vending machines are prohibited.

h. Materials of relative permanence and not susceptible to decay and damage over a short period of time should be used.

i. Materials should be used to help accent the massing and design theme of the buildings. Facades should be provided with articulation and glazing so as to minimize long uninterrupted blank walls.

j. Massing of the buildings should be used to help create spatial hierarchy to the buildings and reflect some of the uses on the interior. This will help to minimize an industrial and monolithic architectural environment.

k. Architectural elements such as cornices, canopies, shading elements, trellises, change of materials, and others are encouraged. However, these elements should be important elements of the building theme and not just applied decoration or architectural gimmicks.

l. Glazing that faces the public right-of-way is encouraged to be of a type that helps create interaction between the interior sales and showroom spaces and the public right-of-way and exterior environment.

m. Use of hierarchal elements such as towers, varied rooflines, etc., are encouraged to help break the horizontal look of buildings and visually enhance the architecture. These types of elements can also identify main entries, provide backdrop for signage, etc.

4. Roofs.

a. The roofline of a building should be designed in conjunction with its mass and facade so that the building and its roof form a consistent composition as viewed from adjacent street.

b. All rooftop mechanical equipment shall be screened from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way. Screening design and materials shall be consistent with the overall building design.

c. Roofs should be an integral part of the building design and overall form of the structure and should reflect and be consistent with the design aesthetic of the building.

d. Roofs should not be such that they become the dominant element of the architecture. Elements such as mansard roofs or pitched roofs should be to scale with the facade and proportion of the building.

e. Pitched roofs should be addressed carefully so that the scale of the roofs is broken down to minimize large uninterrupted rooflines and ridges.

f. Roofing materials should be consistent and complementary to the design of the building.

g. Rooflines shall be used to create a hierarchy of space and help identify entrances, vehicular display areas, etc.



I. Landscaping. Landscaped areas shall be planted as an integral part of the project, and not merely located in leftover portions of the site.

1. The location of plant materials shall respond to the architectural design of the building to key-note entries, contrast with or reinforce building lines and volumes, and soften hard structural lines.

2. Plant materials shall be used to define street edges, outdoor display areas and pedestrian pathways; and to screen vehicle service areas, trash enclosures, utilities and mechanical equipment.

3. Plan materials shall be integrated in the building form as architectural elements (i.e., cascading from balconies, potted trees on upper story patios, etc.) whenever possible.

4. Landscaping should be used to create nodes within both auto and pedestrian circulation patterns and can be useful in distinguishing special display areas.

5. When solid building walls or perimeter walls are within the view of a public street, trees shall be planted a maximum of forty (40) feet on center (trees may be clustered).

6. All trees shall be a minimum twenty-four (24) inch box. Palm trees shall be mature and of good height size.

7. Elements such as sculptures, water elements, etc., incorporating artistic expression shall be used whenever possible.

8. Vertical landscape elements shall be used to enhance the street-side elevation of buildings and to allow view of signs and architectural features from the street.

9. Consistent landscape themes shall be used within the CAD. It is recommended that a simple grass and California Fan Palm tree design – typical fifteen (15) foot brown trunk – (or other tree design pursuant to approved landscape plan), be utilized throughout the front setback area and interior of parcels with shrubs, bushes, vines and ground covers from the following list utilized for foundation and accent planting:

a. Shrubs.

Butterfly Iris

Moraea iridioides

Hibiscus

Hibiscus rosa – sinensis

Dwarf Oleander

Nerium oleander ‘Petite Salmon’ or ‘Petite Pink’

Wheelers Dwarf

Pittosporum tobira ‘Variegata’

India Hawthorn

Ralphiolepis indica ‘Jack Evans’

Compact Natal Plum

Carissa

Lily of Nile

Agapanthus africanus

Privet

Ligustrum ‘Texanum’

Compact Shiny Xylosma

Xuylosma, congestum ‘Compactum’

Pink Escallonia

Escallonia fradesii

Ternstromia

Ternstroemia gymnanthera

Frasers Photinia

Photinia fraseri

Viburnum

Viburnum davidii

b. Ground Covers.

Star Jasmine

Trachelospermum jasminoides

Prostate Natal Plum

Carissa grandiflora
‘Green Carpet’

Blue Rug Juniper

Junipers horizaontalis

Turfgrass

‘Marathon’ fescue

Trailing Lantana

Gazanias

Lantana montividenis

(Ord. 03-1279, § 23; Ord. 08-1404, § 3; Ord. 11-1473, § 3; Ord. 11-1480, § 3)

9138.16 Communications Facilities.
A. Purpose. The purpose and intent of this Section is to provide uniform and comprehensive standards for the development of all communications facilities, including antennas and associated facilities for wireless telecommunication, data, radio, television and microwave, in accordance with existing Federal law while minimizing the aesthetic impacts through the use of carefully chosen siting and design criteria. The regulations contained herein are designed to protect and promote public health, safety and welfare, and aesthetic qualities within the community. At the same time, the intent is to comply with the Telecommunications Act of 1996, to not unduly restrict the development of necessary communications facilities and encourage managed development of communications infrastructure while providing a public forum to ensure a balance between public concerns and private interest in establishing such facilities.

B. Definitions.

1. “Amateur radio service” means a noncommercial, two (2) way radio communications service operated by licensed amateurs using shared frequencies.

2. “Antenna height” means the vertical distance from the existing or proposed grade, whichever is lower, to the highest part of the antenna.

3. “Building-mounted facilities” means all facilities mounted or attached in any way to an existing building. The building must serve a primary use other than as a site for a communications facility.

4. “Cell on wheels” or “COW” means a facility which is temporarily rolled in or temporarily installed.

5. “Co-location” means the placement of more than one (1) facility on an existing building or freestanding structure.

6. “Enhanced 911 emergency calling systems (911/ECS)” means a service which allows public safety personnel, including police and fire departments, to automatically identify the phone number and location of a person making an emergency call from a mobile source.

7. “Facade-mounted” means the mounting of antennas directly to the fascia or sidewall of a building and stealth into the architectural design of the wall.

8. “Facility” means a communications facility that repeats, transmits and/or receives electromagnetic signals which includes, but is not limited to: the combination of antennas, transmitters, masts, cabinets, and equipment rooms; towers, monopoles, or similar structures supporting said equipment; screening devices including walls and landscaping; and parking areas and other accessory development.

9. “Ground-mounted” means a facility in which the antennas are located on a freestanding pole or structure, other than a building, attached to the ground. These antennas do not use a building or ancillary structure(s) for mounting purposes.

10. “Height” means the distance measured from the average finished grade surrounding the facility to the highest point on the facility. In the case of a building tower, the height includes the portion of the building on which it is mounted. Towers that are adjustable in height shall use the maximum height which the structure is capable of reaching.

11. “Major communications facility” means a facility other than a minor communications facility, which includes ground-mounted or freestanding facilities and facilities that are not stealth. A facility located within a residential zone, regardless of stealth design, is considered a major communications facility.

12. “Minor communications facility” means a facility that includes distributed antenna systems (DAS), microcells and building-mounted facilities that are stealth, including facade-mounted (wall-mounted) and roof-mounted stealth facilities. A co-location onto an existing, approved major communications facility that is in full compliance with this Section, shall be processed as a minor communications facility. Enhanced 911/ECS required by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) are considered minor communications facilities if they are stealth into the design of an existing building-mounted or freestanding facility.

13. “Multiple user” means a communications facility comprised of multiple towers or buildings supporting one (1) or more antennas owned or used by more than one (1) public and/or private entity, excluding research and development industries with antennas to serve internal uses only.

14. “Freestanding” means a facility or structure which is not mounted on or attached in any way to an existing building, or that is attached to a structure whose primary purpose is to support, house or serve as a mounting location for communications equipment.

15. “Not stealth” means any facility not camouflaged in a readily apparent manner to blend with surrounding land uses and features. The design does not conceal the intended use of the facility and incorporates no readily apparent elements of stealth technology or design. A standard monopole with equipment cabinets aboveground and unscreened would be considered not stealth.

16. “Personal communications services (PCS)” is a term coined by the Federal Communications Commission; it describes a two (2) way voice and digital, wireless telecommunications system. PCS encompasses cordless phones, cellular mobile phone paging systems, personal communications networks, wireless office phone systems, and any other wireless telecommunications systems that allow people to place and receive voice/data calls while away from home and office.

17. “Site justification study” means a study performed pursuant to certain requirements which explains the demands and rationale that led to the selection of a particular location and design for a communications facility. The study may include information pertaining to the interrelationship between a specific site and other sites in the local network area.

18. “Stealth” means camouflaged or designed to blend with the surrounding environment and land uses, minimize aesthetic impact on adjacent uses, and conceal the intended use and appearance of the structures.

19. “Tower” means any structure, or support thereto, that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one (1) or more antennas for telephone, radio and similar communications purposes, including self-supporting lattice towers, guyed towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like.

C. Applicability. The procedures and rules set forth in this Section are applicable to all communications facilities and all modifications or additions to existing communications facilities. This Section does not apply to the use or location of private, residential citizen band radio towers, amateur radio service, television antennas, or private residential dish antennas less than one (1) meter in diameter, used for receiving radio frequency or television signals, or public safety communications facilities owned or operated by the City of Carson or any emergency agencies such as the Fire Department or Sheriff’s Department.

D. Procedural Standards.

1. Minor communications facilities shall be subject to the approval of a development plan in accordance with the site plan and design review procedures as provided in CMC 9172.23. The Planning Division shall be the approval authority except if the property is located within one hundred (100) feet of a residential zone. In considering applications for minor communications facilities, the Planning Division shall be guided by the provisions of subsections F (Design and Development Standards) and H (Required Findings) of this Section.

The Planning Division shall render a decision in writing, with findings, and conditions, subsequent to receipt of a complete application. The Planning Division’s decision shall be final unless a written appeal is filed pursuant to CMC 9173.4.

2. Major Communications Facilities. Major communications facilities shall be subject to the approval of a development plan in accordance with the site plan and design review procedures as provided in CMC 9172.23 and conditional use permit procedures as provided in CMC 9172.21. A co-location onto an existing, approved major communications facility shall be processed as a minor communications facility, unless as otherwise mentioned in this Section or if the co-location is a substantial addition that would intensify the existing facility as determined by the Planning Officer. In considering applications for major communications facilities, the Planning Commission shall be guided by the provisions of subsections F (Design and Development Standards) and H (Required Findings) of this Section. The decision of the Planning Commission shall be final unless a written appeal is filed pursuant to CMC 9173.4.

E. Application Requirements. The following information shall be provided concurrently with any application submitted pursuant to CMC 9173.1:

1. Co-Location Statement (if necessary). This statement must be signed by all co-locating providers agreeing to the co-location.

2. Utility Easement Encroachment Agreement (if necessary). A letter of consent must be provided by the utility purveyor(s) if their easement will be encroached upon.

3. Local Facilities Map. Show existing facilities and coverage areas in the City. (At the applicant’s request, the City of Carson will make every effort to ensure the confidentiality of information which is considered to be of a proprietary nature. Said information will be used for municipal planning purposes only.)

4. Site Justification Study. A study which explains the demands and rationale for selecting a particular location and design for a communications facility. The study may include information pertaining to the interrelationship between a specific site and other sites in the local network area. For all major communications facilities, this study shall identify all reasonable, technically feasible, alternative locations, including facilities which could be used for co-location or other networks available such as distributed antenna systems. The study shall also explain the rationale for selecting the proposed site. For all feasible co-location sites, the study shall include evidence of written contact with all wireless service providers or tower owners within a quarter mile of the proposed communications facility, unless a smaller radius is technologically justified by the applicant. The contacted tower owner or service provider shall be requested to respond in writing to the inquiry within thirty (30) days. The applicant’s letter(s) as well as response(s), or a statement from the applicant detailing all responses received, shall be included with the study as a means of demonstrating the need for a new major communications facility.

5. RF Emissions Report. The City of Carson acknowledges that it is preempted from regulating the placement, construction or modification of facilities based on environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that such facilities comply with the Federal Communications Commission’s (FCC) regulations. As such, a report shall be submitted which is signed by a radio frequency engineer and prepared pursuant to FCC, Office of Engineering and Technology, Bulletin 65 or any other applicable guidelines or regulations, stating the maximum (EMF/RF) radiation to be emitted by the proposed facility and whether those emissions conform to safety standards adopted by the Federal Communications Commission. The report shall take into account all other facilities within five hundred (500) feet, both existing and known future facilities, the cumulative effects of co-located facilities and existing nearby buildings and structures and shall be written so as to be understandable to the layman. This report shall be available for review by the public.

6. Site Plan. A site plan shall be submitted and consist of elevation drawings indicating the height, diameter, color, setbacks, landscaping, method of screening, and color photo simulations showing the before and after impacts of the proposed facility on the subject site. Existing communications facilities, poles, towers, and/or antennas shall also be shown. No plans shall include depictions of future antennas or devices, nor shall future antennas or devices be approved, unless specifically identified by applicant in a separate written statement to the Planning Division or Planning Commission as applicable.

7. Costs and Refundable Deposits. Applicant shall bear the reasonable costs associated with the review of the application including the costs incurred as a result of the need to hire an expert or consultant to review the data or information provided by the applicant or any related application, and for the expert or consultant to attend City meetings as determined by the City. At the time the applicant submits its application, it shall also submit an initial refundable deposit of $2,500. The deposit shall be used by the City to pay the reasonable costs associated with the expert or consultant review of the application. In the event that the deposit is or will be fully expended by the City, at the direction of the City, the applicant shall within five (5) business days deposit additional funds with the City in an amount reasonably estimated by the Director of Community Development. Upon final City action on or withdrawal or termination of the application, any unexpended funds on deposit shall promptly be returned to the applicant by the City. No City construction permit or utility connection authorizations shall be issued by the City for any approved project if the applicant has not fully reimbursed the City for its consultant or expert costs as required herein.

F. Design and Development Standards.

1. Setbacks. No communications facility shall be located within or extend into the required setbacks established in the applicable zone.

2. Height.

a. Communications facilities utilizing a freestanding support structure shall be limited to the maximum building height for the applicable zoning district.

b. In zoning districts with no maximum height limit, a communications facility which utilizes a freestanding support structure shall not exceed fifty (50) feet in height above the ground. The zoning of all locations shall be interpreted in accordance with CMC 9114.2.

c. New communications facilities constructed on existing conforming structures shall not exceed the height of the existing structure, except for fully stealth roof-mounted facilities on existing buildings which may project up to the maximum height limit described in this Section or eight (8) feet above the roof from where it is attached, whichever is higher.

d. The Planning Commission or Planning Division may consider approval of facilities to exceed the maximum height limit described in this Section subject to approval of a minor or major exception as described in subsection G (Exceptions) of this Section. Existing facilities lawfully erected prior to July 17, 2003, may have a height limit greater than subsection G (Exceptions) of this Section provided there is no expansion or intensification to the facility.

3. Undergrounding. Electrical wiring associated with a facility shall be buried underground or hidden in a manner acceptable to the Planning Division and Engineering Division or Planning Commission if applicable. To the extent technologically feasible, all vaults, equipment, shelters, structures, or any other device related to or required for use of a facility, shall be underground in the open space zone, in the right-of way, and where all other utilities are required to be underground. In all other areas in the City, all vaults, equipment, shelters, structures, and other devices shall be permitted aboveground only when said devices are not visible from adjacent property or the right-of-way.

4. Microwave Dishes. Where economically feasible the use of microwave dishes shall be prohibited and underground lines utilized. Upon a showing of economic infeasibility, microwave dishes up to twenty-six (26) inches shall be permitted.

5. Painting. The communications facility and supporting structure(s) shall be painted a neutral, non-glossy color that matches the color of the structure to be mounted on or to the color of the surrounding environment subject to the satisfaction of the Planning Manager.

6. Lighting. All communications facilities, except exempt facilities, shall be unlit, except for a manually operated or motion-detector controlled light above the equipment door which shall be used only for personnel maintenance purposes. This requirement is not intended to address interior structure lighting.

7. Noise.

a. All communications facilities, except exempt facilities, shall be constructed and operated in such a manner as to meet the requirements of the noise ordinance.

b. Backup generators shall only be operated during power outages and for testing and maintenance purposes. No backup generator shall be utilized for longer than seventy-two (72) hours without prior approval of the Engineering Division or Planning Division.

c. If the facility is located within one hundred (100) feet of a residential dwelling unit, noise attenuation measures, including redesign or screening, shall be included to reduce exterior noise levels to meet the requirements of the noise ordinance.

8. Signs. The display of any sign or any other graphic on a communications facility or on its screening is prohibited, except for signs for health, safety, and welfare purposes which are required to be posted in case of an emergency. Emergency signs shall be visibly posted at the facility and shall include contact information, including the phone number of the utility provider.

9. Performance Bond. A faithful performance bond shall be required to ensure compliance with City codes and standards, and the removal of abandoned antennas or facilities, before the issuance of any building or public works permits.

G. Exceptions.

1. Exceptions for minor communications facilities may be approved by the Planning Division. For all other facilities including those within one hundred (100) feet of a residential zone, the Planning Commission shall render the decision after notice and hearing. In approving an exception, the Planning Commission or Planning Division shall render a decision in writing, with findings and conditions, subject to the requirements of CMC 9172.23.

a. Minor Exceptions. The design standards for setbacks and height listed in subsection F of this Section may be modified by not more than fifteen (15) percent.

The Planning Commission or Planning Division must make all of the following findings based on evidence submitted by the applicant:

(1) If seeking a minor exception from height standards set forth herein, the applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed height is designed at the minimum height necessary for operation and/or for stealth purposes including design elements or architectural details.

(2) The minor exception would not create a significant visual impact.

(3) Granting the minor exception shall conform to the spirit and intent of this zoning code.

(4) Granting the minor exception will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity.

b. Major Exceptions. The design standards for setbacks and height listed in subsection F of this Section may be modified by not more than thirty (30) percent.

The Planning Commission or Planning Division must make all of the following findings based on evidence submitted by the applicant:

(1) If the applicant seeks the major exception in order to service the applicant’s gap in service, the applicant shall submit an explanation and supporting engineering data establishing that a tower or antenna as proposed is technologically necessary.

(2) If the applicant seeks the major exception in order to accommodate the establishment of a co-located facility, the applicant shall demonstrate that conformance with the code would require the installation of new freestanding communications facility or other less desirable facility.

(3) If seeking a major exception from height standards set forth herein, the applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed height is designed at the minimum height necessary. The applicant shall specifically include an analysis comparing the operation of the facility at its proposed height with its operation at the maximum height permitted herein. The purpose of this analysis is to ensure that additional height is permitted only when technologically necessary for the provision of services. Further, the applicant shall certify that the facility shall not cause a hazard to aircraft.

(4) Locating the antenna in conformance with the specifications of this Section would obstruct the antenna’s reception window or otherwise excessively interfere with reception, and the obstruction or interference involves factors beyond the applicant’s control and relocation is not an option.

(5) The visual impacts are negligible because the facility is designed to architecturally integrate with the surrounding environment.

(6) Granting the major exception shall conform to the spirit and intent of this zoning code.

(7) Granting the major exception will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity.

H. Required Findings. In addition to the provisions of CMC 9172.21 and 9172.23, the Planning Division or Planning Commission shall approve a development plan and conditional use permit for a communications facility if affirmative findings can be made based upon the following criteria:

1. The proposed site is the least intrusive after considering co-location with another facility, other networks available such as distributed antenna systems, and location at another site. If located in the public right-of-way or on City-owned or leased property, the facility must meet the requirements of the Engineering Division.

2. The proposed communications facility will be aesthetically compatible, located and designed to minimize the visual impact on surrounding properties and from public streets, including adequate screening through the use of landscaping that harmonize with the elements and characteristics of the property and/or stealth which incorporates the facility with the structure in which it will be mounted through use of material, color, and architectural design.

3. The proposed communications facility is not located on any residential dwelling or on any property which contains a residential dwelling, or any property wherein a person resides, except as may be associated with a church, temple, or place of religious worship.

I. Maintenance. The site shall be maintained in a condition free of trash, debris, and refuse and all antennas and related structures shall not be permitted to fall into disrepair. All graffiti must be removed immediately or within seventy-two (72) hours of notice from the City.

J. Temporary Facilities.

1. The Planning Division may approve, for a period of up to ninety (90) days, a temporary communications facility, including but not limited to a COW, to provide service while an approved communications facility is being fabricated or when an existing antenna has been damaged or destroyed. The Planning Division may extend the ninety (90) day period at the request of the applicant for thirty (30) day intervals if the applicant can prove that there is a hardship that is delaying the issuance of permits for the permanent facility.

2. The temporary facility may only be approved after the approval authority has approved or conditionally approved an application for a communications facility and the project proponent has signed and returned a copy of the affidavit of acceptance of conditions of approval to the Planning Division.

3. The Planning Division shall approve the actual location and design of the temporary facility consistent with the requirements of subsection F (Design and Development Standards) of this Section.

4. The Planning Division or Public Safety Division shall have the authority to approve a temporary use permit for communications facilities needed during a declared emergency. Temporary facilities shall be removed not later than ten (10) days after the conclusion of the declared emergency.

K. Nonconforming Facilities. Any facility constructed in violation of this Section, or in violation of any part of this code, is subject to immediate abatement. Any major communications facility that is lawfully constructed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Section shall be deemed a nonconforming use and will be subject to the provision of CMC 9182.21 and 9182.22. Additionally, CMC 9172.25 and 9182.05 shall govern any request for an extension to the nonconforming privilege.

L. Facility Removal.

1. Discontinued Use/Abandonment. The operator of a lawfully erected facility, and the owner of the premises upon which it is located, shall promptly notify the Planning Division in writing in the event that the use of the facility is discontinued for any reason. In the event the facility is discontinued or abandoned for a period of more than one hundred eighty (180) days, then the owner(s) and/or operator(s) shall promptly remove the facility, repair any damage to the premises caused by such removal, and restore the premises as appropriate so as to be in conformance with applicable zoning codes at the owner’s and/or operator’s expense. All such removal, repair and restoration shall be completed within ninety (90) days after the use is discontinued or abandoned, and shall be performed in accordance with all applicable health and safety requirements. In the event that an owner or operator fails to remove any abandoned facilities or antennas within the time periods stated, the City may remove the facility after providing thirty (30) days’ notice, and shall bill the owner and/or operator for all costs including any administrative or legal costs incurred in connection with said removal. Once all costs have been paid by the antenna owner, any bond posted for removal shall be released. The City does not waive any legal rights to seek repayment for removal costs pursuant to a bond posted, or bring an action for repayment of costs.

2. Utility-Mounted Facility Removal or Relocation. All utility-mounted facilities shall be removed or relocated at the facility owner’s expense when a City-approved project requires relocation or undergrounding of the utility structure on which the facility is mounted. (Ord. 03-1284, § 5; Ord. 10-1460, § 1)

9138.17 Mixed-Use – Carson Street (MU-CS).
A. Description of Boundaries. The City of Carson Mixed-Use – Carson Street Corridor (MU-CS) is a 1.75-mile section located on the north and south sides of Carson Street between the San Diego (I-405) Freeway and the Harbor (I-110) Freeway. There are five (5) districts within the Carson Street Corridor MU-CS which are: West Gateway District, Community Shopping District, Boulevard Residential District, Civic Center District and East Gateway District. The West Gateway District includes the north and south side of Carson Street between the I-110 Freeway and Moneta Street. The Community Shopping District includes the north and south side of Carson Street from Moneta Street to Dolores Street. The Boulevard Residential District extends from Dolores Street to Grace Avenue, the Civic Center District extends from Grace Avenue to Bonita Street and East Gateway District extends from Bonita Avenue to the I-405 Freeway.

B. Purpose and Intent. The purpose of the MU-CS Zone is to create a downtown retail and residential district which will provide the City of Carson with a distinctive core area which includes its Civic Center. The use of the regulations and development standards contained herein is intended to fulfill the following objectives:

1. Create a livable, pedestrian-friendly downtown retail district surrounding the civic core.

2. Create a distinctive mixed-use character throughout the Carson Street Corridor by establishing standards and guidelines.

C. Permitted Land Uses. All uses within the Mixed-Use – Carson Street Corridor are subject to site plan and design review per CMC 9172.23.

1. Permitted and Conditional Uses. Automatically permitted uses, uses requiring special limitations and requirements, conditionally permitted uses, and all other uses permitted in the MU-CS zoning district are described in CMC 9131.1. Existing nonconforming uses shall comply with the requirements of Division 2 of Part 8 of this Chapter.

2. Prohibited Uses. All uses are prohibited except as expressly permitted by the provisions of this Chapter.

3. Interpretation of Uses Permitted. Further definition and enumeration of uses permitted in the Mixed-Use – Carson Street District shall be determined by means of interpretation in accordance with CMC 9172.24.

D. Site Requirements. The site requirements listed under this Section are mandatory.

1. Minimum Lot Area.

a. The minimum lot size for a commercial-use-only building or buildings is twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.

b. The minimum lot size for a mixed-use building or buildings is twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.

c. The minimum lot size for development with a residential-only mixed-use building or buildings is thirty thousand (30,000) square feet.

d. Any lawfully established lot (including a leased area of land during the term of the lease) is deemed to have the required lot size.

e. A lot may be reduced to less than the required lot area if such a reduction is the result of an acquisition for public purposes.

2. Street Frontage and Access.

a. The minimum building frontage shall be seventy (70) percent of the lot width unless modified by the Planning Commission pursuant to CMC 9172.23 (Site Plan and Design Review).

b. The building or structure frontage shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet per segment unless modified by the Planning Commission pursuant to CMC 9172.23 (Site Plan and Design Review).

c. No lot shall be created unless it is capable of being provided with vehicular access directly from a public street or alley and has a street frontage of at least thirty (30) feet.

d. A new or additional use shall not be developed on an existing lawfully established lot (including a leased area of land during the term of the lease) unless there is vehicular access from a public street or alley, and such access has a width of at least twenty (20) feet. The required vehicular access shall be either directly from a public street or alley or by means of a right-of-way or easement.

3. Minimum Lot Width.

a. The minimum lot width for mixed-use residential or residential use is one hundred (100) feet.

b. The minimum lot width for a commercial use is fifty (50) feet.

4. Minimum Lot Depth.

a. The minimum lot depth shall be two hundred (200) feet.

b. Any lawfully established lot (including a leased area of land during the term of the lease) is deemed to have the required lot depth.

5. Building Setbacks.

a. Front Yard. The following are the required setbacks from the front property line:

1st floor – Commercial/live/work

10'

1st floor – Residential

10'

2nd floor – Commercial

10'

2nd floor – Residential

10'

3rd floor – Residential

10'

4th floor – Residential

10'

West Gateway subarea front yard setback

1st and 2nd floor – All development

15'

b. Side Yard. The following are the required setbacks from the side property lines:

 

Interior

Street Side

Subterranean garage

1''

1''

On-grade parking or partial subterranean garage

1'' or 3'

10'

1st floor – Commercial/live/work

1'', 3' or 10'

10'

1st floor – Residential

10'

10'

2nd floor – Residential

10'

10'

2nd floor – Commercial

1'', 3' or 10'

10'

3rd floor – Residential

10'

10'

4th floor – Residential

10'

10'

If the interior side lot line is adjacent to a residential use, then a ten (10) foot interior side yard is required.

c. Rear Yard. The following are the required setbacks from the rear property line:

Subterranean garage

1''

On grade parking or partial subterranean garage

1'' or 3'

1st floor – Commercial/live/work

10'

2nd floor – Commercial/live/work

10'

1st floor – Residential

15'

2nd floor – Residential

15'

3rd floor

30'

4th floor

30'

d. The front yard ten (10) foot setback shall be provided and treated as an extension of the public right-of-way in the Carson Street Corridor.

e. Projections are allowed ten (10) feet into the front yard setback for arcades subject to review by the Planning Manager.

f. Ground floor awnings and canopies may project five (5) feet into the front and street side yards.

g. Upper-level balconies may project five (5) feet into the front and street side yards.

6. Building Height.

a. No commercial building or structure shall exceed a height of thirty (30) feet.

b. No residential or mixed-use building or structure shall have more than three (3) stories, including a basement but excluding a cellar, nor shall it exceed a height of forty-five (45) feet, except for residential projects for affordable or senior households permitted in accordance with CMC 9126.91 or projects that have an exceptional design.

c. In cases in which CMC 9126.91 is applicable, no building or structure shall have more than four (4) stories, including a basement but excluding a cellar, nor shall the height exceed fifty-five (55) feet.

d. The minimum building height shall be eighteen (18) feet.

e. The Planning Commission may approve building-mounted architectural features that exceed the height requirements described above only if exceptional design is provided as determined by the Planning Commission. The applicant must demonstrate exceptional design based on the quality of materials, colors, texture, and presentation, and the location, orientation, and overall appearance of the architectural feature. The Planning Commission may approve an architectural feature that exceeds the maximum height as described above to a height not more than twenty-five (25) feet; provided, that the architectural feature does not occupy more than ten (10) percent of any vertical plane above the maximum height. The Planning Commission, at its discretion, may require conditions of approval or modifications to the architectural feature in order to achieve an exceptional design, or may deny the proposal if it is unacceptable.

7. Floor Area Ratio (FAR).

a. The maximum floor area ratio (FAR) residential or mixed-use shall be 1.5.

b. The minimum floor area ratio for ground floor commercial uses within a mixed-use development is 0.15.

c. The maximum floor area ratio for ground floor commercial uses within a mixed-use development is 0.7.

d. Subterranean garages are not included in the FAR calculation.

e. Partially subterranean garages are calculated at fifty (50) percent of the gross floor area.

8. Density.

a. A maximum density for residential use is thirty-five (35) dwelling units per acre.

b. If the residential units are affordable or for senior use per CMC 9126.91, the maximum density is fifty-five (55) dwelling units per acre.

c. The maximum number of dwelling units permitted on a lot or project area is the net lot area in acres multiplied by the density designation number, i.e., thirty-five (35) or fifty-five (55). Any fractional amount equal to or greater than one-half (1/2) shall permit an additional dwelling unit.

9. Recreational Open Space.

a. Recreational facilities shall be designed as that space suitably equipped and devoted to active or passive recreation for the exclusive use of the residents of a particular residential building or structure.

b. In each condominium or multiple-family dwelling project, there shall be usable open space of at least fifteen (15) percent of the gross floor devoted to residential use of which sixty (60) percent must be open to the sky.

10. Private Open Space.

a. In each condominium or multiple-family project, there shall be one hundred thirty (130) square feet of private open space for all zero (0) and one (1) bedroom units and one hundred fifty (150) square feet of private open space for each larger unit.

b. A reduction in the amount of private open space may be authorized subject to the review and approval of a development plan by the Planning Commission pursuant to CMC 9172.23 (Site Plan and Design Review).

11. Separation Between Buildings on Same Lot.

a. There shall be a minimum of six (6) foot separation between buildings or one (1) foot horizontal distance for each two (2) feet of building height on the lowest building.

b. Paseos between buildings shall be provided to facilitate pedestrian access between rear parking lots and Carson Street in the Downtown Retail District. Paseos shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet.

12. Parking.

a. Shared on-site parking is permitted with a conditional use permit.

b. Tandem parking may be used for the same residential unit. Tandem parking cannot exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total parking count. No more than twenty-five (25) percent of the parking spaces could be tandem. Two parking spaces in tandem shall have a combined minimum dimension of nine (9) feet by thirty-six (36) feet.

c. Live/work units require one and one-half (1-1/2) spaces for units under two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet. Larger units require one (1) space per unit plus the number of spaces required for commercial use per CMC 9162.21.

d. Residential use requires one (1) covered parking space for every studio and two (2) covered spaces for each unit with one (1) or more bedrooms. One (1) guest space for each four (4) units.

e. No more than one-third (1/3) of the required parking spaces shall be compact spaces.

f. Mixed-use developments require parking for the sum of all the uses.

g. Parking for residential use shall be secure and separate from off-street parking devoted for commercial uses.

h. Parking spaces for residential purposes either in a mixed-use development or exclusively residential development may be provided in a common covered garage above, below or at grade level subject to the review and approval of a development plan by the Planning Commission pursuant to CMC 9172.23 (Site Plan and Design Review).

i. Remote parking is permitted within four hundred (400) feet of use with a conditional use permit, if property owners involved in the joint use agree by covenant.

j. All commercial parking lots/structures shall provide a minimum of five (5) percent of total stalls for preferred parking for carpools/vanpools.

k. Bicycle parking shall be provided for at least five (5) percent of the total number of stalls in all parking areas.

l. Deviations from the parking requirements may be authorized subject to approval of a development plan by the Planning Commission pursuant to CMC 9172.23 (Site Plan and Design Review) if the project includes affordable housing opportunities as defined by this Chapter.

m. All other requirements of Part 6, Division 2 (Vehicle Parking, Loading and Maneuvering Areas) of this Chapter are applicable.

13. Lighting.

a. Pedestrian-scale lighting with a minimum one (1) foot candle is required in the public areas.

b. Storefront entries shall be illuminated.

c. Lighting shall be shielded to prevent glare on adjacent properties.

14. Drive-In or Drive-Through Restaurants.

a. Drive-in or drive-through restaurants are only permitted for multi-level mixed-use developments on four (4) acres or greater that contain a mixture of commercial and residential uses and includes senior or affordable housing.

b. Only one (1) drive-in or drive-through restaurant is permitted per mixed-use development.

c. The drive-in or drive-through shall be ancillary to the main restaurant and designed to not draw excessive attention.

d. Signage for the drive-in or drive-through shall be kept to a minimum and approved through a development plan.

e. A traffic report shall be prepared by a qualified traffic engineer and reviewed and approved by the City Traffic Engineer for proper queuing, adequate circulation, and available parking.

f. A conditional use permit shall be obtained in compliance with CMC 9172.21 and approved by the Planning Commission.

E. Landscaping.

a. All portions of setbacks not covered by permitted encroachments, pedestrian walkways, or driveways shall be landscaped.

b. Open parking areas located at or above grade shall be landscaped in accordance with CMC 9162.52 (Landscaping Requirements).

c. All landscaping shall be in compliance with the provisions of Part 6, Division 8 of this Chapter relating to water-efficient landscaping.

d. One specimen-size tree (thirty (30) inch box tree) shall be provided for each four (4) units. A reduction in the number of required specimen box trees may be authorized subject to the review and approval of a development plan by the Planning Commission pursuant to CMC 9172.23 (Site Plan and Design Review).

e. All other requirements of CMC 9162.52 (Landscaping Requirements) are applicable.

F. Signage. The purpose of this Section is to guide commercial development on Carson Street in the selection and placement of their signage. It is the intent to provide a reasonable number of signs, as well as size specifications, in order to provide aesthetic harmony in the District. It is further intended to limit the number and size of signs to that required for proper conduct of business, yet controlling and managing the design, aesthetics and placement of all signage. It is desired that artistic flexibility be allowed while maintaining continuity and appropriate scale to the District as a whole. The information contained in these development standards as adopted by the City of Carson establishes mandatory criteria to which each sign must conform. Any deviations from these standards may be considered by the Planning Commission pursuant to an approved sign program. Each business will be responsible for the construction, installation and maintenance of its signage, and must submit plans for design approval to the City of Carson, pursuant to this Section. Submitted drawings must indicate location, materials, finishes, height, square footage and method of installation for all proposed signage.

1. Standards.

a. The combined sign area for all signs on a single-story building which abuts a public street shall not exceed two (2) square feet for each of the first twenty (20) feet of business storefront and one (1) square foot for each linear foot that exceeds the first twenty (20) feet.

b. Businesses that take their primary access from the public right-of-way shall have no more than two (2) signs: one (1) wall sign and one (1) awning window or pedestrian sign. Businesses located on a corner may have one (1) wall sign and window or pedestrian sign on each side.

c. Ground floor businesses that have an entrance on an alley or rear parking lot may have one (1) additional sign on the exterior wall that abuts the parking lot. Maximum sign area shall be calculated at subsection (F)(1)(a) of this Section. No more than two (2) rows of letters allowed.

d. Capital letters shall not exceed a height of eighteen (18) inches. Lower case letters shall not exceed a height of eighteen (18) inches. When using logos, logo size should not exceed twenty-four (24) inches. Two (2) rows of letters shall not exceed thirty-six (36) inches.

e. Major projecting signs shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet above adjacent grade and shall not project above the building parapet. Maximum sign projection beyond the building line should be thirty (30) inches at eight (8) feet above grade and a maximum of forty-eight (48) inches at fourteen (14) feet above grade. Projecting signs shall not exceed twenty-five (25) square feet and be no closer than fifteen (15) feet to another projecting sign, monument sign, or pylon sign.

f. Minor projecting signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in size and shall not project more than thirty (30) inches from the wall on which they are attached.

g. Pedestrian signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in size and shall not project more than thirty (30) inches from the wall on which they are attached. Internal illumination of pedestrian signs is prohibited.

h. Window signs shall be limited to permanent signs and shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the window area. Signage letters shall not exceed three (3) inches in height. Content of the sign is limited to the business name and address. No phone numbers are allowed.

i. Blade signs shall be mounted a minimum of eight (8) feet above grade and project no more than thirty (30) inches from the building line in the West Gateway District.

j. A one (1) foot by two (2) foot sign listing the business is permitted on live/work units. All other signage is not allowed, including signage on the inside of the units which may be viewed through the front windows.

k. Awning signs shall be kept to a minimum size and be limited to the valance of the awning. Area shall be calculated with total area.

l. Wall-mounted signage should be centered above storefront. Signage width should not exceed seventy-five (75) percent of leasehold frontage.

m. The sign area of a monument sign shall not exceed 1.5 square feet per each foot of street frontage. Sign placement shall not exceed a maximum of one (1) per every one hundred fifty (150) linear feet of street frontage. Signs shall be located at least seven and one-half (7-1/2) feet from interior lot lines. Monument signs shall be a maximum of eight (8) feet high, with a maximum eighteen (18) inch base and should not be a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic. Sign content shall be limited to shopping center name and name of tenant (no more than two (2) rows of letters).

n. Pole or pylon signs are limited to sign per center subject to review by the Planning Manager. Pole or pylon signs are reserved for major tenants. Pole or pylon signs are limited to parcels two (2) acres and more. The maximum height is thirty (30) feet. The area shall not exceed one (1) square foot for each square foot of building frontage.

o. Pole, pylon or monument signs shall be located within a minimum two hundred (200) square foot landscaped planter area.

p. Any deviations from the standards may be considered by the Planning Commission pursuant to an approved sign program.

2. Prohibited Signs. The following signs are prohibited:

a. Internally illuminated sign cabinets with a rectangular form.

b. Use of human beings, live animals or animated figures.

c. Pennants, streamers, flashing blinking lights or moveable signs (electric or manual).

d. Sign promoting products sold at other locations.

e. Pole or pylon signs on sites less than two (2) acres.

f. Exposed raceway.

3. Temporary Signs.

a. Banners, permits and other similar temporary signage placed on the exterior of the building are generally prohibited, although they may be permitted at the opening of a new business, or for special events with prior approval of the Planning Division.

G. Walls.

1. Standards.

a. All perimeter walls shall be placed directly on the property line.

b. All perimeter walls are to be constructed out of masonry (stone, block, brick) with stucco finish.

c. All perimeter walls are to be articulated via pilasters, reveals, or other elements at a maximum of thirty (30) foot intervals.

H. Other.

1. Standards.

a. Trash and recycling areas shall be provided in accordance with Part 6, Division 4 (Trash and Recycling Areas) of this Chapter.

b. Nonresidential development shall comply with Part 6, Division 5 (Transportation Demand and Trip Reduction Measures) of this Chapter.

c. Exclusively residential development and the residential portion of mixed-use developments shall be in conformance with the requirements set forth in CMC 9128.11 (Intent and Purpose), 9128.13 (Application for Conditional Use Permit), 9128.17 (Declaration of Covenants – Conditions and Restrictions), 9128.51 (Multiple-Family Dwelling), 9128.53 (Application for Conditional Use Permit) and 9128.55 (Development Criteria).

d. Residential uses shall be permitted pursuant to the development standards established by CMC 9128.16 and 9128.54 except as modified in this Section.

I. Live/Work Criteria. The purpose of this Section is to provide standards for live/work units. Live/work units are intended to be occupied by business operators who live in the same structure that contains the commercial activity. The Planning Commission during the conditional use permit process may impose additional conditions as deemed necessary to protect public health, safety and welfare. The development standards for live/work units are mandatory.

1. Development Standards.

a. Each live/work unit shall front on a public or private street and the work area shall be located at street level.

b. Each unit shall have a pedestrian-oriented frontage.

c. The living space within the live/work unit shall be contiguous with and an integral part of the working space with direct access between the two (2) areas and not a separate stand-alone dwelling unit. The residential unit shall not have a separate street address from the business component.

d. The live/work unit shall be occupied and used only by a business operator and/or household of which at least one (1) member shall be the business operator.

e. The living space shall not be rented or sold separately from the working space.

f. One (1) employee, at a time, who does not reside in the unit may work in the unit, unless this employment is prohibited or limited by the conditional use permit.

g. Other than a sign as permitted by this Section, in no way shall the appearance of the structure be altered, or the conduct of the use within the structure be such that the structure may be recognized as serving a nonresidential use (either by color, materials, construction, lighting, odors, noises, vibrations, etc.).

h. The retail use shall be limited to the display and sale of works created in the unit.

i. A commercial business license shall be obtained.

j. A copy of the conditional use permit, showing the conditions of the use permit, shall be provided to all occupants of live/work units in the building prior to their execution of a lease or purchase agreement for such live/work unit.

k. Work space shall be limited to the first floor of the building. Living space shall be located in the rear ground level or upper floors so that it does not interrupt the appearance of the commercial frontage.

l. The designated work space cannot be used for residential living space other than a home office.

m. There shall be no storage of flammable liquids or hazardous materials beyond that normally associated with a residential use. Storage of flammable liquids and hazardous materials beyond that normally associated with a residential use, such as for an artist studio, shall be allowed only through an approved conditional use permit and approval from the Los Angeles County Fire Department and Building Official.

2. Performance Standards. These performance standards shall apply to all live/work units:

a. Noise. Noise resulting from conduct of the work within the unit shall be muffled so as not to become disruptive to surrounding neighborhoods due to volume, tone, intermittence, frequency or shrillness.

b. Odor. Every use shall be operated in such a manner that it does not emit an obnoxious odor or fumes beyond the working unit/area.

c. Smoke. Every use shall be operated in such a manner that it does not emit smoke into the atmosphere.

d. Dust and Dirt. Every use shall be operated in such a manner that it does not emit any dust or dirt into the atmosphere.

3. Findings. The following findings must be made when approving a conditional use permit for live/work units:

a. The proposed use at the location requested will not significantly cause an adverse effect to the health, safety or welfare of persons residing or working in the surrounding area; or

b. The proposed site is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the yards, open space, walls, fences, parking, landscaping and other development requirements as required to integrate the use with existing and planned uses in the surrounding area; and

c. The proposed site is adequately served by highways and streets of sufficient width and improved as necessary to carry the kind and quantity of traffic such use would generate, and by other public and private service activities as required.

d. The living and working areas are not separately rented.

J. Design Guidelines and Sustainable Standards. The purpose of the guidelines is to establish the parameters of sustainable design and provide an opportunity to incorporate the principles of sustainable design into a concentrated area of development, where they can be implemented in a consistent and coordinated manner. The sustainable guidelines shall serve as best practices recommendations for all new development within the Carson Street Corridor. These guidelines are intended to promote a more sustainable built environment through specific design and construction techniques. Guidelines, unlike standards, are not mandatory.

All projects within the Mixed-Use – Carson Street Corridor District are recommended to incorporate the following guidelines and are subject to City review and approval.

1. Site Design/Development.

a. Create outdoor spaces to promote community, a sense of place, pedestrian-friendly environments, and reduced automobile usage.

b. Encourage rehabilitation of damaged sites due to environmental contamination.

c. Cluster buildings to promote higher-density communities and greater opportunities for energy-efficient designs.

d. Site buildings to take advantage of solar orientation, minimize energy use and to increase potential for alternative energy sources.

e. Increase porous paving to minimize stormwater/runoff impact on surrounding environment.

f. Minimize uplighting and reduce site lighting requirements to be one (1) foot candle per square foot to lower the amount of light that spills across the site.

g. There should be a minimum of curb cuts provided and no wider than is necessary to serve the project.

h. Enhanced paving should be provided at all driveways.

i. Built streetwall along Carson Street should be a minimum of fifty (50) percent of lot width in the West Gateway and Community Shopping Districts.

j. Provide pedestrian access connecting rear parking lots to street when possible.

k. Parking lots should be placed at the rear and sides of new retail development to establish a consistent building frontage line along Carson Street.

l. New points of ingress and egress to public or private parking lots should be from side streets whenever possible. Driveways onto Carson Street should be combined to serve two (2) or more properties whenever possible.

m. Provide continuous enhanced paving at pedestrian areas adjoining one (1) or more developments and all driveway areas.

n. Provide fountains and/or civic art, centrally located, in designated open space areas for visual attraction, screening of traffic noise and cooling effect.

o. All new developments over twenty thousand (20,000) square feet should incorporate a public arts component equal to at least one (1) percent of the total project costs.

p. Primary ground floor building entrances should front the public right-of-way. Secondary entrances are permitted when parking is located to the side or rear of the building. The main entrance should be clearly identified and directly accessible from the public right-of-way.

q. New points of access to parking lots for corner lots shall be on the side street.

r. Driveways onto Carson Street shall be combined to serve two (2) properties when possible.

2. Building Composition/Architecture.

a. Orient longer side of building on an east-west axis to maximize solar heat gain.

b. Shape buildings to maximize effects of local wind condition and circulate breezes.

c. Specify light colors or reflective colors and materials to minimize heat gain.

d. Specify windows and glazing systems with high R-values and e-coatings to minimize heat gain and loss.

e. Provide roof overhangs, awnings, canopies, porches, or blinds to prevent unwanted solar heat gain.

f. Provide natural lighting opportunities through the use of skylights, lightshelves, lightwells, clerestories, and windows.

g. Specify materials that are either made from recycled content or are reused from previous construction.

h. Specify materials that do not contain formaldehyde, organic solvents, VOCs and chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs).

i. Entries shall be enhanced through architectural treatment such as tiling, individual awnings, or placement of signs above the entryways.

j. Buildings fronting onto intersections should have architectural features to demarcate the corner.

k. Recess storefront bays on new buildings at least three (3) inches from the front plane of the building. Encourage retention of recessed storefront remodel.

l. Wall opening (windows and doors) shall occupy a minimum of seventy (70) percent of the ground floor street facade in commercial units. Opaque or dark tinted glass is strongly discouraged.

m. Doors and windows for retail shops shall contain seventy (70) percent clear glass (ninety (90) percent light transmission). Solid doors, or doors with opaque or dark tinted glass are strongly discouraged.

n. Each floor above the ground floor shall have a minimum of two (2) windows.

o. Storefront windows shall be a minimum of eighteen (18) inches and a maximum of thirty-six (36) inches from the sidewalk grade to accommodate a traditional bulkhead.

p. Upper-floor windows should have a greater height-to-width ratio.

q. Skylights, clerestories and transom windows should be incorporated into the building where possible to allow for maximum amount of daylight.

r. If awnings are used, each structural bay should have an individual awning. One unified awning spanning several bays shall be prohibited. Awning shape should relate to the shape of the window and door openings.

s. Awnings should be constructed of canvas with metal or wood frames.

t. Wall-mounted signage shall be centered above storefront.

u. Buildings should be designed with a variety of scales, creating a scale and level of detail that addresses the pedestrians at street level and the formal conditions of the upper floors.

v. New development should consider the roof lines of adjacent buildings to avoid clashes in scale, proportion, style and materials.

w. Roof pitches that create prominent or out-of-scale building elements, such a A-frame roofs, geodesic domes, or chalet-style buildings are strongly discouraged.

x. The use of exterior paint should be limited to four (4) different colors per building. Use of fluorescent colors are strongly discouraged.

y. Use of wood, metal, vinyl, and heavily textured stucco as primary exterior building materials is strongly discouraged. Wood and metal may be used for door frames, window frames and other accent uses. Permitted exterior materials for storefront bulkheads should be tile, brick or stucco.

z. Recess storefront bays on new buildings at least three (3) inches from the front plane of the building. Encourage retention of recessed storefront in storefront remodel.

aa. Entries should be enhanced through architectural treatment such as tiling, individual awnings, or placement of signs above the entryway.

bb. Facades should be varied via elements such as windows, fenestrations, cornices, etc., to create visual interest, variety and emphasis. Long repetitive expanses of wall surfaces should be avoided. Vertical and horizontal design elements should be incorporated to balance the facade composition.

cc. Each structural bay should have an individual awning when awnings are provided. One unified awning spanning several structural bays is discouraged. Awnings should relate to the shape of the window and door openings. Awnings should be constructed of canvas with metal or wood frames.

dd. Exterior security grills or permanently affixed security bars are strongly discouraged. Roll-down security grills that conceal storefront windows are strongly discouraged. Interior security grills must recess completely into pockets that conceal the grill when it is retracted. Roll-down security grills and housings must be completely concealed from the street by awnings or canopies. Security grills should not be visible during hours of operation.

3. Conservation.

a. Consider offsetting energy costs through alternative energy sources such as photovoltaics, wind power, water power, geothermal, bio-gas, or co-generation plants.

b. Specify lighting fixtures, plumbing fixtures, and appliances that minimize energy and water consumption (i.e., fluorescent lights, daylight sensors, low-flow toilet fixtures, automatic faucets, natural gas appliances.

c. Institute recycling programs for facilities and provide recycling locations within developments to collect materials.

4. Public Improvements.

a. Minimize amounts of impervious surfaces to reduce stormwater runoff and reduce heat islands through use of landscaping, permeable paving and high-albedo concrete.

b. Provide attractive waiting areas for mass transit use, preferred carpool/vanpool parking locations, bicycle storage areas, and shower/changing facilities for building users.

c. Provide site amenities (i.e., drinking fountains, benches, bike racks, etc.)

d. Provide pedestrian-scaled pole lighting with a minimum of one (1) foot candle in all public areas.

e. Transit shelters should be incorporated into the design of commercial and mixed-use projects. Designs can be physically integrated into the development or coordinated aesthetically with the proposed development.

5. Landscape.

a. Protect the native topsoil during construction so it can support the future landscape, reduce stormwater runoff, reduce fertilizer and pesticide use, and conserve irrigation water.

b. Minimize disruption of existing plants, especially trees. Existing mature trees and shrubs should be incorporated into the site plan when possible.

c. Landscape to reduce energy use by shading buildings and parking lots during hot summer months and to allow for heat gain in the winter, as well as enhancing natural ventilation by directing breezes and blocking wind.

d. Design landscape to allow irrigation and stormwater to soak into the soil recharging groundwater systems and filter out pollutants. Reduce runoff, erosion and pesticide use during construction and operation to protect water quality.

e. Minimize waste by reducing the need to prune by selecting appropriate plants and using plant trimmings as mulch and compost.

f. Use salvaged and recycled content materials in the landscape.

g. Accent planting should be used at all driveways and pedestrian entries to the property marking appropriate entryways. Accent planting should consist of low ground cover and flowering plants.

6. Signs.

a. Signs may use any of the building colors plus three (3) additional colors. Signs must use at least one (1) building color.

b. It is recommended that signs have internally illuminated letters on a raceway (channel letters), neon letters, and externally illuminated letters mounted to facade or canopy, internally and externally illuminated projecting signs, sign cabinets with distinctive curvilinear form.

c. Internally illuminated sign cabinets with a rectangular form are strongly discouraged. (Ord. 06-1363, § 9; Ord. 08-1403, § 1; Ord. 09-1419, § 4; Ord. 09-1420, § 2; Ord. 11-1479, §§ 11, 12; Ord. 14-1536, § 2)

9138.18 Mixed-Use – Sepulveda Boulevard (MU-SB).
A. Description of Boundaries. The City of Carson Mixed-Use – Sepulveda Boulevard Corridor (MU-SB) is located on the south side of Sepulveda Boulevard, two hundred forty (240) feet east of Marbella Avenue to four hundred (400) feet west of Avalon Boulevard.

B. Purpose and Intent. The purpose of the MU-SB Zone is to create a retail, office and residential district along the south side of Sepulveda Boulevard. The use of the regulations and development standards contained herein is intended to fulfill the following objectives:

1. Create a mix of high density residential and commercial use on the south side of Sepulveda Boulevard.

2. Create a buffer between the major street and the residential uses to the south.

C. Permitted Land Uses. All uses within the Mixed-Use – Sepulveda Boulevard District are subject to site plan and design review per CMC 9172.23.

1. Permitted and Conditional Uses. Automatically permitted uses, uses requiring special limitations and requirements, conditionally permitted uses, and all other uses permitted in the MU-SB zoning district are described in CMC 9131.1. Existing nonconforming uses shall comply with the requirements of Division 2 of Part 8 of this Chapter.

2. Prohibited Uses. All uses are prohibited except as expressly permitted by the provisions of this Chapter.

3. Interpretation of Uses Permitted. Further definition and enumeration of uses permitted in the Mixed-Use – Sepulveda Boulevard District shall be determined by means of interpretation in accordance with CMC 9172.24.

D. Site Requirements. The site requirements listed under this Section are mandatory.

1. Minimum Lot Area.

a. The minimum lot size for a commercial use-only building or buildings is ten thousand (10,000) square feet.

b. The minimum lot size for a mixed use building or buildings is fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet.

c. The minimum lot size for development with a residential-only building or buildings is ten thousand (10,000) square feet.

d. Any lawfully established lot (including a leased area of land during the term of the lease) is deemed to have the required lot size.

e. A lot may be reduced to less than the required lot area if such a reduction is the result of an acquisition for public purposes.

2. Street Frontage and Access.

a. The minimum building frontage shall be seventy (70) percent of the lot width unless modified by the Planning Commission pursuant to CMC 9172.23 (Site Plan and Design Review).

b. The building or structure frontage shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet per segment unless modified by the Planning Commission pursuant to CMC 9172.23 (Site Plan and Design Review).

c. No lot shall be created unless it is capable of being provided with vehicular access directly from a public street or alley and has a street frontage of at least thirty (30) feet.

d. A new or additional use shall not be developed on an existing lawfully established lot (including a leased area of land during the term of the lease) unless there is vehicular access from a public street or alley, and such access has a width of at least twenty (20) feet. The required vehicular access shall be either directly from a public street or alley or by means of a right-of-way or easement.

3. Minimum Lot Width.

a. The minimum lot width for mixed-use residential or residential use is one hundred (100) feet.

b. The minimum lot width for a commercial use is fifty (50) feet.

4. Minimum Lot Depth.

a. The minimum lot depth shall be one hundred (100) feet.

b. Any lawfully established lot (including a leased area of land during the term of the lease) is deemed to have the required lot depth.

5. Building Setbacks.

a. Front Yard. The following are the required setbacks from the front property line:

Commercial/live/work

5'

Residential

5'

Commercial

5'

3rd floor – Residential

10'

b. Side Yard. The following are the required setbacks from the side property lines:

 

Interior

Street Side

Subterranean garage

1''

1''

On grade parking or partial subterranean garage

1'' or 3'

5'

1st floor – Commercial/live/work

1'', 3' or 5'

5'

1st floor – Residential

5'

5'

2nd floor – Residential

5'

5'

2nd floor – Commercial

1'', 3' or 5'

5'

3rd floor – Residential

5'

5'

If the interior side lot line for a commercial use is adjacent to residential use, then a ten (10) foot interior side yard is required.

c. Rear Yard. The following are the required setbacks from the rear property line:

Subterranean garage

1''

On grade parking or partial subterranean garage

1'' or 3'

1st floor – Commercial/live/work

5'

2nd floor – Commercial/live/work

5'

1st floor – Residential

5'

2nd floor – Residential

5'

3rd floor

10'

d. Ground floor awnings and canopies may project five (5) feet into the front and street side yards.

e. Upper level balconies may project five (5) feet into the front and street side yards.

6. Building Height.

a. No commercial building or structure shall exceed a height of thirty (30) feet.

b. No residential or mixed-use building or structure shall have more than three (3) stories including a basement but excluding a cellar, nor shall it exceed a height of forty-five (45) feet.

7. Floor Area Ratio (FAR).

a. The maximum floor area ratio (FAR) residential or mixed-use shall be 1.5.

b. The minimum floor area ratio for ground floor commercial uses within a mixed-use development is 0.15.

c. The maximum floor area ratio for ground floor commercial uses within a mixed-use development is 0.7.

d. Subterranean garages are not included in the FAR calculation.

e. Partially subterranean garages are calculated at fifty (50) percent of the gross floor area.

8. Density.

a. A maximum density for residential use is twenty-five (25) dwelling units per acre.

b. If the residential units are affordable or for senior use per CMC 9126.91, the maximum density is thirty-three (33) dwelling units per acre.

c. The maximum number of dwelling units permitted on a lot or project area is the net lot area in acres multiplied by the density designation number; i.e., twenty-five (25) or thirty-three (33). Any fractional amount equal to or greater than one-half (1/2) shall permit an additional dwelling unit.

9. Recreational Open Space.

a. Recreational facilities shall be designated as that space suitably equipped and devoted to active or passive recreation for the exclusive use of the residents of a particular residential building or structure.

b. In each condominium or multiple-family dwelling project, there shall be usable open space of at least fifteen (15) percent of the gross floor devoted to residential use, of which sixty (60) percent must be open to the sky.

10. Private Open Space.

a. In each condominium or multiple-family project, there shall be one hundred thirty (130) square feet of private open space for all zero (0) and one (1) bedroom units and one hundred fifty (150) square feet of private open space for each larger unit.

b. A reduction in the amount of private open space may be authorized subject to the review and approval of a development plan by the Planning Commission, pursuant to CMC 9172.23 (Site Plan and Design Review).

11. Separation Between Buildings on Same Lot.

a. There shall be a minimum six (6) foot separation between buildings or one (1) foot horizontal distance for each two (2) feet of building height on the lowest building.

12. Parking.

a. Shared on-site parking is permitted with a conditional use permit.

b. Tandem parking may be used for the same residential unit. Tandem parking cannot exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total parking count. Two (2) parking spaces in tandem shall have a combined minimum dimension of nine (9) feet by thirty-six (36) feet.

c. Live/work units require one and one-half (1-1/2) spaces for units under two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet. Larger units require one (1) space per unit plus the number of spaces required for commercial use per CMC 9162.21.

d. Residential use requires one (1) covered parking space for every studio, two (2) covered spaces for each unit with one (1) or more bedrooms. One guest space for each four (4) units.

e. No more than one-third (1/3) of the required parking spaces shall be compact spaces.

f. Mixed-use developments require parking for the sum of all the uses.

g. Parking for residential use shall be secure and separate from off-street parking devoted for commercial uses.

h. Parking spaces for residential purposes either in a mixed-use development or exclusively residential development may be provided in a common covered garage above, below or at grade level subject to the review and approval of a development plan by the Planning Commission pursuant to CMC 9172.23 (Site Plan and Design Review).

i. Off-site parking is permitted within four hundred (400) feet of use with a conditional use permit, if property owners involved in the joint use agree by covenant.

j. All commercial parking lots/structures shall provide a minimum of five (5) percent of total stalls for preferred parking for carpools/vanpools.

k. All commercial development shall provide bicycle parking for at least five (5) percent of the total number of parking stalls in all parking areas.

l. Deviations from the parking requirements may be authorized subject to approval of a development plan by the Planning Commission pursuant to CMC 9172.23 (Site Plan and Design Review) if the project includes affordable housing opportunities as defined by this Chapter.

m. All other requirements of Part 6, Division 2 (Vehicle Parking, Loading and Maneuvering Areas) of this Chapter are applicable.

13. Lighting.

a. Pedestrian-scale lighting with a minimum one (1) foot-candle is required in the public areas.

b. Storefront entries shall be illuminated.

c. Lighting shall be shielded to prevent glare on adjacent properties.

E. Landscaping.

a. All portions of setbacks not covered by permitted encroachments, pedestrian walkways, or driveways shall be landscaped.

b. Open parking areas located at or above grade shall be landscaped in accordance with CMC 9162.52 (Landscaping Requirements).

c. All landscaping shall be in compliance with the provisions of Division 8, Part 6 of this Chapter relating to water-efficient landscaping.

d. One specimen-size tree (thirty (30) inch box tree) shall be provided for each four (4) units. A reduction in the number of required specimen box trees may be authorized subject to the review and approval of a development plan by the Planning Commission pursuant to CMC 9172.23 (Site Plan and Design Review).

e. All other requirements of CMC 9162.52 (Landscaping Requirements) are applicable.

F. Signage. The purpose of this Subsection is to guide commercial development on Sepulveda Boulevard in the selection and placement of their signage. It is the intent to provide a reasonable number of signs, as well as size specifications, in order to provide aesthetic harmony in the District. It is further intended to limit the number and size of signs to that required for proper conduct of business, yet controlling and managing the design, aesthetics and placement of all signage. It is desired that artistic flexibility be allowed while maintaining continuity and appropriate scale to the District as a whole. The information contained in these development standards as adopted by the City of Carson establishes mandatory criteria to which each sign must conform. Any deviations from these standards may be considered by the Planning Commission pursuant to an approved sign program. Each business will be responsible for the construction, installation and maintenance of its signage, and must submit plans for design approval to the City of Carson, pursuant to this Section. Submitted drawings must indicate location, materials, finishes, height, square footage and method of installation for all proposed signage.

1. Standards.

a. The combined sign area for all signs on a single-story building which abuts a public street shall not exceed two (2) square feet for each of the first twenty (20) feet of business storefront and one (1) square foot for each linear foot that exceeds the first twenty (20) feet.

b. Businesses that take their primary access from the public right-of-way shall have no more than two (2) signs: one (1) wall sign and one (1) awning window or pedestrian sign. Businesses located on a corner may have one (1) wall sign and window or pedestrian sign on each side.

c. Ground floor businesses that have an entrance on an alley or rear parking lot may have one (1) additional sign on the exterior wall that abuts the parking lot. Maximum sign area shall be calculated at subsection (F)(1)(a) of this Section. No more than two (2) rows of letters allowed.

d. Capital letters shall not exceed a height of eighteen (18) inches. Lower case letters shall not exceed a height of eighteen (18) inches. When using logos, logo size should not exceed twenty-four (24) inches. Two (2) rows of letters shall not exceed thirty-six (36) inches.

e. Major projecting signs shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet above adjacent grade and shall not project above the building parapet. Maximum sign projection beyond the building line should be thirty (30) inches at eight (8) feet above grade and a maximum of forty-eight (48) inches at fourteen (14) feet above grade. Projecting signs shall not exceed twenty-five (25) square feet and be no closer than fifteen (15) feet to another projecting sign, monument sign, or pylon sign.

f. Minor projecting signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in size and shall not project more than thirty (30) inches from the wall on which they are attached.

g. Pedestrian signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in size and shall not project more than thirty (30) inches from the wall on which they are attached. Internal illumination of pedestrian signs is prohibited.

h. Window signs shall be limited to permanent signs and shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the window area. Signage letters shall not exceed three (3) inches in height. Content of the sign is limited to the business name and address. No phone numbers are allowed.

i. Blade signs shall be mounted a minimum of eight (8) feet above grade and project no more than thirty (30) inches.

j. A one (1) foot by two (2) foot sign listing the business is permitted on live/work units. All other signage is not allowed, including signage on the inside of the units which may be viewed through the front windows.

k. Awning signs shall be kept to a minimum size and be limited to the valence of the awning. Area of awning sign shall be calculated with total sign area.

l. Wall-mounted signage should be centered above storefront. Signage width should not exceed seventy-five (75) percent of leasehold frontage.

m. The sign area of a monument sign shall not exceed one and one-half (1.5) square feet per each foot of street frontage. Sign placement shall not exceed a maximum of one (1) per every one hundred fifty (150) linear feet of street frontage. Signs shall be located at least seven and one-half (7-1/2) feet from interior lot lines. Monument signs shall be a maximum of eight (8) feet high, with a maximum eighteen (18) inch base, and should not be a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic. Sign content shall be limited to shopping center name and name of tenant (no more than two (2) rows of letters).

n. Any deviations from the standards may be considered by the Planning Commission pursuant to an approved sign program.

2. Prohibited Signs. The following signs are prohibited:

a. Internally illuminated sign cabinets with a rectangular form.

b. Use of human beings, live animals, animated figures.

c. Pennants, streamers, flashing blinking lights or moveable signs (electric or manual).

d. Sign promoting products sold at other locations.

e. Pole of pylon signs.

f. Exposed raceway.

3. Temporary Signs.

a. Banners, permits and other similar temporary signage placed on the exterior of the building are generally prohibited, although they may be permitted at the opening of a new business, or for special events with prior approval of the Planning Division.

G. Walls.

1. Standards.

a. All perimeter walls shall be placed directly on the property line.

b. All perimeter walls are to be constructed out of masonry (stone, block, brick) with stucco finish.

c. All perimeter walls are to be articulated via pilasters, reveals, or other elements at a maximum of thirty (30) foot intervals.

H. Other.

1. Standards.

a. Trash and recycling areas shall be provided in accordance with Part 6, Division 4 (Trash and Recycling Areas) of this Chapter.

b. Nonresidential development shall comply with Part 6, Division 5 (Transportation Demand and Trip Reduction Measures) of this Chapter.

c. Exclusively residential development and the residential portion of mixed-use developments shall be in conformance with the requirements set forth in CMC 9128.11 (Intent and Purpose), 9128.13 (Application for a Conditional Use Permit), 9128.17 (Declaration of Covenants – Conditions and Restrictions), 9128.51 (Multiple-Family Dwelling), 9128.53 (Application for Conditional Use Permit) and 9128.55 (Development Criteria).

d. Residential uses shall be permitted pursuant to the development standards established by CMC 9128.15 and 9128.54 except as modified in this Section.

I. Live/Work Criteria. The purpose of this Subsection is to provide standards for live/work units. Live/work units are intended to be occupied by business operators who live in the same structure that contains the commercial activity. The Planning Commission during the conditional use permit process may impose additional conditions as deemed necessary to protect public health, safety and welfare. The development standards for live/work units are mandatory.

1. Development Standards.

a. Each live/work unit shall front on a public or private street and the work area shall be located at street level.

b. Each unit shall have a pedestrian-oriented frontage.

c. The living space within the live/work unit shall be contiguous with, and an integral part of, the working space, with direct access between the two (2) areas and not a separate stand-alone dwelling unit. The residential unit shall not have a separate street address from the business component.

d. The live/work unit shall be occupied and used only by a business operator and/or household of which at least one (1) member shall be the business operator.

e. The living space shall not be rented or sold separately from the working space.

f. One (1) employee, at any time, who does not reside in the unit may work in the unit, unless this employment is prohibited or limited by the conditional use permit.

g. Other than a sign as permitted by this Section, in no way shall the appearance of the structure be altered, or the conduct of the use within the structure be such that the structure may be recognized as serving a nonresidential use (either by color, materials, construction, lighting, odors, noises, vibrations, etc.).

h. The retail use shall be limited to the display and sale of works created in the unit.

i. A commercial business license shall be obtained.

j. A copy of the conditional use permit, showing the conditions of the use permit, shall be provided to all occupants of live/work units in the building prior to their execution of a lease or purchase agreement for such live/work unit.

k. Work space shall be limited to the first floor of the building. Living space shall be located in the rear ground level or upper floors so that it does not interrupt the appearance of the commercial frontage.

l. The designated work space cannot be used for residential living space other than a home office.

m. There shall be no storage of flammable liquids or hazardous materials beyond that normally associated with a residential use. Storage of flammable liquids and hazardous materials beyond that normally associated with a residential use, such as for an artist studio, shall be allowed only through an approved conditional use permit and approval from the Los Angeles County Fire Department and Building Official.

2. Performance Standards. These performance standards shall apply to all live/work units.

a. Noise. Noise resulting from conduct of the work within the unit shall be muffled so as not to become disruptive to surrounding neighborhoods due to volume, tone, intermittence, frequency or shrillness.

b. Odor. Every use shall be operated in such a manner that it does not emit an obnoxious odor or fumes beyond the working unit/area.

c. Smoke. Every use shall be operated in such a manner that it does not emit smoke into the atmosphere.

d. Dust and Dirt. Every use shall be operated in such a manner that it does not emit any dust or dirt into the atmosphere.

3. The following findings must be made when approving a conditional use permit for live/work units.

a. The proposed use at the location requested will not significantly cause an adverse effect to the health, safety or welfare of persons residing or working in the surrounding area; or

b. The proposed site is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the yards, open space, walls, fences, parking, landscaping and other development requirements as required to integrate the use with existing and planned uses in the surrounding area; and

c. The proposed site is adequately served by highways and streets of sufficient width and improved as necessary to carry the kind and quantity of traffic such use would generate, and by other public and private service facilities as required.

d. The living and working areas are not separately rented.

J. Design Guidelines and Sustainable Standards. The purpose of the guidelines is to establish the parameters of sustainable design, provide an opportunity to incorporate the principles of sustainable design into a concentrated area of development, where they can be implemented in a consistent and coordinated manner. The sustainable guidelines shall serve as best practices recommendations for all new development within the Sepulveda Boulevard Corridor. These guidelines are intended to promote a more sustainable built environment through specific design and construction techniques. Guidelines, unlike standards, are not mandatory.

All projects within the Mixed-Use – Sepulveda Boulevard District are recommended to incorporate the following guidelines and are subject to City review and approval.

1. Site Design/Development.

a. Encourage rehabilitation of damaged sites due to environmental contamination.

b. Cluster buildings to promote higher density communities and greater opportunities for energy-efficient designs.

c. Site buildings to take advantage of solar orientation, minimize energy use and to increase potential for alternative energy sources.

d. Increase porous paving to minimize stormwater/runoff impact on surrounding environment.

e. Minimize uplighting and reduce site lighting requirements to be one (1) foot-candle per square foot to lower the amount of light that spills across the site.

f. There should be a minimum number of curb cuts provided which are no wider than necessary to serve the project.

g. Enhanced paving should be provided at all driveways.

h. Vehicular access should be from the alley whenever feasible.

i. Provide pedestrian access connecting rear parking lots to street when possible.

j. Parking lots should be placed at the rear and sides of new retail development to establish a consistent building frontage line along Sepulveda Boulevard.

k. New points of ingress and egress to public or private parking lots should be from side streets or alleys whenever possible. Driveways onto Sepulveda Boulevard should be combined to serve two (2) or more properties whenever possible.

l. Provide continuous enhanced paving at pedestrian areas adjoining one (1) or more developments and all driveway areas.

m. All new developments over twenty thousand (20,000) square feet should incorporate a public arts component equal to at least one (1) percent of the total project costs.

n. Primary ground floor building entrances should front the public right-of-way. Secondary entrances are permitted when parking is located to the side or rear of building. The main entrance should be clearly identified and directly accessible from the public right-of-way.

2. Building Composition/Architecture.

a. Orient longer side of building on an east-west axis to maximize solar heat gain.

b. Shape buildings to maximize effects of local wind condition and circulate breezes.

c. Specify light colored or reflective colors and materials to minimize heat gain.

d. Specify windows and glazing systems with high R-values and e-coatings to minimize heat gain and loss.

e. Provide roof overhangs, awnings, canopies, porches, or blinds to prevent unwanted solar heat gain.

f. Provide natural lighting opportunities through the use of skylights, lightshelves, lightwells, clerestories, and windows.

g. Specify materials that are either made from recycled content or are reused from previous construction.

h. Specify materials that do not contain formaldehyde, organic solvents, VOCs and chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs).

i. Entries shall be enhanced through architectural treatment such as tiling, individual awnings, or placement of signs above the entryways.

j. Recess storefront bays on new buildings at least three (3) inches from the front plane of the building. Encourage retention of recessed storefront remodel.

k. Wall openings (windows and doors) shall occupy a minimum of seventy (70) percent of the ground floor street facade in commercial units. Opaque or dark-tinted glass is strongly discouraged.

l. Doors and windows for retail shops shall contain seventy (70) percent clear glass (ninety (90) percent light transmission). Solid doors, or doors with opaque or dark-tinted glass, are strongly discouraged.

m. Each floor above the ground floor shall have a minimum of two (2) windows.

n. Storefront windows shall be a minimum of eighteen (18) inches and a maximum of thirty-six (36) inches from the sidewalk grade to accommodate a traditional bulkhead.

o. Upper-floor windows should have a greater height-to-width ratio.

p. Skylights, clerestories and transom windows should be incorporated into the building where possible to allow for maximum amount of daylight.

q. If awnings are used, each structural bay should have an individual awning. One (1) unified awning spanning several bays shall be prohibited. Awning shape should relate to the shape of the window and door openings.

r. Awnings should be constructed of canvas with metal or wood frames.

s. Wall-mounted signage shall be centered above storefront.

t. Buildings should be designed with a variety of scales, creating a scale and level of detail that addresses the pedestrians at street level and the formal conditions of the upper floors.

u. New development should consider the roof lines of adjacent buildings to avoid clashes in scale, proportion, style and materials.

v. Roof pitches that create prominent or out-of-scale building elements, such as A-frame roofs, geodesic domes, or chalet-style buildings, are strongly discouraged.

w. The use of exterior paint should be limited to four (4) different colors per building. Use of fluorescent colors is strongly discouraged.

x. Use of wood, metal, vinyl, and heavily textured stucco as primary exterior building materials is strongly discouraged. Wood and metal may be used for door frames, window frames and other accent uses. Permitted exterior materials for storefront bulkheads should be tile, brick or stucco.

y. Facades should be varied via elements such as windows, fenestrations, cornices, etc., to create visual interest, variety and emphasis. Long, repetitive expanses of wall surfaces should be avoided. Vertical and horizontal design elements should be incorporated to balance the facade composition.

z. Exterior security grills or permanently affixed security bars are strongly discouraged. Roll-down security grills that conceal storefront windows are strongly discouraged. Interior security grills must recess completely into pockets that conceal the grill when it is retracted. Roll-down security grills and housings must be completely concealed from the street by awnings or canopies. Security grills should not be visible during hours of operation.

3. Conservation.

a. Consider offsetting energy costs through alternative energy sources such as photovoltaics, wind power, water power, geothermal, bio-gas, or co-generation plants.

b. Specify lighting fixtures, plumbing fixtures, and appliances that minimize energy and water consumption (i.e., fluorescent lights, daylight sensors, low-flow toilet fixtures, automatic faucets, natural gas appliances).

c. Institute recycling programs for facilities and provide recycling locations within developments to collect materials.

4. Public Improvements.

a. Minimize amounts of impervious surfaces to reduce stormwater runoff and reduce heat islands through use of landscaping, permeable paving and high-albedo concrete.

b. Provide pedestrian-scaled pole lighting with a minimum of one (1) foot-candle in all public areas.

5. Landscape.

a. Protect the native topsoil during construction, so it can support the future landscape, reduce stormwater runoff, reduce fertilizer and pesticide use, and conserve irrigation water.

b. Minimize disruption of existing plants, especially trees. Existing mature trees and shrubs should be incorporated into the site plan when possible.

c. Landscape to reduce energy use by shading buildings and parking lots during hot summer months and to allow for heat gain in the winter, as well as enhancing natural ventilation by directing breezes and blocking wind.

d. Design landscape to allow irrigation and stormwater to soak into the soil recharging groundwater systems and filter out pollutants. Reduce runoff, erosion and pesticide use during construction and operation to protect water quality.

e. Minimize waste by reducing the need to prune by selecting appropriate plants and using plant trimmings as mulch and compost.

f. Use salvaged and recycled content materials in the landscape.

g. Accent planting should be used at all driveways and pedestrian entries to the property, marking appropriate entryways. Accent planting should consist of low ground cover and flowering plants.

6. Signs.

a. Signs may use any of the building colors plus three (3) additional colors. Signs must use at least one (1) building color.

b. It is recommended that signs have internally illuminated letters on a raceway (channel letters), neon letters, and externally illuminated letters mounted to facade or canopy, internally and externally illuminated projecting signs, sign cabinets with distinctive curvilinear form.

c. Internally illuminated sign cabinets with a rectangular form are strongly discouraged. (Ord. 07-1392, § 9; Ord. 09-1419, § 5; Ord. 11-1479, § 13)

9138.19 Discount Stores.
A. Use Classification. Retail establishments that sell a broad range of outlet, close-out, discontinued, liquidation, or overstock and general merchandise, primarily at a single discount price and/or in the low and very low price ranges.

B. Minimum Lot Area. Discount stores shall not be permitted on lots less than six (6) acres of net area.

C. Minimum Separation Requirement. New discount stores shall not be less than one-half (1/2) mile from an existing discount store.

D. Hours of Operation. Business hours, including truck loading hours, shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., seven (7) days a week.

E. Parking Requirement. One (1) space per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area. (Ord. 16-1603, § 3)

9138.2 Vehicle Service and Repair.
The servicing and repair of motor vehicles in the commercial zones at establishments other than retail petroleum outlets* shall be subject to the following:

1. Vehicle repair and service located within one hundred (100) feet of any residential zone, as measured from lot line to lot line, shall be subject to the approval of a Conditional Use Permit by the Planning Commission pursuant to CMC 9172.21. Within the CR (Commercial, Regional) Zone and MUR (Mixed-Use Residential) Overlay District, a Conditional Use Permit is required regardless of the one hundred (100) foot distance requirement.

a. Lawfully established automotive repair facilities on property fronting Avalon Boulevard and located within the CA Zone shall discontinue operations on or before July 1, 2017.

Ability to comply with CMC 9138.15** and 9138.2**.

2. All operations shall be conducted within an enclosed building.

3. All areas or structures in which such operations are conducted shall be so located or soundproofed as to prevent annoyance or detriment to surrounding property. In no case shall doors or windows be permitted in any wall within one hundred (100) feet of and facing a residential zone.

4. All damaged or wrecked vehicles awaiting repair shall be effectively screened so as not to be visible from surrounding property or from any adjoining public street or walkway.

5. All repair activities shall be confined to the hours between 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. daily.

6. No damaged or wrecked vehicles shall be stored for purposes other than repair and shall not constitute a vehicle wrecking, dismantling, or impounding yard, or junk or salvage yard.

7. Dismantling of vehicles for purposes other than repair is prohibited.

8. All display and storage shall be located within an enclosed building. Vehicles awaiting service may be parked in an unenclosed area for a period not to exceed seventy-two (72) hours. Vending machines shall be placed indoors.

9. The entire ground area of the site, except building and planting areas, shall be paved with asphaltic compound or concrete to City standards and shall comply with the Standard Urban Storm Water Mitigation Plan (SUSMP) requirements as stated in Article V, Sanitation and Health, Chapter 8, Storm Water and Urban Runoff Pollution Control, Section 5809 of the Carson Municipal Code.

10. Design a repair/maintenance bay drainage system to capture all washwater, leaks and spills. Connect drains to sump for collection and disposal or connect to clarifier then sanitary sewer.

11. That development and architectural plans indicating compliance with the provisions of this Section and embodying acceptable design standards shall be submitted for approval by the Planning Division and made a condition of an approved Conditional Use Permit.

12. All entrances to restrooms shall be located within the building in such a manner as not to be visible from adjacent property.

13. Parking shall be provided as follows:

a. One (1) automobile parking space shall be provided for each employee on the largest shift.

b. Two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for each service bay.

c. Spaces are to be striped and provided, as deemed necessary, with bumper guards or wheel stops approved by the Planning Division.

d. Vehicles may only be parked in designated parking spaces.

e. Parking for all other uses shall comply with CMC 9162.21.

14. That landscaping shall be provided as follows:

a. Landscaped planters shall be provided along the full length of building facades facing streets or public parking areas.

b. All landscaped areas shall be protected by a curb not less than six (6) inches in height or a raised planter wall between the landscaping and paved areas.

c. Landscaped planters not less than three (3) feet in width shall be provided along all interior lot lines.

d. Landscaping shall consist of trees of at least twenty-four (24) inch box, shrubs of at least five (5) gallon size, and suitable ground cover.

e. All landscaped areas shall be properly maintained in a neat, orderly and safe manner. Such landscaping and maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, the installation and use of an irrigation system, permanently and completely installed, which delivers water directly to all landscaped areas.

15. A solid decorative masonry wall or wrought iron fencing with appropriate landscaping or other such appropriate screening material to the discretion of the Director, six (6) feet in height shall be installed and maintained along interior property lines not occupied by a building, except that any screening located within the required front setback area shall not exceed three and one-half (3-1/2) feet in height.

16. That the requirements and limitations contained in this Section shall be considered minimum standards; provided, however, that the Planning Commission may:

a. Require such additional conditions as are deemed necessary within the intent of CMC 9172.21(D); or

b. Modify such requirements or limitations contained herein which, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, are inappropriate or inapplicable either to the intended use of the property, to the property itself or to adjacent property.

17. Signage shall be of appropriate design as approved pursuant to the Site Plan and Design Review procedures (including number of signs and sign structures to be permitted) as provided in CMC 9172.23. (Ord. 79-479, § 7; Ord. 04-1322, § 7; Ord. 11-1473, § 4)

*For servicing and repair incidental to a retail petroleum outlet, see CMC 9138.11.

**Lawfully established automotive repair facilities on property fronting Avalon Boulevard and located within the CA Zone shall discontinue operations on or before July 1, 2017.

9138.21 Vehicle Auctions.
In connection with vehicle auctions, the following requirements shall be met:

1. Vehicle auctions may not be conducted on any property of less than five (5) acres.

2. The vehicles placed up for auction must be operable under their own power to and from the subject auction site. No dismantled or wrecked vehicles are allowed to be stored or repaired and be placed up for auction.

3. Vehicle auctions shall provide off-street parking based upon a place of public assembly, pursuant to CMC 9162.21(C)(l) or based upon approval of a Development Plan pursuant to CMC 9172.23.

4. Vehicle service and repair may be permitted as an accessory use, subject to CMC 9132.2 of this Chapter. (See CMC 9133 for CR zone, MUR Overlay District and properties in all zones within one hundred (100) feet of residential zones).

5. All activities not conducted within an enclosed building shall be confined to the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. daily.

6. No loudspeakers or sound equipment shall be used for the amplification of voices or sounds to a level exceeding allowable noise control standards pursuant to Chapter 5, Article V, entitled Noise Control Ordinance of the Carson Municipal Code.

7. In the CA zone, automotive and equipment auctions are only permitted on property fronting Avalon Boulevard with an approved conditional use permit. Lawfully established automotive and equipment auctions in the CA zone shall cease operations and discontinue business on or before July 1, 2017. After that date, no new auctions are permitted in the CA zone. (Ord. 96-1085, § 3; Ord. 04-1322, § 6; Ord. 11-1480, § 4)

9138.22 Church Uses within the CR (Commercial, Regional) Zone.
The establishment of churches, temples or other places of religious worship are a permitted use within the CR (Commercial, Regional) Zone, subject to the following:

1. The principal building shall be a free-standing structure for the exclusive use of a church, temple or other place of religious worship and permitted accessory uses.

2. No accessory use shall be permitted other than a school, daycare center or church-affiliated community or social center. No accessory use and/or facility shall be permitted unless it is clearly subordinate to the principal church use.

3. Church uses shall be subject to the requirements of CMC 9172.23 (Site Plan and Design Review) and CMC 9182.25 (Continuation of

Churches, Temples or Other Places of Religious Worship Located within the CR (Commercial, Regional) Zone). (Ord. 97-1115, § 2)

9138.3 Golf Facilities.
In connection with golf facilities including golf courses, golf driving ranges, or pitch-and-putt courses, the following requirements shall be met:

Screens or nets shall be provided wherever necessary, as determined by the Director, to prevent the travel of golf balls beyond the lot lines of the site on which a golf facility is located.

Such screens or nets shall be continuously maintained so as not to fall into disrepair and shall be subject to the applicable height restrictions unless otherwise approved by the Director.

The entire site of the golf facility, or other than paved areas and land occupied by structures, shall be covered with turf or other landscaping.

9138.4 Arcade Facilities.
In connection with the operation of an arcade, the following requirements shall be met:

(1) All activities shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building.

(2) The arcade shall comply with the provisions of CMC 63106 through 63107.3.

In addition to the above requirements, arcades not in lawful existence on January 3, 1983, must comply with the following requirements.

(3) Interior walls of an arcade, if in common with another business establishment, shall be soundproofed to a minimum rating of 50 STC (Sound Transmission Class).

(4) A minimum of one (1) bicycle rack space shall be provided for every three (3) amusement machines. Such bicycle parking shall not be located in the public right-of-way or the required parking area. (Ord. 83-637U, § 4; Ord. 83-644U; Ord. 83-665U; Ord. 84-685, § 4)

9138.5 Alcoholic Beverage Sales and Services.
In connection with alcoholic beverage sales and services, the following requirements shall be met:

After the effective date of Ordinance No. 01-1231, no off-sale business (incidental) shall be established within three hundred (300) feet of any school or park, and no off-sale business (primary) shall be established within three hundred (300) feet of any school, park or church. The distances set forth in the preceding sentence shall be determined by measuring from lot line to lot line.

The total number of on-sale businesses shall not exceed eighty-five (85).

The total number of off-sale businesses shall not exceed seventy (70). (Ord. 82-621, § 3; Ord. 83-657, § 1; Ord. 01-1231, § 2)

9138.6 Small Collection Recycling Facility.
A small collection recycling facility is permitted only in a designated convenience district as defined in CMC 9191.508. No small collection recycling facility shall be established, maintained or enlarged in any zone unless it complies with the following requirements:

A. Shall be permitted only within a designated convenience district as defined in CMC 9191.508, and shall be certified, or shall have applied to be certified, as a recycling location pursuant to Division 12.1 (commencing with Section 14500) of the Public Resources Code;

B. Shall be permitted only as an accessory use to an existing primary commercial use;

C. Shall contain not more than one (1) type of collection facility as described in CMC 9191.508(B), which shall be located on the site in such a manner as not to obstruct pedestrian, automobile or truck circulation;

D. Shall not occupy parking spaces required by the primary commercial use;

E. Shall be designated on a site plan to be submitted and approved in accordance with CMC 9172.23;

F. Shall not occupy any portion of a front setback or any setback which abuts an existing or future public right-of-way;

G. Shall be landscaped to the satisfaction of the Community Development Director;

H. Shall not occupy an area in excess of five hundred (500) square feet, including any protective enclosure; provided, however, that a small collection recycling facility consisting of one (1) single-feed reverse vending machine shall not occupy an area in excess of fifty (50) square feet, including any protective enclosure, and shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height;

I. Shall be constructed with durable waterproof and rustproof material and shall be maintained at all times in a clean, litter-free condition;

J. Shall observe the hours of operation of the primary commercial use;

K. Shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material to be deposited, the operating instructions, and the identity and telephone number of a responsible person to call if the facility is inoperative. The signage on any reverse vending machine shall not exceed four (4) square feet, exclusive of the operating instructions;

L. Shall be adequately illuminated to ensure public safety;

M. Shall accept only recyclable materials as defined in CMC 9191.508;

N. Shall provide for storage of all recyclable materials within the facility at all times; and

O. Shall not operate at noise levels in excess of sixty (60) dBA as measured at the property line of any adjacent residentially zoned property. (Ord. 87-819, § 2; Ord. 95-1070, § 1)

9138.7 Mixed-Use or Residential Development in a Mixed-Use Residential (MUR) Overlay District.
A. Purpose. The Mixed-Use Residential Overlay District (MUR) is intended:

To encourage a diversity of compatible land uses, which may include a mixture of office, retail sales and services, food sales and services, education, health services, multiple-family residential, residential condominiums, and recreational uses.

To promote a diverse economic base that serves local residents by providing jobs and City revenues.

To assist in improving the quality and quantity of housing available to meet the need of all social and economic groups within the community by encouraging new residential and mixed-use developments in planned locations with appropriate densities, heights, building massing, site planning, architectural design and mixture of uses.

To achieve pedestrian-oriented development by encouraging pedestrian access, building entries that face and engage the street, design on a human scale, parking management to reduce the prominence of parking lots and development clustered along major corridors served by public transportation.

To achieve harmony between each development and the surrounding community through flexibility in architectural design and site planning.

To create a balance in the use of land which is conducive to a higher quality of life and environment for residents, businesses and employees.

B. Minimum Lot Size for Development. The minimum lot size for mixed-use development shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. The minimum lot size for exclusively residential development shall be thirty thousand (30,000) square feet.

C. Minimum Street Frontage. The minimum street frontage for mixed-use or residential development shall be one hundred (100) feet.

D. Floor Area Ratio (FAR). The maximum floor area ratio of mixed-use or residential development shall be 1.5. If area for commercial uses is provided within a building or structure intended for mixed-use occupancy, a minimum of 0.15 FAR and a maximum of 0.7 FAR shall be devoted for commercial uses. For the purposes of this Section, the area of subterranean parking garages shall not be included in the FAR calculation, and the area of partially subterranean parking garages shall be calculated at fifty (50) percent of the gross floor area. Deviations from the minimum or maximum commercial FAR may be allowed subject to the approval of a Development Plan by the Planning Commission pursuant to CMC 9172.23 (Site Plan and Design Review) if the project includes affordable housing opportunities as defined by this Chapter.

E. Vehicular Access, Maneuvering Areas and Parking Spaces. Vehicular access, maneuvering areas and parking spaces shall be in accordance with all applicable provisions of this Chapter. In conjunction with mixed-use developments, parking for residential uses, except guest parking, shall be secured from general public access and shall be separate from off-street parking devoted for commercial uses. Separate secure pedestrian access shall be provided from the parking areas devoted for residential uses to secure areas directly accessible from the units.

Parking spaces devoted for residential purposes either in a mixed-use development or exclusively residential development may be provided in a common covered garage above, below or at grade level subject to the review and approval of a Development Plan by the Planning Commission pursuant to CMC 9172.23 (Site Plan and Design Review). Deviations from the parking requirements may be authorized subject to approval of a Development Plan by the Planning Commission pursuant to CMC 9172.23 (Site Plan and Design Review) if the project includes affordable housing opportunities as defined by this Chapter.

Tandem parking may be used to satisfy minimum parking requirements for residential portions of a mixed-use development or for an exclusively residential development provided that all of the following conditions are met:

1. Both tandem spaces shall be assigned to the same unit.

2. Parking for no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the units shall be accommodated by tandem spaces.

3. Two (2) parking spaces in tandem shall have a combined minimum dimension of nine (9) feet by thirty-six (36) feet.

4. The use of tandem parking shall be approved by the Director of Engineering Services.

F. Residential Design Standards. Exclusively residential developments and the residential portions of mixed-use developments shall be in conformance with the requirements set forth in CMC 9128.11 (Intent and Purpose), 9128.13 (Application for a Conditional Use Permit), 9128.14 (Development Policy), 9128.16 (Development Criteria), 9128.17 (Declaration of Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions), 9128.51 (Multiple-Family Dwellings), 9128.53 (Application for a Conditional Use Permit), and 9128.55 (Development Criteria).

Residential uses shall be permitted pursuant to the development standards established by CMC 9128.15 and 9128.54 except as modified as follows:

1. Private Open Space. A reduction in the amount of private open space may be authorized subject to the review and approval of a Development Plan by the Planning Commission pursuant to CMC 9172.23 (Site Plan and Design Review).

2. Landscaping Requirements. All portions of setbacks not covered by permitted encroachments, pedestrian walkways, or driveways shall be landscaped. Open parking areas located at or above grade shall be landscaped in accordance with CMC 9162.52 (Landscaping Requirements). All landscaping shall be in compliance with the provisions of Division 8, Part 6 of this Chapter relating to water efficient landscaping. One (1) specimen size tree (thirty (30) inch box tree) shall be provided for each four (4) units. A reduction in the number of required specimen trees may be authorized subject to the review and approval of a Development Plan by the Planning Commission pursuant to CMC 9172.23 (Site Plan and Design Review).

3. Recreational Facilities. Recreational facilities shall be designated as that space suitably equipped and devoted to active or passive recreation for the exclusive use of the residents of a particular residential building or structure. An area equal to or greater than fifteen (15) percent of the gross floor area which is devoted for residential purposes shall be provided as private residential recreational space. Private residential recreational space may be located at ground level, on or above the residential plane, on rooftops, or within the building or structure; provided, that sixty (60) percent of the total of this space shall be open to the sky. (Added by Ord. 94-1039, § 12; Ord. 95-1074, §§ 2, 3)

9138.71 Outdoor Advertising Signs in an Electronic Marquee Signage (EMS) Overlay District.
A. Purpose. The Electronic Marquee Signage (EMS) Overlay District is intended to provide for the off-site advertisement, by means of electronic message center signs, of extraordinary attractions benefiting the City and of the sponsors of such attractions. To the extent the provisions of this Section conflict with any other provision of this Code, the provisions of this Section shall be controlling.

B. Permitted Use. Outdoor advertising signs that are permitted in the Electronic Marquee Signage (EMS) Overlay District.

C. Development Standards. The following development standards shall be applicable to outdoor advertising signs in the Electronic Marquee Signage (EMS) Overlay District:

1. Such sign shall be an electronic message center sign.

2. Such sign shall not exceed the following dimensions: a height of ninety-five (95) feet above freeway grade and a width of forty-six (46) feet.

3. A development plan for such sign shall be submitted and approved in accordance with subsection D of this Section and the Site Plan and Design Review procedure as provided in CMC 9172.23.

D. Development Plan Approval. The provisions of this paragraph shall supersede the provisions of CMC 9172.23 to the extent of any inconsistency. The Commission shall be an advisory agency and the Council shall be the approval authority for a development plan application for an outdoor advertising sign in the Electronic Marquee Signage (EMS) Overlay District.

The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the application and shall, by resolution, render its decision in the form of a recommendation to the Council. Failure of the Commission to render a decision within forty (40) days of the date the matter first appears on a Commission agenda for public hearing shall be deemed approval of the application. The Council shall hold a public hearing following the Commission’s decision and shall, by resolution, render its decision on the application. The decision of the Council shall be final.

E. Outdoor advertising signs established pursuant to this Section shall be subject to CMC 9167.6, except that the display on such signage of the names of companies which sell beer products, or the subsidiaries or divisions of such companies which sell beer products, shall be permitted on such outdoor advertising signage. (Ord. 02-1245, § 3)

9138.72 Sex Offender Residency Restrictions.
Permanent and temporary residence for a sex offender is permitted as an accessory use to a mobilehome or dwelling subject to the provisions of Chapter 15 of Article IV and CMC 9182.31. (Ord. 08-1413U, § 3; Ord. 08-1414U, § 3; Ord. 08-1413, § 3)

9138.8 Sidewalk, Parking Lot and Tent Sales and Special Events.
In connection with temporary sidewalk, parking lot, and tent sales, and special events, the following requirements shall be met:

A. Only nonprofit organizations and merchants with a permanent location may conduct such sales.

B. The applicant shall obtain written approval to conduct such sales from the property owner.

C. The event shall be conducted outside an enclosed building and shall not encroach upon public rights-of-way.

D. The applicant shall submit adequate plot plans depicting pedestrian and vehicular circulation, parking and fire lanes acceptable to the Planning Division.

E. In the case of a tent sale, County Fire Department approval must accompany the application.

F. Such sales shall be subject to prior approval of the Director.

G. Tent events for a period not to exceed three and one-half (3.5) months that are hosted by department stores or regional shopping centers with a gross floor area of at least one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet located in the CR zoning district and in a Mixed-Use Residential (MUR) overlay district may be approved by the Planning Manager; provided, that the event meets all the requirements for location, parking, and access. All other sidewalk, parking lot and tent sales, and special events shall occur no more than one (1) weekend in any three (3) month period, or similar time period as determined by the Planning Officer to be appropriate. (Ord. 88-857, § 4; Ord. 89-888, § 1; Ord. 09-1421, § 1; Ord. 11-1479, § 14)

9138.9 Adult Business.
In connection with an adult business, the following requirements shall be met:

A. Location Standards.

1. The use shall not be located on property that is either:

a. Within a project area of the Carson Redevelopment Agency and zoned Commercial General (CG); or

b. Within a mixed-use residential overlay district with mixed-use development located therein or improved with buildings or structures designed or intended for mixed-use occupancy.

2. The use shall not be located within a one thousand (1,000) foot radius of any of the following:

a. Another adult business;

b. A public or private element elementary or secondary school;

c. A public park; or

d. The Carson Civic Center, as such term is defined in CMC 9191.072.

3. The use shall not be located on any lot or parcel of land that has a front yard on the same or opposite side of the street as a lot or parcel of land that (1) is within the distance specified in the left column below, (2) is zoned or used for the purposes specified in the right column below, and (3) has a front yard abutting the same street:

Distance

Use

1,000 feet

A licensed day care center located in a commercial zone

500 feet

A church, temple or other place of religious worship

500 feet

A residence

4. For purposes of this Section, measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structure or objects, from the nearest property line of the property where an adult business is to be conducted to the nearest property line of the premises of any facility, use or business referenced above in subsections (A)(2) and (A)(3) of this Section.

5. The distance requirements applicable to the uses specified in subsections (A)(2) and (A)(3) of this Section shall not apply to any adult business located within a covered mall building provided that all customer access to the adult business is from the mall. As used in this subsection the terms “covered mall building” and “mall” are as defined in Section 5601(c) of the 1991 Edition of the Uniform Building Code.

B. Development and Performance Standards. Adult businesses shall comply with the following development and performance standards:

1. Advertisements, displays or other promotional materials depicting or describing “nude” or “semi-nude” persons, as defined in CMC 9191.411, or “specified sexual activities,” as defined in CMC 9191.621, or displaying instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with “specified sexual activities” shall not be shown or exhibited so as to be visible from other areas open to the general public.

2. All building openings, entries and windows for an adult business shall be located, covered or screened in such a manner as to prevent a view of instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with ten (10) specified sexual activities from any area open to the general public.

3. All entrances to an adult business shall be clearly and legibly posted by a notice indicating that minors are prohibited from entering the premises as to the extent such signs are required by state law.

4. All entrances, exits, vehicular parking spaces, and yard areas for the adult business shall be developed such that they are directly visible from the public right-of-way unless the access thereto is physically restricted to employees only.

5. No loudspeakers or sound equipment shall be used by an adult business for the amplification of sound to a level discernible by the public beyond the walls of the building in which the adult business is conducted.

C. Procedural Standards. Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 9172.21, the Commission shall hold a hearing on an application for a conditional use permit for an adult business within four (4) months of the date the application is deemed complete, and shall make a decision on the application within five (5) months of the date the application is deemed complete, unless an extension to these time limits is agreed to by the applicant.

D. Required Findings. Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 9172.21(d)(1), the Planning Commission shall approve a Conditional Use Permit for an adult business if the Commission is able to make affirmative findings based on all of the following criteria:

1. The proposed use and development are consistent with the General Plan and either comply with or are concurrently conditioned to comply with the location standards and development and performance standards set forth in this Section;

2. The proposed site is adequate in size, shape and topography to accommodate the proposed use, the amount of vehicular parking spaces, and other improvements required by this Code;

3. The proposed site has vehicular and pedestrian access to an improved roadway and the proposed use will not result in an unmitigated reduction in the level of service standard of traffic capacity on adjacent roadways; and

4. The proposed site and use will be in compliance with all other objective development requirements as set forth in Divisions 5 and 6 of Part 3 of Chapter I of Article IX of this Code and Part 6 of Chapter I of Article IX of this Code, to the extent such requirements are not in conflict with the provisions of this CMC 9138.9. (Added by Ord. 94-1035U, § 5; Ord. 94-1037, § 6)

9138.91 Massage Service.
A. Purpose and Intent.

1. The permit requirements and restrictions imposed by this Code are reasonably necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City of Carson.

2. The City of Carson is authorized, by virtue of the State Constitution, Sections 51030 et seq. of the Government Code, and Section 13 of the Chiropractic Act to regulate massage establishments by imposing, reasonable standards relative to the skill and experience of massage operators and massage technicians and reasonable conditions on the operation of massage establishments.

3. There is a significant risk of injury to massage clients by improperly trained and/or educated massage technicians, and this Code provides reasonable safeguards against injury and economic loss.

4. There is opportunity for acts of prostitution, lewdness, and other unlawful sexual activity to occur in massage establishments. Courts have long recognized massage as a pervasively regulated activity and that massage establishments are often brothels in disguise. The establishment of reasonable standards for issuance of permits and restrictions or operations would serve to reduce the risk of illegal activity and would thereby benefit the public health.

5. The restrictions and requirements contained in this Section are intended to reduce the burden on the Sheriff’s Department and the City of Carson Code Enforcement Division in the regulation of massage establishments.

6. The restrictions and requirements contained in this Section are intended to be in addition to the requirement of a valid business license and permit issued by the Business License Division or any license requirements imposed by the State or local agency.

7. The regulations and restrictions contained in this Code are intended to discourage massage establishments from degenerating into houses of prostitution, and the means utilized in this Code bear a reasonable and rational relationship to the goals sought to be achieved by the City of Carson as described in the General Plan.

B. Definitions. In addition to the definitions provided in CMC 63134 and for the purpose of this Section, the following definitions apply:

1. “Massage Establishment” means a fixed place of business where one or more persons engage in or carry on the practice of massage either as a principle or ancillary use. For the purpose of this Section, this definition shall not include those businesses that offer sexual stimulation or other adult-oriented activity in the guise of an establishment for therapeutic massage.

2. “Massage Parlor” means an establishment that provides massage service as its principle use. For the purpose of this Section, this definition shall not include those businesses that offer sexual stimulation or other adult-oriented activity in the guise of an establishment for therapeutic massage.

3. “Massage” or “Massage Service” means any method of pressure or acupressure on or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, or stimulating the external parts of the body with the hands or other parts of the body, with or without the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliances, or with or without supplementary aids such as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations commonly used in this practice. This definition includes the practice of Therapeutic Massage or Massage Therapy. For the purpose of this Section, “Massage” or “Massage Service” shall not apply to any duly licensed physician, surgeon, osteopath, chiropractor or to other persons duly licensed by the State to treat, manipulate, operate upon or prescribe for the persons or bodies of human beings and who are actually practicing said licensed profession or to graduate nurses, or to students of medicine, surgery, osteopathy, chiropractic or similar professional callings actually attending accredited schools.

4. “Massage Technician” or “Massage Practitioner” means any person, who, for any monetary form of consideration whatsoever, gives or administers to another person a massage as defined in this Section.

5. “Therapeutic Massage” or “Massage Therapy” means the practice of kneading or otherwise manipulating a person’s muscles and other soft tissue with the intent of improving a person’s well-being or health and preventing and alleviating pain, discomfort, muscle spasm, and stress.

C. Required Permits.

1. Conditional Use Permit.

a. Pursuant to CMC 9172.21, an application for a massage establishment shall be subject to the requirements of a Conditional Use Permit, unless otherwise specified herein. The Planning Commission has the authority to approve such Conditional Use Permit. Any facility used for massage service shall be available for City inspection subject to reasonable notice.

b. The City retains the right to inspect these massage establishments, at minimum on an annual basis, after issuance to ensure the owner’s continued compliance with the Conditional Use Permit. The cost of such inspection should be paid by operator pursuant to a fee set forth in the City’s fee schedule.

c. The Planning Commission retains the discretion to deny any application for a Conditional Use Permit where the massage establishment is within close proximity, as determined by the Planning Commission, to any adult business or establishment selling alcohol for on-site consumption, including bars and taverns.

2. Business License and Business Permit.

a. No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on, or permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in any location within the City, the business or operation of a massage establishment, and no person shall manage a massage establishment, without first obtaining a valid business license and permit issued by the City Business License Division.

b. Each establishment providing massage services in a massage parlor must additionally obtain a valid massage parlor permit in compliance with CMC 63134, regardless of whether such person has a valid business permit for a massage establishment. In addition, no operator and/or manager shall employ or allow any person to work in the establishment as a massage technician who does not have a valid massage technician permit issued by the City Business License Division.

3. Massage Technician Permit.

a. No person shall work as a massage technician in a massage establishment without first having obtained a valid massage technician permit in accordance with CMC 63135. A valid massage technician permit shall be required for any person who offers to, engages in, conducts, or provides massage services from any location within the City whether in the capacity of an employee or an independent contractor.

b. A massage technician permit does not automatically authorize the operation or management of a massage establishment. Any person permitted to perform massage services who desires to operate or manage a massage establishment must apply separately and obtain a business license and a massage service permit.

D. Exceptions.

1. In addition to the exceptions included in CMC 63134.4 and 63134.5, the required permits described in this Section shall not apply to, have no effect upon, and shall not be construed as applying to:

a. Any duly licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor, acupuncturist, osteopath, or physical therapist licensed to practice such specialized profession in the State of California.

b. Any registered nurse or licensed vocational nurse, licensed to practice under the laws of the State of California, who is an employee of and working under the direction of a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, or osteopath, duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the State of California. Practical nurses or other persons that do not meet the requisite qualifications for a massage technician, or any other person not otherwise licensed by the State of California, whether or not employed by physicians, surgeons, or chiropractors, osteopaths, acupuncturists, or physical therapists, may not provide massage or act as a massage technician.

c. Any person licensed to practice any healing art under the provisions commencing with Section 700 of the Business and Professions Code when engaging in such practice within the scope of such license.

d. Any person providing massages ancillary to a legitimate primary business which do not involve disrobing and are not administered in a room separate and apart from the legitimate primary business.

e. For the purpose of this Section, privacy panels and similar separation systems shall not constitute a separate room subject to the approval of the Planning Division. The massage activity pursuant to this paragraph shall be considered ancillary if it can be demonstrated that it does not comprise more than twenty-five (25) percent of the gross floor area of the overall business.

f. Hospitals, senior-citizen nursing homes, sanatoriums, or other health care facilities duly licensed by the State of California, and the employees of such facilities while working on the premises of such State-licensed facilities.

g. Accredited high schools, junior colleges, trade schools, and colleges or universities whose coaches and trainers are acting within the scope of their employment.

h. Barbers, beauticians, or manicurists who are duly licensed by the State of California pursuant to the Barbering and Cosmetology Act set forth in the Business and Professions Code Section 7300 et seq., as the same may be amended from time to time, while engaging in practices within the scope of such license, except that this exemption applies solely for the massaging of the back, neck, face, and/or scalp of the customer or client of said barber or beautician or, in the case of a licensed manicurist, the massaging of the forearms, hands, calves, and/or feet.

i. Schools of cosmetology or barbering which comply with the requirements of Business and Professions Code Section 7362 et seq. when instructors are acting within the scope of their employment or when students are working as unpaid externs pursuant to the requirements of Business and Professions Code Section 7395.1.

2. Any person claiming exemption under this Section shall furnish satisfactory evidence that he or she is entitled to such exemption, including, proof of bona fide employment, or if applicable, a citation or certification to the particular provision of the Business and Professions Code upon which that person relies. Any facility used for massage service shall be available for City inspection subject to reasonable notice. (Ord. 06-1349, § 3)

9138.92 Tattoo Service.
A. Purpose and Intent.

1. The permit requirements and restrictions imposed by this Section are reasonably necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City of Carson.

2. The restrictions and requirements contained in this Section are intended to reduce the burden on the Sheriff’s Department and the City of Carson Code Enforcement Division in the regulation of tattoo services.

3. The restrictions and requirements contained in this Section are intended to be in addition to the requirement of a valid business license issued by the Business License Division.

4. The regulations and restrictions contained in this Section are intended to bear a reasonable and rational relationship to the goals sought to be achieved by the City of Carson as described in the General Plan.

B. Definitions. For the purpose of this Section, the following definitions apply:

1. “Body Pierce” means to puncture, perforate, or penetrate a human body part or tissue with an object, appliance, or instrument for the purpose of placing a foreign object in the perforation to prevent the perforation from closing. The puncturing of the outer perimeter or lobe of the ear shall not be included in this definition.

2. “Tattoo” means an indelible mark or figure fixed upon a body by insertion of pigment under the skin or by production of scars.

3. “Tattoo Establishment” means premises used for the business of marking or coloring the skin with tattoos, and all furnishings, equipment, instruments, dyes and inks, and other facilities maintained therein incidental to such use.

4. “Tattoo Parlor” or “Tattoo Facility” – see “Tattoo Establishment.”

5. “Tattoo Service” means a business that provides tattoos to customers.

C. Required Registration and Permits.

1. Conditional Use Permit. Pursuant to CMC 9172.21, an application for tattoo service shall be subject to the requirements of a Conditional Use Permit, unless otherwise specified herein. The Planning Commission has the authority to approve such Conditional Use Permit.

2. Business License.

a. No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on, or permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in any location within the City, the business or operation of a tattoo establishment, and no person shall manage a tattoo establishment, without first obtaining a valid business license issued by the Business License Division.

b. Each person providing tattoo service in a tattoo establishment who is not a paid employee of said establishment, but is contracted or otherwise paid apart from the establishment, must obtain a separate business license. Paid employees of the establishment need not obtain a separate business license.

3. Registration. Every person conducting tattoo services, as defined in this Section, or desiring to conduct such activity, on or after the effective date of the ordinance, shall register with the Los Angeles County Health Department in compliance with applicable County codes.

4. Public Health Facility and Public Health Operator Permits.

a. Every person owning a tattoo establishment shall, within one (1) year of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Section and in compliance with CMC 9182.22(A), or prior to the operation of a tattoo establishment, obtain and maintain a valid public health facility permit in compliance with applicable County codes.

b. Every person conducting tattoo activity shall, within one (1) year of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Section and in compliance with CMC 9182.22(A), or prior to conducting any tattoo service, obtain and maintain a valid public health operator permit in compliance with applicable County codes.

D. Posting Requirements.

1. The public health facility permit issued to the owner of any facility operating as a tattoo establishment must be posted and exhibited at all times in an area that is visible to the public and clients of said establishment.

2. The public health operator permit issued to a person providing a tattoo service must be posted and exhibited at all times in an area that is visible to the public and clients of any tattoo establishment in which tattoo services are provided.

3. Every person registered with the department shall at all times prominently post the certificate of registration adjacent to his or her workstation in an area that is readily visible to clients from that location.

E. Communicable Disease Control. If the City of Los Angeles County Health Department has reasonable cause to suspect a communicable disease is, or may be, transmitted by any person conducting activities regulated by this Section, or by any use of contaminated equipment, or by other unsanitary or unsafe conditions which may adversely impact the public health and safety, the City of County Health Department may do any or all of the following:

1. Issue an order excluding from the permitted tattoo establishment any person responsible for transmitting a communicable disease, or reasonably believed to be responsible for transmitting a communicable disease, or reasonably believed to pose a substantial risk of transmitting a communicable disease, until the City or Los Angeles County Health Department determines there is no further risk to the public health and safety.

2. Issue an order to immediately suspend the public health facility permit issued to the owner of the tattoo establishment until the City or Los Angeles County Health Department determines there is no further risk to the public health and safety.

3. Issue an order to an owner, an employee or a client of a tattoo establishment, to provide information reasonably deemed necessary to prevent the spread of communicable disease.

F. Inspections. Any and all tattoo establishments shall permit City officers, including code compliance officers, to inspect any premises providing tattoo services for compliance with applicable codes.

G. Violation and Noncompliance.

1. Penalty. Any person who operates a tattoo establishment in violation of this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000, imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or both.

2. Injunctive Relief. Any act or failure to act which is a violation of this Section may be the subject of a civil action to enjoin the person so acting or failing to act to conform his or her conduct to the provisions of this Code. The filing and prosecution of such an action shall, in no way, limit the authority or ability to impose other requirements of this Section or penalties enumerated hereunder.

3. Owner Responsibility. The owner of a tattoo establishment is responsible for any violation by any person who does any tattoo service with the owner’s consent, or in the owner’s tattoo establishment, whether such person is an employee or a tattoo technician independent operator. Any such tattoo activity done with the owner’s actual or constructive knowledge is presumed to be done with the owner’s consent.

H. Exceptions.

1. The required permits described in this Section shall not apply to, have no effect upon, and shall not be construed as applying to the application of permanent make-up or cosmetic reconstruction applied by a licensed practitioner, licensed cosmetician, or licensed electrologist as defined in the California Business and Professions Code, and has received additional training in the procedures, practices and techniques of permanent make-up application and cosmetic reconstruction.

2. Any person claiming exemption under this Section shall furnish satisfactory evidence that he or she is entitled to such exemption, including proof of bona fide employment, or if applicable, a citation or certification to the particular provision of the Business and Professions Code upon which that person relies.

3. A person who exclusively engages in the piercing of the leading edge or earlobe of the ear shall be exempt from the permitting and registration requirements of this Section, provided he or she does the following:

a. Performs the procedure through the use of an approved ear perforating mechanical device to force the single-use stud or single-use needle through the tissue of the ear; and

b. Utilizes a sterile, disposable, single-use stud or single-use solid needle.

I. Severability. If any provision of this Section or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the Section or the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 06-1349, § 4)

PART 4. INDUSTRIAL ZONES
Sections:

Division 1. Uses Permitted

§ 9141.1    Uses Permitted.

§ 9141.12    Uses Permitted on Organic Refuse Landfill Sites.

§ 9141.2    Interpretation of Uses Permitted.

§ 9141.3    Prohibited Uses.

Division 2. Accessory Uses

§ 9142    Accessory Uses.

§ 9142.1    Accessory Uses of Division 2, Part 3 Permitted.

Division 3. Conditional Use Criteria

§ 9143    Conditional Use Criteria.

Division 4. (Reserved)

Division 5. Site Requirements

§ 9145.1    Applicability.

§ 9145.2    Minimum Lot Area.

§ 9145.3    Street Frontage and Access.

§ 9145.4    Minimum Lot Width.

Division 6. Site Development Standards

Buildings and Structures

§ 9146.11    Reserved.

§ 9146.12    Height of Buildings and Structure.

Yards and Open Spaces

§ 9146.21    Reserved.

§ 9146.22    Future Rights-of-Way.

§ 9146.23    Front Yard.

§ 9146.24    Side Yards.

§ 9146.25    Rear Yard.

§ 9146.26    Reserved.

§ 9146.27    Space Between Buildings.

§ 9146.28    Reserved.

§ 9146.29    Encroachments.

Other Site Development Standards

§ 9146.3    Fences, Walls and Hedges.

§ 9146.4    Trash Areas.

§ 9146.5    Reserved.

§ 9146.6    Parking, Loading, Truck Maneuvering and Driveways.

§ 9146.7    Signs.

§ 9146.8    Utilities.

§ 9146.9    Site Planning and Design.

Division 7. Environmental Effects

§ 9147.1    Exterior Lighting.

§ 9147.2    Performance Standards.

§ 9147.3    Hours of Operation.

Division 8. Special Requirements for Certain Uses

§ 9148.1    Vehicle Dismantling Yards, Junk and Salvage Yards, Vehicle Impounding Yards.

§ 9148.2    Reserved.

§ 9148.3    Reserved.

§ 9148.4    Large Collection Recycling Facility.

§ 9148.5    Processing Facility for Recyclables.

§ 9148.6    Cargo Container Storage Facilities.

§ 9148.7    Sidewalk, Parking Lot and Tent Sales.

§ 9148.8    Truck-Related Uses Located Less than One Hundred (100) Feet from a Residential Zone.

§ 9148.9    Truck Terminal and Truck Yard Facilities.

§ 9148.10    Emergency Shelters.

Division 1. Uses Permitted
9141.1 Uses Permitted.
Uses are permitted in the industrial zones as indicated in the following table:

USES PERMITTED IN INDUSTRIAL ZONES

Legend

X.

Automatically permitted use.

L.

Automatically permitted use provided special limitations and requirements are satisfied as noted herein, in Division 8 of this Part and in Division 8 of Part 3.

D.

Use permitted subject to the approval of the Director.

LD.

Use permitted provided special limitations and requirements are satisfied as noted herein, in Division 8 of Part 2, and subject to the approval of the Director.

C.

Use permitted upon approval of a conditional use permit.

CC.

Use permitted upon approval of the City Council as prescribed under other provisions of the Carson Municipal Code.

 

All commercial uses permitted by this part shall be subject to the requirements contained in CMC 9172.23, Site Plan and Design Review, except temporary uses. (See CMC 9131.1.) (Ord. 84-704)

DA.

Use permitted upon approval of a development agreement by the City Council subject to the requirements contained in Chapter 15 of Article VI.

Note: In the following list, industrial activities are classified by product, by materials used, by use, and by processes employed. Since many industrial uses are complex in nature, it is necessary to consider all of the above-mentioned elements in classifying any specific industrial use. Uncertainties as to the proper classification for a specific use are to be resolved through Interpretations adopted in accordance with CMC 9172.24.

ZONES

 

ML

MH

Manufacturing of the Following Products:*

 

 

*Food manufacturing and processing activities are listed under a separate heading.

Pharmaceuticals – drugs, medicines, vitamin tablets.

X

X

Perfume, cosmetics, toiletries (except soap).

X

X

Soap, bleaching powder, glue.

 

C

Novelties, buttons, brushes, toys, candles.

X

X

Ceramics, pottery, statuary.

X

X

Jewelry, watches, clocks, optical goods, musical instruments, scientific instruments, electronic instruments, phonographs, phonograph records, radios, television sets, electronic parts, precision metal products, wire, springs, tools, sandpaper, emery cloth, grinding wheels, printer’s type.

X

X

Electric and gas fixtures, electric appliances, electric motors and generators, batteries (including rebuilding), signs (electric, neon, billboards, etc.).

X

X

Furniture, bedsprings, boxes, coffins, fences, sash and doors, venetian blinds, window shades.

X

X

Clothing, dry goods, draperies, bedding, rugs, upholstery, automobile seat covers, awnings, bags, rope, baskets.

X

X

Chamois.

 

C

Ink, polish, putty, enamel (except lacquer, synthetic enamel, polyurethane), ethylene glycol.

X

X

Lacquer, synthetic enamel, polyurethane.

C

C

Engines (no foundry).

X

X

Engines (with foundry).

C

C

Automobiles, trailers, boats, aircraft, heavy equipment.

 

X

Tile (indoor kiln).

X

X

Concrete block, brick, tile (outdoor kiln).

 

C

Poisons (Class A and Class B)* – pesticides, rodenticides, insecticides, herbicides.

 

C

*Classification according to the Los Angeles County Fire Department (R.M. Graziano’s Tariff No. 25).

Explosives – fireworks, dynamite, ammunition, weapons involving use or testing with explosive materials.

 

C

Manufacturing of Products from the Following Materials:

 

 

Textiles, wool, yarn, fur, felt, canvas, leather, hair, feathers, paper, cloth.

X

X

Bone, horn, shells, cellophane, casein (except glue).

X

X

Wood, cork, fiberglass, clay, glass (no blast furnace), plastic (no pyroxylin).

X

X

Hydrocyanic acid, tar, coal tar, pyroxyline plastic, guncotton.

 

C

Aluminum, sheet metal, ornamental iron, steel.

X

X

Rubber (in ML Zone, rubber is not to be melted and, where a banbury mixer is used, the resulting dust is to be washed).

L

X

Petroleum.

 

C

Manufacturing of the Following Materials:

 

 

Dextrin.

X

X

Cloth, textiles, upholstery, felt, canvas.

X

X

Wallboard, fiberglass, glass (no blast furnace).

X

X

Glass (with blast furnace).

 

C

Polyurethane foam.

C

C

Cellophane, celluloid, cellulose.

 

C

Steel.

 

C

Gas acetylene, chlorine, ammonia, synthetic ammonia.

 

C

Acid, caustic soda, soda ash, lye, lime.

 

C

Gelatin, grease, tallow.

 

C

Cement, gypsum, terra cotta.

 

C

Kalsomine, lamp black, size, phenol, potash, pyroxylin plastic.

 

C

Petroleum, petroleum cleaning compound, asphalt, tar, coal tar, creosote.

 

C

Organic peroxide.

 

C

Fertilizer.

 

C

Explosives – nitroglycerine, nitromethane, nitroethane, cellulose nitrate, gunpowder, blasting powder.

 

C

Industrial Activities Involving the Following Processes:

 

 

Sewing, weaving and knitting of textiles, dyeing of yarn and fabrics.

X

X

Cleaning of fabrics, curtains, carpets.

X

X

Mattress renovation.

X

X

Wool pulling.

 

C

Photo-finishing, film developing and processing, photoengraving, lithography, block printing, silk screening, printing, book binding.

X

X

Glass silvering, optical grinding, fitting and mounting; glass blowing (no blast furnace).

X

X

Furniture redecorating and restoration, antique restoration, cabinet making, wood carving.

X

X

Plastic molding (including hydraulic press).

X

X

Tire retreading and recapping.

X

X

Raw rubber processing (in ML Zone, rubber is not to be melted and, where a banbury mixer is used, the resulting dust is to be washed).

L

X

Rubber reclaiming.

 

C

Metal plating and finishing (in ML Zone, no perchloric acid).

L

X

Metal engraving, metal fabrication (no snap riveting) metal spinning, tool tempering, welding.

X

X

Foundry (no brass or bronze) – precision investment casting, die casting.

X

X

Foundry (including brass or bronze) forging, drop forge, drop hammer, boiler works, smelter, blast furnace, coke oven, scrap metal processing, metal fabrication (including snap riveting).

 

C

Vehicle dismantling or wrecking, junk and salvage processing, subject to the requirements of CMC 9148.1.

 

C

Aircraft power plant testing.

 

X

Ore grinding and reduction.

 

C

Paper shredding.

 

C

Grinding, dressing or cutting of stone, granite or marble; sand washing.

X

X

Aggregate batch plant, aggregate dryer, rock or asphalt crushing, asphalt plant, sandblasting. (In ML Zone, only permitted on property which also has an ORL Zone designation, and must be at least 1,000 feet, as measured from lot line to lot line, from any residential zone, and any conditional use permit shall be subject to final approval or other action by the City Council.)

C

C

Starch mixing and bottling, paint spray booth, shellac mixing (no cooking), paint or enamel mixing (except lacquer, synthetic enamel, polyurethane).

X

X

Mixing of lacquers, synthetic enamel, polyurethane paint.

C

C

Shellac mixing (with cooking).

 

C

Processing of coconut oil, cottonseed oil, linseed oil.

 

C

Oil canning and packaging (in ML Zone, not more than 100 barrels stored aboveground).

L

X

Petroleum refining, oil reclaiming, coal or coal tar distillation.

 

C

Potash refining.

 

C

Bone distillation, fat rendering, offal reduction, curing or tanning of furs or hides, processing of animal by-products.

 

C

Creosoting.

 

C

Fertilizer works, manure spreading and drying.

 

C

Use of organic peroxides,* nitromethane, nitroethane.

 

C

*Having a severity classification of 3 or greater according to tests prescribed by the Society of the Plastics Industry and acceptable to the Los Angeles County Fire Department.

Water treatment.

X

X

Resource Extraction:

 

 

Borrow pit.

C

C

Oil fields, oil wells, subject to the requirements of CMC 9500 – 9537, Oil and Gas Code.

C*

C*

*Development agreement provisions apply as specified in CMC 9502 and 9508.

Food Manufacturing and Processing:

 

 

Ice, soft drinks, beer, wine, malt products, dairy products, candy, confections, pastries, bread, oleomargarine, sodium glutamate, honey, nuts and similar food products (no lard, pickles, sauerkraut, or vinegar).

X

X

Lard, pickles, sauerkraut, vinegar.

 

C

Box lunch preparation.

X

X

Fruits and vegetables – packing, canning, processing or extracting or bottling of juices (must be at least 100 feet from any residential zone, public school, public park, hospital or long-term health care facility).

L

L

Fish barbecuing or smoking (oven less than 10 cubic feet, no fish cleaning, retail sales only).

L

L

Dressing of poultry or rabbits (must be at least 100 feet from any residential zone, public school, public park, hospital or long-term health care facility).

 

L

Slaughtering of animals.

 

C

Meat, fish, dog or cat food – packing, canning, processing.

 

C

Coffee roasting.

 

C

Cigars, cigarettes.

X

X

Chewing tobacco.

 

C

Service and Repair:

 

 

Linen, towel or uniform supply.

X

X

Assaying, gas heater testing, pest control, cesspool cleaning service, plumbing contractor, roofing contractor, tree surgeon.

X

X

Carpenter shop, machine shop, metal working shop, sheet metal shop, tinsmith, gunsmith (no weapons manufacture involving use or testing with explosive materials), blacksmith, lapidary shop, electrical motor and appliance repair.

X

X

Boat repair, vehicle repair (no limit on size of vehicle), equipment and machinery repair, subject to the limitations of CMC 9138.2 if within 300 feet of other than an industrial zone.

L

L

Laboratory – product testing, product research.

X

X

Laboratory – chemical, biological, anatomical.

C

C

Equipment Sale and Rental:

 

 

Motor vehicles and heavy equipment of all types and sizes, contractor’s equipment, agricultural equipment.

X

X

Auction:

 

 

Auction – indoor or outdoor (no swap meet or flea market).

C

C

Wholesale:

 

 

Wholesale activities of all types (except livestock and poultry).

X

X

Poultry (in ML Zone, all activities within an enclosed building).

L

X

Storage:

 

 

Cold storage plant.

X

X

Petroleum coke.

 

C

Warehousing of furniture, household goods, dry goods, clothing, textiles, durable goods, no perishable foods.

X

X

Glass, lumber (no boxes or crates), naval stores, plaster, empty barrels, metal (no scrap), machinery, equipment.

X

X

Polyurethane foam.

C

C

Rock, sand, crushed aggregate and gravel:

 

 

Not more than 2,000 tons.

X

X

More than 2,000 tons. (In ML Zone, only permitted on property which also has an ORL Zone designation and must be at least 1,000 feet, as measured from lot line to lot line, from any residential zone, and any conditional use permit shall be subject to approval or other action by the City Council.)

C

X

Clay and clay products.

X

X

Cement silo, grain elevator.

 

X

Petroleum and petroleum products (If associated with oil and gas production and related facilities, refer to CMC 9500 – 9537, Oil and Gas Code, for governing requirements):

 

 

Not more than 2,500 barrels.

X

X

More than 2,500 barrels.

 

C

Cargo container (prohibited within 1,000 feet, as measured from lot line to lot line, of residentially zoned property or institutional uses).

 

L

Natural gas (If associated with oil and gas production and related facilities, refer to CMC 9500 – 9537, Oil and Gas Code, for governing requirements):

 

 

Belowground – any amount.

X

X

Aboveground:

 

 

Not more than 500,000 cubic feet.

X

X

More than 500,000 cubic feet.

C

 

Oxygen, acetylene (subject to Fire Code requirements).

X

X

Agricultural chemicals (must be at least 100 feet from any residential zone, public school, public park, hospital or long-term health care facility).

L

L

Liquid petroleum gas (If associated with oil and gas production and related facilities, refer to CMC 9500 – 9537, Oil and Gas Code, for governing requirements):

 

 

Not more than 30,000 gallons.

X

X

More than 30,000 gallons

 

C

Fuel yard (not covered elsewhere, including propane).

X

X

Aircraft fuel and lubricant.

 

C

Explosives – dynamite (over 100 pounds), nitroglycerine, nitromethane, nitroethane, cellulose nitrate, gun powder, blasting powder.

 

C

Creosote, creosoted poles.

 

C

Fertilizer.

 

C

Junk, salvage, metal scrap, rags, bottles, nonferrous scrap (other than paper), subject to the requirements of CMC 9148.1.

 

C

Waste paper, subject to the requirements of CMC 9148.1.

C

C

Poison (Class A or Class B)* – pesticides, rodenticides, insecticides, herbicides.

 

C

*Classification according to Los Angeles County Fire Department. (R.M. Graziano’s Tariff No. 25).

Organic peroxides** – (more than 50 pounds).

 

C

**Having a severity classification of 3 or greater according to tests prescribed by the Society of the Plastics Industry and acceptable to the Los Angeles County Fire Department.

Motor vehicles (not including impounding yard).

X

X

Vehicle impounding yard, subject to the requirements of CMC 9148.1.

 

C

Aircraft.

 

X

Transportation, Communications, Utilities and Public Service:

 

 

Service yard – public utility or public service.

X

X

Jail farm, honor farm.

C

C

Aircraft beacons and navigational aids – operating.

X

X

Blimp port, heliport, helistop.

C

C

Railroad yard, repair shop, roundhouse.

 

C

Truck terminal, subject to the requirements of CMC 9148.9.

C

C

Truck yard, subject to the requirements of CMC 9148.9.

 

C

Transfer station for refuse, sewage treatment plant.

 

C

Access to other property lawfully used for purposes not permitted on subject property.

X

X

Intermodal container transfer facility.

 

C

Education:

 

 

Trade school.

X

X

Recreation:

 

 

Arcade (subject to the requirements of CMC 9138.4).

C

C

Archery range.

C

C

Outdoor drive-in theater.

C

C

Range for pistol, rifle, skeet, or trap shooting; turkey shoot.

 

C

Model airplane area (motor-driven or jet-propelled).

 

C

Fairgrounds, outdoor festival (permanent).

C

C

Race track – horse, automobile, motorcycle.

 

C

Zoo.

 

C

Agriculture:

 

 

Earthworm farm (must be at least 100 feet from any residential zone, public school, public park, hospital or long-term health care facility).

L

L

Mushroom farm (must be at least 300 feet from any residential zone, public school, public park, hospital or long-term health facility).

 

L

Egg candling.

X

X

Studios:

 

 

Motion picture studio or set – indoor or outdoor.

X

X

Cemetery:

 

 

Cemetery, mausoleum, columbarium, crematory.

 

C

Animal Services:

 

 

Horse stable, riding academy – commercial or private (must be at least 100 feet from any residential zone, public school, public park, hospital or long-term health care facility).

C

C

Animal shelter, pound, kennel, training school.

C

C

Animal hospital, animal research institute.

X

X

Pet cemetery.

 

C

Electronic message center signs. (See CMC 9146.7.)

C

C

Outdoor Advertising:

 

 

Outdoor advertising sign, including electronic digital displays, subject to the requirements of CMC 9146.7.

CC

CC

Recycling Facilities:

 

 

Large collection recycling facility. (Subject to CMC 9148.4.)

L

L

Processing facility for recyclables, light. (Subject to CMC 9148.5.)

L

L

Processing facility for recyclables, heavy. (Subject to CMC 9148.5.)

 

C

Wireless Telecommunications Facilities (see CMC 9138.16):

 

 

Minor wireless telecommunications facilities, subject to the requirement of CMC 9138.16.

L

L

Major wireless telecommunications facilities, subject to the requirement of CMC 9138.16.

C

C

Uses Permitted in Commercial Zones:

 

 

Any principal use permitted in any commercial zone, whether automatically (X), with limitation (L), or by conditional use permit (C), is automatically permitted in the industrial zones, subject to the same requirements specified for such use in the commercial zones, except the following:

 

 

Residential:

 

 

Mobile home park.

Not permitted

Group quarters for members of a religious order.

Not permitted

Community residential care facility, boarding or rooming house, fraternity or sorority house, dormitory, residential hotel or similar group quarters, motel units with kitchens.

Not permitted

Emergency shelters, up to 30 occupants within the City.

L

L

Emergency shelters, more than 30 occupants within the City.

C

C

Transitional housing, supportive housing and single-room occupancy (SRO) housing.

Not permitted

Transportation related uses:

 

 

Shared parking facilities.

C

C

Health services:

 

 

Hospital, long-term health care facility, public health center.

C

 

Ambulance service.

C

C

Public and quasi-public uses:

 

 

Archaeological dig, provided the Director determines there is a reasonable prospect that significant scientific, cultural, or historical information will be obtained from the site.

D

D

Education:

 

 

Elementary or secondary school public or private.

Not permitted

Recreation:

 

 

Golf driving range, pitch-and-putt course, golf course, subject to the limitations of CMC 9138.3.

L

L

Arcade, subject to the requirements of CMC 9138.4.

C

C

Retail services and offices:

 

 

Adult business.

Not permitted

Convenience stores.

C

C

Payday loans.

CUP

CUP

Massage service.

Not permitted

Tattoo service. (New uses not permitted. Existing uses prior to June 7, 2006, required a CUP and are subject to CMC 9138.92.)

L

Not permitted

Alcoholic beverage sales and services:

 

 

Alcoholic beverage sales in conjunction with variety store, drugstore, mini market, drive-through market, food store, or grocery store excluding a supermarket, take-out food, liquor store, subject to requirements of CMC 9138.5.

C

C

Alcoholic beverage sales and services in conjunction with cocktail lounge, bar, arcade, pool hall, billiards, card room, bowling alley, indoor theater, night club and eating establishment other than a bona fide restaurant, subject to requirements of CMC 9138.5.

C

C

Vehicles sales and service:

 

 

Automobile service station, subject to the requirements of CMC 9138.14.

C

C

Automobile/vehicle washing, subject to the requirements of CMC 9138.14.

C

C

Automobile/vehicle service and repair, subject to the limitations of CMC 9138.14.

C

C

Auctions for used automobiles, recreational vehicles, travel trailers, trucks or trailers, not over 2-ton capacity, motorcycles or motorscooters, subject to the requirements of CMC 9138.21.

C

C

Temporary Uses:

 

 

Election campaign office in a trailer. (Not permitted earlier than 90 days before the election. To be removed within 14 days after the election.)

L

L

Office or other permitted commercial use in a trailer or other mobile unit. (Permitted for a period not exceeding 6 months during construction of a building on the same lot while a building permit is in effect. The Director may approve reasonable time extensions if he finds construction is proceeding in good faith.)

L

L

Storage of construction materials and equipment at a construction site without the screening which would be required for permanent outdoor storage (only during the period a building permit is in effect).

L

L

Subdivision directional sign. (See CMC 9128.31 – 9128.35.)

LD

LD

Fireworks stand, fireworks storage. (See CMC 3101.0 – 3101.10.)

CC

CC

Tent revival. (See Chapter 6 of Article III.)

CC

CC

Carnival, mechanical rides, pony rides, outdoor festival and similar uses. (See CMC 63119 and 63119.1.)

CC

CC

Circus, rodeo. (See CMC 63120; and Animal Control Ordinance, CMC 3300 – 3301.)

CC

CC

Sidewalk, parking lot, and tent sales. (See CMC 9148.7.)

D

D

Yard sales. (See CMC 4600 – 4606.)

L

L

Uses Permitted in Manufacturing Zones:

 

 

Auction house.

C

C

Indoor mini-mart.

Not permitted

Commercial Cannabis (See Chapter 15 of Article VI)

DA

DA

Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Section shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 2 of Article I. (Ord. 79-479, § 8; Ord. 78-427; Ord. 80-532, § 4; Ord. 80-541, § 1; Ord. 82-621, § 4; Ord. 83-673U, § 5; Ord. 84-685, § 5; Ord. 86-732, § 1; Ord. 87-813, § 4; Ord. 87-819, §§ 3, 4; Ord. 87-822, § 1; Ord. 88-857, § 3; Ord. 89-888, § 3; Ord. 90-915, § 3; Ord. 91-932, §§ 1, 2; Ord. 92-982, § 1; Ord. 93-1001, § 3; Ord. 94-1035U, § 6; Ord. 94-1037, § 7; Ord. 96-1085, § 2; Ord. 96-1097, § 1; Ord. 01-1237, § 2; Ord. 03-1284, § 4; Ord. 04-1308, §§ 3, 4; Ord. 06-1349, § 5; Ord. 09-1419, § 6; Ord. 09-1434, § 2; Ord. 10-1455, § 2; Ord. 13-1525, §§ 3, 4; Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 9); Ord. 16-1602, § 7; Ord. 18-1825, § 2)

9141.12 Uses Permitted on Organic Refuse Landfill Sites.
A. No use except as hereinafter provided shall be permitted on property designated as ORL (Organic Refuse Landfill) without the approval of a conditional use permit by both the Commission and the Council. Such conditional use permit shall require, as a condition precedent to use of the property under the conditional use permit, approval by the Building and Safety Division and the Council of a report submitted by the applicant pursuant to the applicable provisions of the Building Code, prepared by a licensed civil engineer designated by the applicant and approved by the City, which shall provide and include plans for a protective system or systems designated to eliminate or mitigate the potential hazards and environmental risks associated with the proposed use. Approval of such report by the Building and Safety Division shall be in the discretion of the Building Official, who shall evaluate any risks and hazards associated with the site and proposed use and who may grant approval only if he finds that the report and plans adequately provide for protection against such associated risks and hazards. The Building Official’s approval shall be submitted to the Council for final approval which will be in the discretion of the Council.

The following uses are exempt from the provisions of this Section:

1. Uses which do not involve buildings or structures, including but not limited to outdoor storage, display and outdoor recreational facilities.

2. Construction of structures which are unoccupiable, such as signs, flagpoles, walls, fences and towers, but not including oil wells and storage tanks.

3. Paving of no more than twenty (20) percent of the site.

4. Repair or minor alterations to existing structures which do not increase floor area. (Ord. 78-449; Ord. 81-560, § 1; Ord. 82-586, § 1)

B. An application for a conditional use permit required by subsection A of this Section shall be considered in accordance with CMC 9172.21, except that the Commission’s decision shall be referred to the Council for review as if an appeal had been filed pursuant to CMC 9173.4.

C. Every conditional use permit for a use located on property designated as ORL (Organic Refuse Landfill) shall be subject to the following conditions in addition to any other conditions that the Commission or the Council may impose:

1. Approval by the Building Official of the report provided for in subsection A of this Section.

2. The applicant shall comply with a development schedule approved by the Community Development Director.

3. All measures to eliminate or mitigate the hazards and environmental risks associated with the site proposed in the report approved by the Building Official provided for in subsection A of this Section shall be subject to approval by the Council and shall be incorporated into the project. Such measures shall include monitoring, evaluation and control of methane gas produced by the site as the City shall determine to be necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare with respect to the production or migration of methane gas.

4. Monitoring and regular inspections and reports by a licensed civil engineer designated by the applicant and monitored, evaluated and approved by the Building Official shall be done and filed with the City from time to time as directed by the Building Official at the applicant’s cost.

5. The mitigation measures required by subsection (C)(3) of this Section shall be implemented to the satisfaction of the Building Official and City Council. In the event that the Building Official or Council finds that such measures when implemented are inadequate to protect the public health, safety, or welfare, the Building Official or Council may (1) require additional mitigation measures to be incorporated into the project, or (2) after notice to the applicant and an opportunity to be heard, declare the conditional use permit null and void if the Council finds that the public health, safety or welfare cannot be adequately protected to the satisfaction of the Council.

6. Adequate measures shall be taken to eliminate odors from the site to the satisfaction of the Building Official.

7. The applicant shall, at the applicant’s own expense, carry public liability insurance during the existence of the conditional use permit, with a company and policy to be approved by the City Attorney, covering liability for injuries or death arising out of or in connection with the use of the site pursuant to said permit in an amount not less than $5,000,000. The City shall be named as an additional assured under such insurance policy. (Ord. 79-471; Ord. 81-560, § 1)

D. Whenever both subsection A and any other Section of this Chapter require a conditional use permit for a particular property, only one (1) conditional use permit shall be required, which shall be applied for, processed and considered pursuant to the provisions of subsection B. The application and conditional use permit, if approved, shall refer to both Sections which are applicable.

E. Subsection A of this Section shall not apply to the following:

1. Any lawfully established existing use.

2. An expansion of an existing, lawfully established use on a lot on which such existing use was approved provided that the existence of an organic refuse landfill in such lot is shown by the record to have been considered by the granting body in connection with the approval of such existing use.

3. Any proposed use for which a conditional use permit requiring approval of methane gas control measures by the Council either (1) has been granted, or (2) has been applied for and is being processed on the effective date of this Section; provided, that subsection A shall apply if such conditional use permit which has been granted expires, is declared to be null and void or is otherwise terminated or if such conditional use permit for which an application is being processed is thereafter denied. (Ord. 78-449; Ord. 79-471; Ord. 81-560, § 1)

9141.2 Interpretation of Uses Permitted.
Further definition and enumeration of uses permitted in the various residential zones shall be determined by means of Interpretation in accordance with CMC 9172.24.

9141.3 Prohibited Uses.
All uses are prohibited except as expressly permitted by the provisions of this Chapter.

Division 2. Accessory Uses
9142 Accessory Uses.
If not otherwise permitted as principal uses, the following uses are permitted as minor uses if related to and incidental to the indicated principal permitted use on the same site:

Amusement machines – not more than three (3) machines – only in connection with a cocktail lounge, bar, bona fide restaurant or theater.

Caretaker’s or superintendent’s residence – not more than one (1) dwelling unit per site; property cannot be less than one (1) acre; residence size cannot exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet; two (2) covered parking spaces required; conditional use permit must be approved by Planning Commission.

Cargo container storage involving full or empty cargo containers and minor maintenance and repair incidental to a truck terminal, rail yard or intermodal container transfer facility, subject to a conditional use permit. Cargo container storage that is incidental to an automatically permitted warehouse use is permitted if the number of cargo containers stored does not exceed the number of loading positions on the site and if the duration of storage does not exceed seventy-two (72) hours. All other cargo container storage, whether involving single or multiple cargo containers for any use, is prohibited as an accessory use.

Employee recreation area or facilities.

Employee cafeteria and eating facilities.

Medical clinic and infirmary.

Outdoor display, subject to the requirements of CMC 9146.29.

Outdoor storage, subject to the requirements of CMC 9146.29.

Similar uses as determined in accordance with the Interpretation procedure of CMC 9172.24. (Ord. 83-635; Ord. 83-635 repealed by election on 6/28/83; Ord. 83-637, § 6; Ord. 84-685, § 6; Ord. 87-822, § 2; Ord. 11-1479, § 15)

9142.1 Accessory Uses of Division 2, Part 3 Permitted.
If not otherwise permitted as principal uses, all accessory uses specified in Division 2, Part 3 of this Chapter are permitted in the industrial zones, subject to the same requirements for such uses as are set forth in said Division 2, Part 3. (Ord. 87-919, § 5)

Division 3. Conditional Use Criteria
9143 Conditional Use Criteria.
In addition to the general criteria for the approval of a Conditional Use Permit pursuant to CMC 9172.21(d)(1), special criteria and limitations as indicated below shall be considered in acting upon a Conditional Use Permit in an industrial zone:

Possible hazards to the surrounding area as a result of the proposed use.

Possible hazards to the proposed use due to proximity or interaction with uses in the surrounding area.

Cumulative and interactive effects upon the environment and public safety resulting from the interrelation, magnitude and intensity of industrial activities in the area.

Division 4. (Reserved)
Division 5. Site Requirements
9145.1 Applicability.
The provisions of this Division do not apply to the individual lots within planned developments wherein the owners or lessees of individual lots also hold an undivided interest in common areas within the same development, nor to a lease of less than four hundred (400) square feet of land.

9145.2 Minimum Lot Area.
No lot shall be created which has a net area less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.

Any existing lawfully established lot (including a leased area of land during the term of the lease) is deemed to have the required lot area.

A lot may be reduced to less than the required lot area if such reduction is the result of an acquisition for public purposes.

9145.3 Street Frontage and Access.
No lot shall be created unless it is capable of being provided with vehicular access directly from a public street or alley and has a street frontage of at least one hundred (100) feet.

A new or additional use shall not be developed on an existing lawfully established lot (including a leased area of land during the term of the lease) unless there is vehicular access from a public street or alley, and such access has a width of at least twenty (20) feet. The required vehicular access shall be either directly from a public street or alley or by means of a right-of-way or easement. (Ord. 79-460, § 3)

9145.4 Minimum Lot Width.
No lot shall be created which has a width less than one hundred (100) feet.

Any existing lawfully established lot (including a leased area of land during the term of the lease) is deemed to have the required width.

A lot may be reduced to less than the required width if such reduction is the result of an acquisition for public purposes.

Division 6. Site Development Standards
Buildings and Structures

9146.11 Reserved.
9146.12 Height of Buildings and Structure.
In the industrial zones, there is no height limit provided additional yard spaces are provided as required in CMC 9146.21 through 9146.29.

Yards and Open Spaces

9146.21 Reserved.
9146.22 Future Rights-of-Way.
This Section is applicable only where portions of a lot are within areas planned to be part of future streets, alleys or public rights-of-way, as determined by the Director.

In cases to which this Section is applicable, unless otherwise approved by the Commission, the portions of any lot within such future right-of-way areas shall not be occupied by structures other than those encroachments allowed in future right-of-way areas as provided in CMC 9146.29. All other required setbacks, yards and open spaces shall be provided in addition to the future right-of-way areas, and the future right-of-way lines shall be considered to be lot lines for purposes of measuring such other setbacks, yards and open spaces.

9146.23 Front Yard.
Each lot shall have a front yard with a required depth of twenty-five (25) feet or twenty-five (25) percent of the lot depth, whichever is less, except that a variable front yard in which all portions are at least ten (10) feet in depth and some portion is at least twenty (20) feet in depth is permitted if, to the satisfaction of the Director, all portions of the yard where the setback is twenty (20) feet or less are landscaped and mounded earthforms are included in the landscaping.

For any building (but not for an unoccupiable structure, whether detached or attached to a building) over fifty (50) feet in height, the required front yard setback shall be increased by one (1) foot for each two (2) feet of height above fifty (50) feet.

Any portion of a required front yard which is not utilized for parking shall be landscaped. A required front yard shall not be otherwise occupied except as provided in CMC 9146.29. (Ord. 19-1904, § 2)

9146.24 Side Yards.
Where the side of a lot abuts a street, there shall be a side yard with a width of at least ten (10) feet. For any building (but not for an unoccupiable structure whether detached or attached to a building) over fifty (50) feet in height, the required side yard setback shall be increased by one (1) foot for each two (2) feet of height above fifty (50) feet.

Where the side of a lot abuts a lot in a residential zone, there shall be a side yard with a width of at least ten (10) percent of the subject lot width, except that such side yard shall be at least five (5) feet and need not be greater than ten (10) feet in width. For any building (but not for an unoccupiable structure whether detached or attached to a building) over thirty (30) feet in height, the required side yard setback shall be increased by one (1) foot for each foot of height over thirty (30) feet.

Where the side of a lot abuts a lot in other than a residential zone and the height of the building is not over fifty (50) feet, no side yard is required. If any side yard greater than approximately one (1) inch is required or provided, it shall be at least three (3) feet. For any building (but not for an unoccupiable structure whether detached or attached to a building) over fifty (50) feet in height, the required side yard setback shall be three (3) feet plus one (1) foot for each two (2) feet of height above fifty (50) feet.

Required side yards shall not be occupied except as provided in CMC 9146.29.

9146.25 Rear Yard.
Where the rear of a lot abuts a lot in a residential zone, there shall be a rear yard with a depth of at least ten (10) percent of the subject lot depth, except that such rear yard shall be at least five (5) feet and need not be greater than ten (10) feet. For any building (but not for an unoccupiable structure whether detached or attached to a building) over thirty (30) feet in height, the required rear yard setback shall be increased by one (1) foot for each foot of height above thirty (30) feet.

Where the rear of a lot abuts a lot in other than a residential zone and the height of the building or structure is not over fifty (50) feet, no rear yard is required. If any rear yard greater than approximately one (1) inch is required or provided, it shall be at least three (3) feet. For any building (but not for an occupiable structure whether detached or attached to a building) over fifty (50) feet in height, the required rear yard setback shall be three (3) feet plus one (1) foot for each two (2) feet of height above fifty (50) feet.

A required rear lot shall not be occupied except as provided in CMC 9146.29.

9146.26 Reserved.
9146.27 Space between Buildings.
Buildings (but not including unoccupiable structures whether detached or attached to buildings) on the same lot either shall be abutting each other or there shall be a separation of at least three (3) feet. Where there is a separation and both buildings are more than fifty (50) feet in height, the required separation shall be increased by one (1) foot for each two (2) feet of height above fifty (50) feet on the lower building.

9146.28 Reserved.
9146.29 Encroachments.
Every part of a required yard or open space shall be open and unobstructed from finished grade to the sky except for facilities and activities as follows:

A. Projections from buildings (such as eaves, awnings and shading devices; signs; architectural features; utility meters; conduits and pipes; unenclosed and unroofed stairways, landings, porches and balconies; chimneys; and mechanical equipment) may project into a required yard not more than one-half of the width of the required yard, except that only such projections permitted into a required front yard or a required side yard abutting a street shall be for eaves, awnings, shading devices, architectural features and signs. No projections are permitted into future right-of-way areas as determined under CMC 9146.22.

B. Free-standing mechanical equipment is not permitted in any required yard except those additional yard areas required because of building height.

C. Utility-owned facilities are permitted in any required yard if also located in an approved utility easement.

D. Signs are permitted in required yards other than in existing or future street rights-of-way if in accordance with the provisions of CMC 9146.7.

E. Swimming pools are permitted in required yards other than future right-of-way areas provided the pool is set back from the front lot line at least twenty-five (25) feet or twenty-five (25) percent of the lot depth, whichever is less, and is not less than five (5) feet from any other lot line.

F. Fences, walls, and hedges shall not be higher than eight (8) feet above finished grade in a future right-of-way, front yard, or in a side or rear yard which abuts a residential zone. In a required front yard or abutting future right-of-way area, any portion of a fence, wall or hedge above three and one-half (3-1/2) feet in height shall not impair vision by obscuring more than ten (10) percent of the area in the vertical plane unless approved by the Director pursuant to the procedures and requirements for Site Plan and Design Review contained in CMC 9172.23.

G. Landscaping (other than hedges) is permitted in any required yard or open space.

H. Outdoor display of goods. The following items may be displayed in any required yard area, but not in a required parking area:

Vehicles (automobiles, motorcycles, motorscooters, bicycles, recreational vehicles, trucks, mobile homes, or other vehicles).

Boats.

Agricultural produce.

Nursery stock.

Flowers and plants.

Christmas trees.

Similar items as determined in accordance with the Interpretation procedure of CMC 9172.24.

The following items may be displayed in yard areas other than a required front yard and any abutting future right-of-way area, but not in a required parking area:

Garden equipment and supplies.

Building materials.

Monuments, tombstones, statuary.

Similar items as determined in accordance with the Interpretation procedure of CMC 9172.24.

Items displayed must be in the form in which marketed (no raw materials or subassemblies).

I. Outdoor storage is permitted only in yards other than a required front yard and abutting future right-of-way area, but not in a required parking area.

Outdoor storage areas shall be screened from view from any adjoining public street or walkway.

J. Employee recreation and eating facilities (no buildings) are permitted in any yard other than a required front yard and adjacent future street right-of-way, but not in a required parking area.

K. Parking is permitted in required yards except the area within ten (10) feet of an existing or future street right-of-way. (See CMC 9162.52.)

L. Railroad spur tracks are permitted in any yard other than a required yard adjacent to a street (front or side) and any adjacent future street right-of-way.

Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Section shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 2 of Article I of this Code. (Ord. 79-479, § 8; Ord. 90-905, § 1; Ord. 91-945, § 1)

Other Site Development Standards

9146.3 Fences, Walls and Hedges.
A. Except as provided in Division 8 of this Part*:

1. A solid masonry wall shall be constructed along the inside of any lot line (or upon the lot line with the consent of the adjoining property owner) if the lot line abuts a residential zone or if the lot line abuts an alley that borders a residential zone. In areas other than the required front yard area and any abutting future right-of-way area, such wall shall be a minimum of six (6) feet and a maximum of eight (8) feet in height. In a required front yard area and any abutting future right-of-way area, such wall may not exceed three and one-half (3-1/2) feet in height, except fencing material of any type may extend above the three and one-half (3-1/2) foot solid masonry portion to a height not exceeding eight (8) feet, provided such extended portion does not impair vision by obscuring more than ten (10) percent of the area in the vertical plane.

2. No fence, wall or hedge in an industrial zone shall exceed a height of fifty (50) feet.

3. The height of fences, walls and hedges shall be measured from the finished grade at each point along the fence, wall or hedge. Where there is a difference between the grade on the two (2) sides of the fence, wall or hedge, the higher grade shall be used. (Ord. 90-905, § 2; Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 10))

*Division 8 applies only to vehicle dismantling yards, junk and salvage yards, vehicle impounding yards and retail petroleum outlets.

9146.4 Trash Areas.
Trash and recycling areas shall be provided in accordance with Division 4 of Part 6 of this Chapter. (Ord. 93-1013, § 3)

9146.5 Reserved.
9146.6 Parking, Loading, Truck Maneuvering and Driveways.
Parking spaces and loading areas for each use and the areas required for access and truck maneuvering shall be provided in accordance with Division 2 of Part 6 of this Chapter.

9146.7 Signs*.
A. Outdoor advertising signs are permitted, subject to the following:

1. The total sign face area on each I-405, I-110 or SR-91 Freeway Corridor sign structure or any pre-Ordinance No. 01-1237 sign structure shall not exceed eight hundred (800) square feet and digital displays can be installed on said sign face areas if approved within a development agreement, with appropriate conditions and public benefits to be negotiated with the City and complying with all other conditions imposed by this Chapter. The interval between the change of digital display shall be a minimum of eight (8) seconds. The total sign face area on any other new sign structure shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet and digital displays are not allowed on these other new sign structures.

2. The height of an I-405, I-110 or SR-91 Freeway Corridor sign structure or any pre-Ordinance No. 01-1237 sign structure shall either be the height of the current off-premises sign if said sign is being rebuilt or maintained on the same parcel of land or if the proposed off-premises sign is not replacing an existing off-premises sign on the same parcel of land, then said sign shall not exceed forty-two (42) feet measured from the higher of either the ground level at the base of the sign structure or the finished grade of the road which the sign is advertising thereto. The height of any other new sign structure shall not exceed twenty (20) feet measured from the ground level at the base of the sign structure.

3. A new sign structure shall be erected only on a property that abuts the Alameda Corridor or abuts either the I-405, I-110 or SR-91 Freeway Corridor. For purposes of this provision, the term “Alameda Corridor” means that portion of Alameda Street between Del Amo Boulevard and Lomita Boulevard. For purposes of this Section, the term “I-405 Freeway Corridor” means that portion of the I-405 Freeway that is on the north side of the I-405 Freeway and that is also between Main Street and Figueroa Street (“Main Street Portion”) and that portion of the I-405 Freeway that is between the west line of Alameda Street and a point that is two thousand one hundred (2,100) feet west of the west line of Alameda Street (“Alameda Street Portion”). The term “I-110 Freeway Corridor” means that portion of the I-110 Freeway that directly abuts the east side of the I-110 Freeway, is zoned Manufacturing Light (ML), and is located on MTA owned property between Sepulveda Boulevard and Lomita Boulevard. The term “SR-91 Freeway Corridor” means that portion of the SR-91 Freeway that directly abuts the north side of the SR-91 Freeway, is zoned Manufacturing Light (ML), and is located on APN 7319-033-064 property between Avalon Boulevard and Central Avenue.

4. The I-405, I-110 and SR-91 Freeway Corridor static outdoor advertising signs shall not be erected within five hundred (500) feet of any other outdoor advertising sign on the same side of the freeway and a digital display shall not be erected within one thousand (1,000) feet of any other digital display on the same side of either freeway, but in no case shall there be more than two (2) digital display faces allowed on the north side of the I-405 Freeway Corridor within the entire Alameda Street Portion, no more than two (2) digital display faces allowed on the south side of the I-405 Freeway Corridor within the entire Alameda Street Portion, no more than two (2) digital display faces allowed on the I-110 Freeway Corridor, and no more than two (2) digital display faces allowed on the SR-91 Freeway Corridor. Other than an I-405, I-110 or SR-91 Freeway Corridor sign structure which shall not have a sign face area of more than six hundred seventy-two (672) square feet with the exception of no more than one hundred twenty-eight (128) square feet in extensions, no new sign structure having a total sign face area of more than eighty (80) square feet but not exceeding one hundred fifty (150) square feet shall be erected within:

a. Two hundred (200) feet of an outdoor advertising sign structure having a total sign face area greater than eighty (80) square feet; or

b. One hundred (100) feet of any other outdoor advertising sign structure located on the same side of the public street or other right-of-way.

5. No new sign structures having a total sign face area of eighty (80) square feet or less shall be erected within one hundred (100) feet of any outdoor advertising sign structure located on the same side of the public street or other right-of-way.

6. Other than an I-405, I-110 or SR-91 Freeway Corridor sign structure, any such sign having a sign face visible from and within a distance of six hundred (600) feet of the edge of the right-of-way of a freeway or scenic highway measured horizontally along a line perpendicular to the centerline of such freeway or scenic highway shall not be permitted if placed or directed so as to be viewed primarily by persons traveling thereon.

7. Such sign shall not be permitted on the roof of a building, and a freestanding sign shall not be permitted to project over the roof of a building.

8. Such signs shall not encroach over public rights-of-way.

9. Any such sign structure shall not be permitted within two hundred (200) feet of a residential zone located on the same side of a public street or right-of-way.

10. Other than an I-405, I-110 or SR-91 Freeway Corridor sign structure or any pre-Ordinance No. 01-1237 sign structure, any such sign structure shall be designed in the simplest form and shall be free of any bracing, angle iron, guy wires, cables, etc.

11. All exposed backs of such signs, which are visible to the public, shall be suitably covered in order to conceal the structure and shall be properly maintained.

12. An approved development agreement shall be required for each new sign structure. The provisions of this subsection shall govern the processing of applications for a development agreement for an outdoor advertising sign. Unless an extension is agreed to in writing by the applicant, the City Council shall render its decision on an application for a development agreement for an outdoor advertising sign within three (3) months of the date of acceptance of the application. An application for a development agreement for an outdoor advertising sign shall be approved by the City Council if the proposed sign structure conforms to the requirements of this code and applicable laws.

B. Business signs are permitted, subject to the following:

1. All business signs and sign structures shall be permitted in conformance with development plans which have been approved pursuant to the Site Plan and Design Review procedures (including the number of signs and sign structures to be permitted) as provided in CMC 9172.23. All signs and sign structures shall also comply with the minimum requirements, as outlined in this Section of the Zoning Ordinance.

2. The total sign area per lot shall not exceed an area in square feet equal to two (2) times the linear feet of lot frontage on a public street or streets for the first one hundred (100) feet of frontage, plus one-half (1/2) times the frontage in excess of one hundred (100) feet. Window signage shall not exceed ten (10) percent of window area. Lot frontage on a freeway shall not be considered in computing this figure.

When the total frontage of a lot is less than the square root of the lot’s area, said frontage shall be deemed to be equal to the square root of the lot’s area for the purpose of determining the permitted sign area.

Any primary use which is developed commercially may be permitted to have a sign area equal to that permitted by CMC 9136.7(B)(2); provided, that a deed restriction is recorded in the offices of the County Recorder, restricting the use on the property to a commercial use, and proof of such recordation is submitted to the satisfaction of the Director.

3. Repealed by Ord. 16-1602.

4. A ground sign in excess of six (6) feet in height shall not be permitted. The distance between ground elevation and the bottom of a ground sign shall not exceed one (1) foot. Not more than one (1) ground sign shall be permitted on a lot. No ground sign shall be erected until written approval is obtained from the City Traffic Engineer. Such signs shall be in conformance with development plans which have been approved pursuant to the Site Plan and Design Review procedure as provided in CMC 9172.23.

5. A sign may be affixed to a building but shall not project above the height of the building wall or roof fascia.

6. A sign shall not project into an existing or future right-of-way.

7. No “A” frame or “sandwich” sign or scintillating, flashing or revolving sign shall be permitted.

8. Electronic message center signs are permitted, subject to the following:

(a) Such sign shall be at least one hundred (100) feet from a residential zone.

(b) Such sign shall be at least five hundred (500) feet from any other electronic message center sign.

(c) Such sign shall be affixed to a pole and subject to the pole sign limitations of this Chapter.

(d) A conditional use permit (CUP) shall be required for all electronic message center signs in accordance with provisions set forth in CMC 9172.21. Approval shall not be granted if the Commission finds that the proposed sign would interfere with traffic signals, disrupt normal traffic flow or otherwise create a safety hazard.

C. Streamers, banners, pennants, and similar displays are permitted subject to the following:

1. Streamers, banners, pennants, and similar displays may be exhibited in connection with grand openings and other special events upon written approval of the Community Development Director. Requests for such displays shall be submitted to the Community Development Director, in writing, thirty (30) days prior to the event. All approvals shall be limited to no longer than sixty (60) consecutive days at any one (1) time with a minimum of thirty (30) days in between the next display period for a total of one hundred twenty (120) days of display per calendar year per business. An additional thirty (30) days of display is permitted; provided, that a new banner permit is issued and a fee is paid.

2. Any streamer, banner, pennant, or similar displays shall be suspended so as to maintain at least seven (7) foot clearance.

3. No streamer, banner, pennant, or similar displays shall be exhibited if, in the opinion of the Director, such displays are not adequately maintained.

4. Christmas decorations displayed between thirty (30) days prior to and fifteen (15) days after December 25th, and during official public events, are not subject to this subsection.

5. Streamers, banners, pennants and similar displays may be attached directly upon the structure of a lawfully erected fireworks stand (see CMC 3101.0 through 3101.10) without necessity of a banner permit.

D. Real Estate Advertising. Real estate advertising signs are permitted, subject to the following:

1. One (1) unlighted sign structure is permitted per lot; except, on parcels larger than five (5) acres, one (1) such sign structure is permitted for each street frontage of the parcel.

2. A sign structure may have any number of sign faces but the total sign area shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet per sign structure.

3. All portions of a sign structure shall be not less than ten (10) feet from the inside line of the sidewalk, or if there is no sidewalk from the lot line, except, if the building setback is less than ten (10) feet, the sign structure shall be not less than one-half (1/2) the setback from the inside line of the sidewalk or lot line.

4. A freestanding real estate advertising sign shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in height.

5. A sign may be affixed to a building but shall not project above the height of the building wall or roof fascia.

6. Advertising copy shall pertain only to the premises upon which the sign is located.

7. Any such signs shall be removed within two (2) weeks after the execution of a sales agreement, escrow instructions or lease agreement.

8. Off-site open house signs for residential properties may be placed on commercial properties with the permission of the commercial property’s owner, and consistent with the provisions of Section 9126.7(A)(8).

9. Violations.

a. Violations of this subsection (D) shall be subject to the following civil fines within a calendar year: (a) $50.00 for the first violation; (b) $75.00 for the second violation; and (c) $100.00 for the third and any subsequent violation.

b. Fines shall be payable within thirty (30) days of issuance. Late payment shall incur a late penalty equal to the amount of the fine. The failure of any person, within sixty (60) days of the date of issuance of a fine, to pay the fine and any applicable late penalty, may result in the matter being referred to the Director of Finance to file a claim with the small claims court. Alternatively, the City may pursue any other legal remedy to collect the civil fines. The City may also recover its collections costs according to proof.

c. Violations shall be recorded by realtor office address, rather than by individual property for sale; provided, that if the property is being sold by its owner, the violations shall be recorded against the property that is for sale.

d. The remedies provided in this Section are in addition to any other remedies and penalties that may be available under the Carson Municipal Code and the laws of the State of California.

E. Except as provided for violations of subsection (D) of this Section, any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Section shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 2 of Article I. (Ord. 79-479, § 8; Ord. 79-473; Ord. 80-513, § 2; Ord. 80-531, § 1; Ord. 80-532, § 5; Ord. 88-856, § 2; Ord. 89-873, § 3; Ord. 90-915, § 4; Ord. 01-1225, § 5; Ord. 01-1237, § 3; Ord. 03-1272, § 2; Ord. 09-1434, § 3; Ord. 10-1455, § 3; Ord. 11-1475, §§ 3, 4; Ord. 12-1500, § 2; Ord. 15-1563, §§ 7, 8; Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 11); Ord. 16-1602, § 8; Ord. 17-1625, § 2)

*See CMC 9526 for different sign regulations applicable to petroleum operations.

9146.8 Utilities.
All new utility lines, other than major transmission lines, shall be placed underground. This requirement may be waived by the Commission where topography, soil, undue financial hardship or other conditions make such underground installation unreasonable or impractical. Undergrounding shall be in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations of the utility, as currently on file with the California Public Utilities Commission.

All aboveground equipment (other than pole lines when permitted), such as transformers and pedestal terminals, which are visible from an adjacent public street or walkway, shall be within a solid enclosure or otherwise screened from public view. Such enclosure/screening shall be in accordance with the utility’s service requirement.

9146.9 Site Planning and Design.
In the case of a commercial or industrial use located on a corner lot, no public pedestrian entrance from a side street shall be located less than one hundred (100) feet from any residential zone.

Roof-mounted structures and equipment shall not extend more than ten (10) feet above the roof, measured from the point of attachment. If such roof projections are not incorporated in the building design as architectural features, they shall be screened from view from any adjoining public street or walkway.

Mechanical equipment not enclosed within a building shall be screened from view from any adjoining public street or walkway.

Within one hundred (100) feet of a residential zone, there shall be no opening in the wall of a nonresidential building where such wall faces a residential zone.

Within any D (Design Overlay) designated area, all development subsequent to the date of such designation shall be in conformance with development plans which have been approved pursuant to the Site Plan and Design Review procedure as provided in CMC 9172.23. No permit shall be issued for grading or construction involving significant exterior changes, as determined by the Director, which is not in conformance with such approved development plans.

Division 7. Environmental Effects
9147.1 Exterior Lighting.
All lighting of buildings, landscaping, parking lots and similar facilities shall be directed away from all adjoining and nearby residential property. Such lighting shall be arranged and controlled so as not to create a nuisance or hazard to traffic or to the living environment. This Section is also applicable to arc lights, search lights and similar lighting devices.

Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Section shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 2 of Article I of this Code. (Ord. 79-479, § 8)

9147.2 Performance Standards.
No use shall create a disturbance to the surrounding area in the form of vibration, noise, electromagnetic or other radiations, odor, dust, heat or glare. All uses shall comply with Federal, State and local laws and regulations pertaining to such environmental effects.

9147.3 Hours of Operation.
Within one hundred (100) feet of a residential zone, except where the residential zone is governed by a Specific Plan, all nonresidential activities shall be confined to the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. daily. (Ord. 79-479, § 8; Ord. 95-1064, § 1)

Division 8. Special Requirements
For Certain Uses
9148.1 Vehicle Dismantling Yards, Junk and Salvage Yards, Vehicle Impounding Yards.
No vehicle dismantling yard, or junk and salvage yard, or vehicle impounding yard shall be established, maintained or extended in any zone unless it complies with the following requirements:

A. All operations and storage, including all equipment used in conducting such business, other than parking, shall be conducted within an enclosed building, or within an area enclosed by a solid fence. When two (2) or more vehicle dismantling yards, junk and salvage yards, and/or vehicle impounding yards have a common boundary line, a solid wall or solid fence shall not be required on such common boundary line; provided, however, that a solid wall or solid fence shall enclose the entire combined area devoted to such uses. (Ord. 80-532, § 6)

B. Where such fences or walls are provided, other than a decorative wall required pursuant to CMC 9162.52, they shall be developed as provided herein:

1. The fences and walls shall be of a uniform height in relation to the ground upon which they stand and shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet and shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height. Except in the yard areas where off-street parking is required or provided, said fences or walls shall be set back five (5) feet from the lot line along all frontages abutting a public street or walkway, or abutting a more restrictive zone. This five (5) foot setback area shall be landscaped in a neat, attractive manner and shall be equipped with an irrigation system, permanently and completely installed, which delivers water directly to all landscaped areas. Where off-street parking is required or provided, said wall or fence shall be constructed at the rear of the parking area.

Tall-growing trees shall be planted and maintained along side and rear fences or walls which abut an elevated freeway or residential area, in accordance with a planting plan approved by the Director.

2. All fences and walls open to view from any public street or walkway or any area in other than an industrial zone shall be constructed of solid masonry, except required fences may be constructed of other material comparable to the foregoing if approved by the Director and in accordance with standards established by resolution of the Council after recommendation by the Commission.

3. The fences and walls shall be constructed in workmanlike manner, shall be uniform in appearance and shall consist solely of new materials unless the Director approves the substitution of used materials, where, in his opinion, such used materials will provide the equivalent in service, appearance and useful life.

4. All gates in the fences or walls shall be of solid metal material and shall be no less than eight (8) feet in height and shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height. Such gates shall be kept closed when not in use and shall provide a pedestrian access opening unless other pedestrian access is provided.

C. The entire site shall be paved with an asphalt or concrete surfacing or an oil and aggregate mixture to prevent emulsion of dust or tracking of mud onto public rights-of-way. The site shall be graded to drain to the public street or other drainage provision satisfactory to the Director of Public Works. The Community Development Director shall enforce these dust control standards and may:

1. Approve other paving materials which provide, in his opinion, the equivalent in service and useful life.

2. Modify such requirements with respect to existing establishments in those areas where mate-rial is stored and he finds no dust or mud problems would result.

D. The following minimum required off-street parking spaces, and adequate access thereto, shall be maintained on the site:

1. One (1) off-street parking space (nine (9) feet by twenty (20) feet) for each seven thousand (7,000) square feet of site area or fraction thereof for the first two (2) acres, and two (2) off-street parking spaces for each acre thereafter, to be located outside the walls or fences required by subsection B of this Section and to be in compliance with CMC 9162.41 through 9162.7.

2. One (1) off-street loading area (fourteen (14) feet by forty (40) feet) for each acre of site area or fraction thereof, to be located within the walls or fences required by subsection B of this Section.

3. Regardless of the size of the site, a minimum of five (5) parking spaces plus one (1) loading area shall be provided.

The parking spaces required herein shall not be used for the parking of vehicles used directly in the conduct of such use or of renovated, repaired or reassembled vehicles which are owned, operated or in possession of the proprietor of the vehicle dismantling yard or junk and salvage yard.

All off-street parking shall be improved and paved with a surface of three (3) inch asphaltic concrete with concrete wheel stops installed. The interior landscaping, five (5) foot landscaped strip, permanent irrigation system, and decorative wall shall all comply with CMC 9162.52.

E. No wrecked or dismantled vehicles, salvage or junk shall be placed or allowed to remain outside the enclosed yard area.

F. No wrecked or dismantled vehicles, salvage or junk shall be stored at a height greater than that of the surrounding fence or wall.

G. The frontage along all dedicated public streets shall be improved with curbs, gutters and sidewalks.

H. The standards of development as set forth in this Section shall not relieve the proprietors of such establishments from complying with all applicable regulations, laws, and ordinances of the City of Carson, County of Los Angeles and the State of California.

I. The crushing, smashing, baling or reduction of metal where permitted by the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to all of the conditions and required improvements set forth in this Section, and in addition, the maximum noise generated by such operation measured from any point on any adjacent property in a more restrictive zone, or along any street, shall be seventy (70) decibels as measured on the A-scale.

J. All vehicle dismantling yards, junk and salvage yards and vehicle impounding yards shall comply with the requirements set forth in this Section on or before April 1, 1970. (Ord. 78-429)

9148.2 Reserved.
Repealed by Ord. 16-1590. (Ord. 95-1079, Exh. A.)

9148.3 Reserved.
Reserved. (Ord. 79-479, § 8; Ord. 16-1602, § 9)

9148.4 Large Collection Recycling Facility.
No large collection recycling facility shall be established, maintained or enlarged in any zone unless it complies with the following requirements:

A. Shall not be located within one hundred fifty (150) feet, as measured from lot line to lot line, of any residentially zoned property or institutional use (as specified in CMC 9162.21(b));

B. Shall be constructed with durable waterproof and rustproof material if not located within an enclosed building;

C. Shall conduct all collection operations within an enclosed building or within an area enclosed by a decorative reinforced concrete wall. Cargo containers, as defined in CMC 9191.067(A), shall not be used for storage;

D. Shall not occupy any portion of a front setback or any setback which abuts an existing or future public right-of-way;

E. Shall be designated on a site plan to be submitted and approved in accordance with CMC 9172.23;

F. Shall be landscaped to the satisfaction of the Community Development Director;

G. Shall be maintained at all times in a clean, litter-free condition and shall be cleared of loose debris on a daily basis;

H. Shall accept only recyclable materials as defined in CMC 9191.508. If such facility has public access, the collection containers shall be clearly marked to identify the material that may be deposited;

I. Shall not operate with exterior noise levels in excess of 60 dBA as measured at the property line of adjacent noise sensitive land uses such as residential, schools, libraries, community care facilities, hospitals, churches, unsoundproofed offices, hotels, motels and outdoor recreation areas; for all other adjacent uses, exterior noise levels shall not exceed 70 dBA. A noise study extrapolating the exterior noise levels to be generated by the proposed use shall be submitted to and approved by the Community Development Director. Noise contours overlaid on a land use map showing the surrounding property shall accompany such a study;

J. Shall limit the hours of operation from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. if the facility is located within five hundred (500) feet of property zoned for a residential use;

K. Shall obtain the approval of the Community Development Director for all power-driven processing, including aluminum foil and can compacting, baling, plastic shredding, or other light processing activities necessary for the efficient temporary storage and shipment of material, and shall comply with all conditions to mitigate noise and other adverse impacts;

L. Shall comply with sign requirements applicable to the zoning district. The facility shall be clearly marked with the name and telephone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation. Directional signs, bearing no advertising message, may be installed with the approval of the Community Development Director. (Ord. 87-819, § 6)

9148.5 Processing Facility for Recyclables.
No processing facility for recyclables shall be established, maintained, or enlarged in any zone unless it complies with the following requirements:

A. Shall not be located within one hundred fifty (150) feet, as measured from lot line to lot line, of any residentially zoned property or institutional use (as specified in CMC 9162.21(B));

B. Shall conduct all operations, except for incidental storage, within an enclosed building or within an area enclosed by a decorative reinforced concrete wall, with mounded landscaping between the wall and the property line;

C. Shall comply with Section 25250.11 of the California Health and Safety Code if used motor oil is accepted for recycling;

D. Shall be maintained at all times in a clean, litter-free condition and shall be cleared of loose debris on a daily basis;

E. Shall accept only recyclable materials as defined in CMC 9191.508. If such facility has public access, the collection containers shall be clearly marked to identify the material that may be deposited;

F. Shall not operate with exterior noise levels in excess of 60 dBA as measured at the property line of adjacent noise sensitive land uses such as residential, schools, libraries, community care facilities, hospitals, churches, unsoundproofed offices, hotels, motels and outdoor recreation areas; for all other adjacent uses, exterior noise levels shall not exceed 70 dBA. A noise study extrapolating the exterior noise levels to be generated by the proposed use shall be submitted to and approved by the Community Development Director. Noise contours overlaid on a land use map showing the surrounding property shall accompany such a study;

G. Shall limit the hours of operation from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. if the facility is located within five hundred (500) feet of property occupied by noise-sensitive land uses as identified in this Section. The facility will be operated by on-site personnel during the hours the facility is open;

H. Shall not permit dust, fumes, smoke, vibration or odors above ambient levels to impact on neighboring properties;

I. Shall meet all noise level requirements of this Section for any power-driven processing. Light processing facilities for recyclables shall be limited to the baling, briquetting, crushing, compacting, grinding, shredding and sorting of source-separate recyclable materials and the repair of reusable materials;

J. Shall ensure that all collection facilities not within an enclosed building are constructed with durable waterproof and rustproof material;

K. Shall, if a light processing facility for recyclables, be no larger than forty-five thousand (45,000) square feet and have no more than an average of two (2) outbound truck shipments of material per day. A light processing facility for recyclables shall not shred, compact or bale ferrous metals, other than food and beverage containers. (Ord. 87-819, § 7)

9148.6 Cargo Container Storage Facilities.
A. Development Policy. The objectives of these regulations pertaining to cargo container storage facilities are as follows:

1. To provide for the safe and orderly storage of cargo containers in a manner that minimizes the noise, dust, traffic, blight and other adverse environmental impacts of such a use upon the surrounding area.

2. To ensure that the cargo container storage operation is conducted in a safe manner based upon such factors as the permitted height of such containers, the cargo within the containers, and methods of securing the containers so as to prevent shifting and toppling.

3. To ensure adequate screening of cargo containers from the public right-of-way.

4. To ensure that the site is sufficient in size to accommodate the safe storage of containers in accordance with this Section.

B. Site Development.

1. Setbacks.

a. All setbacks abutting a public right-of-way shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet in depth.

b. All setbacks not abutting a public right-of-way shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet in depth.

c. No encroachments are permitted in any setback except that any existing legal, nonconforming encroachment may be permitted to remain, subject to the provisions of CMC 9172.23.

2. Landscaping and Irrigation.

a. Landscaping and irrigation plans shall be prepared and signed by a licensed landscape architect and approved by the Community Development Director prior to occupancy.

b. All landscaped areas shall be well maintained at all times and permanently irrigated with an electronic timer preset for early morning hours.

c. All required yards adjacent to, or visible from, a public right-of-way shall be landscaped utilizing any combination of the following:

(1) Drought resistant plants common to this region, including lawn grasses, flowers, ground covers, vines, shrubs in five (5) to fifteen (15) gallon sizes, and specimen trees;

(2) Decorative materials such as rock, bark, gravel, boulders, wood, brick, block, tile, stucco, ornamental iron, and chain link; or

(3) Artistic features, such as berms, earth mounds, planter beds, fencing, monuments, artwork, sculptures, and fountains.

3. Configuration of Cargo Containers.

a. Cargo containers shall not be stored within five (5) feet of any required screening wall nor within twenty (20) feet of any structure or building.

b. All cargo containers shall be arranged in parallel rows.

c. Except as to cargo containers stored within one thousand (1,000) feet of residentially zoned property or institutional uses, as to which the interim provisions relating to “Cargo Container Storage” contained in CMC 9182.22(A) are applicable during the “Allowable Life” provided for therein, cargo container storage shall comply with the following standards:

(1) The first row which is parallel or adjacent to any property line, or any required setback therefrom, may be stacked to a maximum of three (3) high.

(2) The second row which is parallel or in proximity to any property line, or any required setback therefrom, may be stacked to a maximum of three (3) high.

(3) The third and any subsequent row which is parallel or in proximity to any property line, or any required setback therefrom, may be stacked to a maximum of four (4) high; and

(4) The maximum stacking height on any site is four (4) containers.

d. Cargo container configuration site plan shall be submitted to the Community Development Department for review and approval prior to the commencement of operations. The site plan, as approved by the Director, shall be adhered to at all times.

4. General Requirements.

a. Vehicular parking, loading, and maneuvering areas shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of CMC 9162.0.

b. Areas utilized for the storage of cargo containers shall be surfaced with materials approved by the Community Development Department which adequately prevent dust from becoming airborne and prevent the tracking of mud onto public rights-of-way. The site shall be graded to drain onto the street or shall otherwise be drained in a manner approved by the Director of Public Works.

c. The site shall, to the extent reasonably feasible, be located so as to provide for direct vehicular ingress from and egress to a designated route, as specified in CMC 3261, and to minimize or preclude ingress from and egress to restricted streets, as defined in CMC 3260. These requirements shall not apply to any site where cargo containers are received and transported by rail only.

d. All cargo container storage shall be screened from public rights-of-way. The screening shall be designed and scaled so that its mass and height is compatible with other existing or proposed improvements in the area, and the cargo containers are adequately concealed.

e. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to authorize or permit the storage of cargo containers containing hazardous materials, substances or wastes which are capable of posing an unreasonable risk to health, safety or property, including, but not limited to, any radioactive material, poison, flammable gas, nonflammable gas, flammable liquid, oxidizer, flammable solid, corrosive material (liquid or solid), irritating materials, combustible liquids, explosives, blasting agents, etiologic agents, organic peroxides, hazardous wastes, and regulated materials of classes A, B, C, D and E, the definitions of which may from time to time be designated by the United States Department of Transportation under Title 49 (commencing with Section 1801) of the United States Code and Title 49 (commencing with Section 107) of the Code of Federal Regulations, and adopted by the Commissioner of the California Highway Patrol pursuant to Section 2402.7 of the Vehicle Code.

f. All habitable structures shall be placed on a permanent foundation, and a building permit shall be obtained.

5. Additional Requirements.

a. Cargo container storage facilities located within a redevelopment project area shall be subject to site plan and design review pursuant to CMC 9172.23.

b. In reviewing any application for a business license for compliance with this Code, or in reviewing and approving any site plan, the Community Development Director may impose such additional requirements as may be required to achieve the objectives in subsection (B)(5)(a) of this Section. (Ord. 88-842, § 1; Ord. 93-1026, § 1)

9148.7 Sidewalk, Parking Lot and Tent Sales.
In connection with temporary sidewalk, parking lot, and tent sales, the following requirements shall be met:

A. Only nonprofit organizations and merchants with a permanent location may conduct such sales.

B. The applicant shall obtain written approval to conduct such sales from the property owner.

C. The event shall be conducted outside an enclosed building and shall not encroach upon public rights-of-way.

D. The applicant shall submit adequate plot plans depicting pedestrian and vehicular circulation, parking and fire lanes acceptable to the Planning Division.

E. In the case of a “Tent Sale,” County Fire Department approval must accompany the application.

F. Such sales shall be subject to prior approval of the Director. (Ord. 88-857, § 5; Ord. 89-888, § 2)

9148.8 Truck-Related Uses Located Less than One Hundred (100) Feet from a Residential Zone.
A. If any portion of property utilized for any truck-related use described in this subsection (A)(1) or (A)(2), is less than one hundred (100) feet from the lot line of any residentially zoned property, a conditional use permit shall be required.

(1) Truck parking, maneuvering, loading and off-loading operations, stacking or servicing.

(2) Placement or stacking of trailers or any other similar container for cargo, merchandise, products, materials, etc.

B. Approval of a conditional use permit required by this Section shall include development standards designed to mitigate existing and potential noise, dust, fumes, traffic and other adverse environmental impacts affecting neighboring residential areas. Examples of these development standards may include, but are not limited to, walls, fences, buffer zones, landscaping and other mitigating measures.

C. Notwithstanding subsections A and B of this Section, if, upon review by the Director, it is determined that a warehouse or manufacturing facility has less than three (3) loading zones, ramps, doors or docks; or has a minimum fifty (50) foot separation between truck-related uses and the residential property line; or that no mitigation measures can be imposed that will alleviate existing or potential problems caused by truck-related uses defined in this Section that affect residentially zoned properties, then the Director may waive the requirement for conditional use permit. Any property that has been constructed pursuant to an approved owner’s participation agreement with the City’s Redevelopment Agency or has an approved site plan and design review in accordance with CMC 9172.23, and whose present use is consistent with such owner’s participation agreement or site plan and design review, is not subject to the requirements of this Section. (Ord. 92-982, § 2)

9148.9 Truck Terminal and Truck Yard Facilities.
A. Development Policy. The objectives of these regulations pertaining to truck terminal and truck yard facilities are as follows:

1. To be used in connection with conditional use permit and site plan approval.

2. To provide for the safe and orderly use of land for parking, servicing, repairing or storage of trucks in active use in a manner that minimizes adverse environmental impacts of such a use upon the surrounding area.

3. To ensure that truck terminal and truck yard uses include development standards designed to mitigate existing and potential noise, dust, fumes, traffic and other adverse environmental impacts affecting neighboring residential and commercial areas. Examples of these development standards may include, but are not limited to, walls, fences, buffer zones, landscaping and other mitigating measures.

4. To ensure that the truck terminal and truck yard operations are conducted in a safe manner based upon such factors as the adequate paving, striping of truck parking stalls, lighting, storage within the yard and cargo within the trucks.

5. To ensure adequate screening of truck terminal and truck yard facilities from the public right-of-way.

6. To ensure that the site is sufficient in size to accommodate truck terminal and truck yard uses in accordance with this Section.

B. Site Development.

1. Setbacks.

a. All setbacks abutting a public right-of-way shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet in depth.

b. No encroachments are permitted in any setback except that any existing legal, nonconforming encroachment may be permitted to remain, subject to the provisions of CMC 9172.23.

2. Landscaping and Irrigation.

a. Landscaping and irrigation plans shall be prepared and signed by a licensed landscape architect and approved by the Development Services Group Planning Division prior to occupancy.

b. All landscaped areas shall be well maintained at all times and permanently irrigated with an electronic timer preset for early morning hours.

c. All required yards adjacent to, or visible from, a public right-of-way shall be landscaped utilizing any combination of the following:

(1) Drought resistant plants common to this region, including lawn grasses, flowers, ground covers, vines, shrubs in five (5) to fifteen (15) gallon sizes, and minimum twenty-four (24) inch box specimen trees, of sufficient bulk to provide screening;

(2) Decorative materials such as rock, bark, gravel, boulders, wood, brick, block, tile, stucco, ornamental iron; or

(3) Artistic features, such as berms, earth mounds, planter beds, fencing, monuments, artwork, sculptures, and fountains.

3. Fencing.

a. Fencing materials shall consist of decorative masonry walls, such as splitface, stucco block or slumpstone, and shall be approved by the Development Services Group Planning Division.

b. Decorative wrought iron gates with opaque screening shall be installed at all access points visible from the public right-of-way.

c. Fence height shall comply with CMC 9146.3.

d. Chainlink fencing and barbed or concertina wire shall be prohibited where visible from public right-of-way.

4. Configuration of Truck Parking and Storage.

a. Trucks and permitted storage shall not be stored within five (5) feet of any required screening wall.

b. Truck parking and permitted storage shall be arranged in parallel rows and shall be stripped per CMC 9162.66.

c. A site plan in connection with a Conditional Use Permit application shall be submitted to the Development Services Group Planning Division.

5. General Requirements.

a. Vehicular parking, loading, and maneuvering areas shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of CMC 9162.0.

b. Areas utilized for the parking of truck and permitted storage shall be surfaced with materials approved by the Development Services Group Planning Division which adequately prevent dust from becoming airborne and prevent the tracking of mud onto public rights-of-way. The site shall be graded to drain in accordance with the City’s Standard Urban Storm Water Mitigation Plan (SUSMP) Ordinance and in a manner approved by the City Engineer.

c. The site shall, to the extent reasonably feasible, be located so as to provide for direct vehicular ingress from and egress to a designated route, as specified in CMC 3261 (Oversize Vehicles), and to minimize or preclude ingress from and egress to restricted streets, as defined in CMC 3260 (Truck Routes).

d. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to authorize or permit the storage of hazardous materials, substances or wastes which are capable of posing an unreasonable risk to health, safety or property, including, but not limited to, any radioactive material, poison, flammable gas, nonflammable gas, flammable liquid, oxidizer, flammable solid, corrosive material (liquid or solid), irritating materials, combustible liquids, explosives, blasting agents, etiologic agents, organic peroxides, hazardous wastes, and regulated materials of classes A, B, C, D and E, the definitions of which may from time to time be designated by the United States Department of Transportation under Title 49 (commencing with Section 1801) of the United States Code and Title 49 (commencing with Section 107) of the Code of Federal Regulations, and adopted by the Commissioner of the California Highway Patrol pursuant to Section 2402.7 of the California Vehicle Code.

e. All habitable structures shall be placed on a permanent foundation, and a building permit shall be obtained. (Ord. 04-1308, § 5)

9148.10 Emergency shelters.
A. A single emergency shelter for thirty (30) occupants, or a combination of multiple shelters with a combined capacity not to exceed thirty (30) occupants, shall be allowed as a permitted use in the “ML” (Manufacturing Light) zone and “MH” (Manufacturing Heavy) zone; provided, that all of the requirements and development standards set forth below are satisfied. Any emergency shelter with a capacity greater than thirty (30) occupants shall also be subject to the approval of a conditional use permit.

B. Location Requirements. Emergency shelters shall meet the following location requirements:

1. Emergency shelters serving single adults or families shall be situated a minimum of three hundred (300) feet from another emergency shelter and one thousand (1,000) feet from a residential area, public park, public or private school (not including trade or technology school), universities, colleges, student housing, senior housing, child care facility, and business licensed for on- or off-site sales of alcoholic beverages to the public as measured from property line to property line.

2. Emergency shelters shall be located within one-quarter (1/4) mile of a designated public transportation stop.

C. Development Standards. Emergency shelters shall meet the following development standards:

1. Hours of Operation. The facility shall operate on a first-come, first-serve basis with clients only permitted on site and admitted to the facility between 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. during Pacific Daylight Time, and 5:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. during Pacific Standard Time. Clients must vacate the facility by 8:00 a.m. and have no guaranteed bed for the next night. A curfew of 10:00 p.m. (or earlier) shall be established and strictly enforced and clients shall not be admitted after the curfew.

2. Waiting Area. Adequate waiting areas must be provided within the premises for clients and prospective clients including ten (10) square feet per bed with a minimum one hundred (100) square feet to ensure that public sidewalks or private walkways are not used as queuing or waiting areas.

3. Shelter Management Plan. A shelter management plan shall be submitted as a part of the permit application, which addresses all of the following:

a. Service providers shall maintain sufficient monetary resources to enable them to operate the facility per the shelter management plan, and shall demonstrate to the City prior to approval of the permit application that such funds shall be available for use upon first occupancy of the proposed project and shall reasonably be expected to be available for the life of the project.

b. A minimum of one (1) staff member per fifteen (15) beds shall be awake and on duty when the facility is open. Facility staff shall be trained in operating procedures, safety plans, and assisting clients. The facility shall not employ staff who have been convicted of a felony or who are required to register as a sex registrant under Penal Code Section 290.

c. Service providers shall maintain up-to-date information and referral sheets to give clients and other persons who, for any reason, cannot be served by the establishment.

d. Service providers shall provide criteria to screen clients for admittance eligibility, with the objective to provide first service to individuals with connections to Carson.

e. Service providers will maintain information on individuals utilizing the facility and will ensure that the maximum stay at the facility shall not exceed one hundred twenty (120) days in a three hundred sixty-five (365) day period.

f. Service providers shall continuously monitor waiting areas to inform prospective clients whether they can be served within a reasonable time. If they cannot be served by the provider because of time or resource constraints, the monitor shall inform the client of alternative programs and locations where he or she may seek similar service.

g. Service providers will educate on-site staff to provide adequate knowledge and skills to assist clients in obtaining permanent shelter and income, including referrals to outside assistance agencies. An annual report on this activity will be provided to the City.

h. Service providers shall provide for the timely removal of litter attributable to clients within the vicinity of the facility every twenty-four (24) hour period.

i. Service providers will maintain good communication and have procedures in place to respond to operational issues which may arise from the neighborhood, City staff, or the general public.

j. Service providers shall establish standards for responding to emergencies and incidents expelling clients from the facility. Readmittance policies for clients who have previously been expelled from the facility shall also be established.

k. Alcohol and illegal drug use is prohibited on site. Service providers shall expel clients from the facility if found to be using alcohol or illegal drugs.

l. The establishment shall implement other conditions and/or measures as determined by the City, in consultation with other City/County agencies, necessary to ensure that management and/or clients of the establishment maintain the quiet, safety and cleanliness of the premises and the vicinity of the use.

m. Other requirements as deemed necessary by the City to ensure that the facility does not create an adverse impact to surrounding properties.

n. On a monthly basis, provide an updated list of emergency shelter residents to the Sheriff’s Department.

o. All graffiti on the premises shall be removed by the business operator within twenty-four (24) hours.

p. Installation of anti-loitering signs.

4. Client Restrictions. The emergency shelter operator shall not intake any person as a client if that person is wanted by the police or has a record of committing violent offenses. The emergency shelter operator shall also conduct a background check on all prospective clients using Megan’s Law database and restrict client intake in accordance with State and local registered sex offender residency restrictions.

5. Maximum Number of Beds. No more than a total of forty-five (45) beds shall be provided on the entire property where the emergency shelter is located. Beds shall be provided for men and women in separate and secured areas.

6. No Alcohol, Drugs or Weapons Allowed. At no time shall any client be allowed to keep on site any alcoholic beverages, drugs or weapons of any kind. The manager of the emergency shelter shall conduct routine inspections of each client’s personal space to verify compliance and report to the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Office any client that is found in possession of illegal substances, drugs, and/or weapons of any kind.

7. Personal Space. A minimum of thirty (30) square feet shall be allocated for each client bed.

8. Restroom and Shower Facilities. Separate and secured restrooms and shower facilities shall be provided for men and women with at least two (2) toilets, one (1) shower and one (1) sink provided for every twenty (20) clients in accordance with Building Code requirements.

9. Common Space. Interior and/or exterior common space for the on-site clients to congregate shall be provided on the property at a ratio of not less than fifteen (15) square feet per occupant or a minimum overall area of four hundred (400) square feet, whichever is greater. Any outdoor storage, including, but not limited to, items brought on site by clients for overnight stays, shall be screened from public view by a minimum six (6) foot tall decorative wall or fence. Shopping carts are not permitted on site.

10. Food Service Areas. The emergency shelter operator shall be responsible for compliance with all applicable Los Angeles County Health Department regulations in providing food service to its clients.

11. Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided at a ratio of one (1) on-site parking space for every eight (8) adult beds, plus one (1) additional space designated for the on-site manager. No client shall sleep or live within a motor vehicle on the property of an emergency shelter at any time.

12. Bicycle Racks. Bicycle racks that allow for the secure storage of bicycles shall be provided. Bicycle racks shall accommodate at least one (1) bicycle storage space for every eight (8) adult beds. All bicycle racks are required to be located in an area that is not visible from the public right-of-way.

13. Lighting. Each emergency shelter shall provide exterior lighting on pedestrian pathways and parking lot areas on the property for safety. Lighting shall be shielded and/or reflected away from all residential areas and public streets.

14. Security. The emergency shelter shall be required to submit an on-site securing plan for review and approval by the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Office. The emergency shelter operator shall ensure that the approved security plan is implemented at the emergency shelter at all times.

15. Health and Safety. Each emergency shelter shall comply with all applicable local and State health and safety codes such as the California Building Code, California Fire Code, California Health and Safety Code and applicable zoning standards for the development and use of the property on which the emergency shelter is located. (Ord. 13-1525, § 7)

PART 5. OPEN SPACE ZONE
AND SPECIAL USES
Sections:

Division 1. Uses Permitted

§ 9151.1    Uses Permitted.

§ 9151.12    Uses Permitted on Organic Refuse Landfill Sites.

§ 9151.2    Interpretation of Uses Permitted.

§ 9151.3    Prohibited Uses.

§ 9151.4    Reserved.

Special Uses

§ 9151.5    Unique Characteristics.

§ 9151.6    Establishment of Regulations.

§ 9151.7    Termination.

Division 2. Accessory Uses

§ 9152.1    Caretaker’s or Superintendent’s Residence.

§ 9152.2    Parking.

§ 9152.3    Agricultural Accessory Uses.

§ 9152.4    Reserved.

§ 9152.5    Reserved.

§ 9152.6    Reserved.

§ 9152.7    Reserved.

§ 9152.8    Reserved.

§ 9152.9    Other Accessory Uses.

Division 3. Conditional Use Criteria

§ 9153    Conditional Use Criteria.

Division 4. (Reserved)

Division 5. Site Requirements

§ 9155.1    Reserved.

§ 9155.2    Minimum Lot Area and Width.

§ 9155.3    Street Frontage and Access.

Division 6. Site Development Standards

Buildings and Structures

§ 9156.11    Buildings and Structures Permitted.

§ 9156.12    Height of Buildings and Structures.

§ 9156.21    Ground Coverage.

§ 9156.22    Future Rights-of-Way.

§ 9156.23    Front Yard and Side Yard Abutting a Street.

§ 9156.24    Yard Abutting Property in Another Zone.

§ 9156.25    Reserved.

§ 9156.26    Reserved.

§ 9156.27    Reserved.

§ 9156.28    Reserved.

§ 9156.29    Encroachments.

§ 9156.3    Reserved.

§ 9156.4    Reserved.

Other Site Development Standards

§ 9156.5    Other Site Development Standards (Parking, Trash and Recycling Areas, Walls, Etc.)

§ 9156.6    Reserved.

§ 9156.7    Signs.

§ 9156.8    Utilities.

§ 9156.9    Site Planning and Design.

Division 7. Environmental Effects

§ 9157.1    Exterior Lighting.

Division 8. (Reserved)

Division 9. Special Use Zones

§ 9159.1    SU-CEM Zone (Cemetery).

§ 9159.2    SU-BP Zone (Blimp Port).

§ 9159.3    SU-COL Zone (College).

Division 1. Uses Permitted
9151.1 Uses Permitted.
Uses permitted in the Open Space Zone and are eligible for consideration as a Special Use (see CMC 9151.5 through 9151.7) as indicated in the following table:

USES PERMITTED IN THE OPEN SPACE ZONE OR ELIGIBLE FOR CONSIDERATION AS A SPECIAL USE

Legend

X.

Automatically permitted use.

L.

Automatically permitted use provided special limitations and requirements are satisfied as noted herein.

D.

Use permitted subject to the approval of the Director.

C.

Use permitted upon approval of a Conditional Use Permit.

CC.

Use permitted upon approval of the City Council as prescribed under other provisions of the Carson Municipal Code.

S.

Eligible for consideration as a Special Use to be permitted under additional regulations adopted pursuant to CMC 9151.6.

 

 

ZONE

 

OS

Special Use

General:

 

 

Major public use.

 

S

Major private institution.

 

S

Education:

 

 

University or college.

 

S

Recreation:

 

 

Publicly owned outdoor recreation – parks, playgrounds, picnic grounds and recreational facilities, including incidental buildings (no motor-driven or jet-propelled model airplane area):

 

 

With not more than 1,000 spectator seats.

X

S

With more than 1,000 spectator seats.

C

S

Publicly owned recreation buildings not incidental to outdoor recreation.

C

S

Privately owned outdoor recreation – parks, playgrounds, picnic grounds and recreational facilities, including incidental buildings (no motor-driven or jet-propelled model airplane area).

C

S

Archery range.

C

 

Campground (including transient recreational vehicles), hostel.

C

 

Trails – hiking, biking, equestrian.

X

 

Golf course and club.

C

S

Golf pitch-and-putt course, driving range, miniature golf.

C

 

Riding academy, stable – public, private or commercial.

C

 

Outdoor festival or fairgrounds – permanent.

C

S

Stadium or sports arena, horse racing (no motor vehicle racing).

C

S

Zoo.

C

S

Natural Resources:

 

 

Archaeological dig, provided the Director determines there is a reasonable prospect that significant scientific, cultural or historical information will be obtained from the site.

D

D

Ecological preserve for plant life and wildlife, conservation area, scenic area.

X

 

Borrow pit.

C

S

Oil field or oil wells. (See CMC 9502.)

 

 

Agriculture:

 

 

Cultivation of plants including nursery, orchard, vineyards, field crops, flowers (no mushroom farm, no retail sales).

X

 

Greenhouse, lathhouse

C

 

Cemetery:

 

 

Cemetery, mausoleum, columbarium, crematory.

 

S

Transportation, Communications, Utilities:

 

 

Blimp port.

C

S

Heliport, helistop.

C

 

Right-of-way and line facilities for pipelines, power transmission line (no yard terminal, station or loading/unloading area).

X

 

Power plant, water or sewage treatment plant, or other major utility plant.

S

Electrical distribution substation, pumping station, water well, gas measurement or control station.

C

 

Water reservoir.

C

S

Flood control channel, detention basin.

X

 

Communications Facilities:

 

 

Minor communications facilities, subject to the requirement of CMC 9138.16.

L

L

Major communications facilities, subject to the requirement of CMC 9138.16.

C

C

Parking lot (no parking structure).

C

 

Access to other property lawfully used for purposes not permitted on subject property, provided the Director finds no available alternative access is preferable and the open space character of the area will not be adversely affected.

D

 

Temporary Uses:

 

 

Contractor’s office and/or storage of construction materials and equipment at a construction site during the period of construction and not to exceed 60 days thereafter. In the event construction is suspended for a period of 6 months, such use and material shall be terminated and removed.

L

L*

Carnival, mechanical rides, pony rides, outdoor festival, and similar uses. (See CMC 63119 and 63119.1.)

CC

CC*

Circus, rodeo. (See CMC 63120; and Animal Control Ordinance, CMC 3300 – 3301.)

CC

CC*

Christmas tree sales, pumpkin sales.

CC

CC*

Yard sales. (See CMC 4600 – 4606.)

L

L

Tent revival.

CC

CC

*May be permitted temporarily on a site for which a permanent Special Use has been authorized.

Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Section shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 2 of Article I. (Ord. 79-479, § 9; Ord. 78-446; Ord. 80-532, § 7; Ord. 82-602, § 3; Ord. 10-1460, § 2; Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 13))

9151.12 Uses Permitted on Organic Refuse Landfill Sites.
A. No use except as hereinafter provided, shall be permitted on property designated as ORL (Organic Refuse Landfill) without the approval of a conditional use permit by both the Commission and the Council. Such conditional use permit shall require, as a condition precedent to use of the property under the conditional use permit, approval by the Building and Safety Division and the Council of a report submitted by the applicant pursuant to the applicable provisions of the Building Code, prepared by a licensed civil engineer designated by the applicant and approved by the City, which shall provide and include plans for a protective system or systems designated to eliminate or mitigate the potential hazards and environmental risks associated with the proposed use. Approval of such report by the Building and Safety Division shall be in the discretion of the Building Official, who shall evaluate any risks and hazards associated with the site and proposed use and who may grant approval only if he finds that the report and plans adequately provide for protection against such associated risks and hazards. The Building Official’s approval shall be submitted to the Council for final approval which will be in the discretion of the Council.

The following uses are exempt from the provisions of this Section:

1. Uses which do not involve buildings or structures, including but not limited to outdoor storage, display and outdoor recreational facilities.

2. Construction of structures which are unoccupiable, such as signs, flagpoles, walls, fences and towers, but not including storage tanks.

3. Paving of no more than twenty (20) percent of the site.

4. Repair or minor alterations to existing structures which do not increase floor area. (Ord. 78-449; Ord. 81-560, § 1; Ord. 82-586, § 1)

B. An application for a conditional use permit required by subsection A of this Section shall be considered in accordance with CMC 9172.21, except that the Commission’s decision shall be referred to the Council for review as if an appeal had been filed pursuant to CMC 9173.4.

C. Every conditional use permit for a use located on property designated as ORL (Organic Refuse Landfill) shall be subject to the following conditions in addition to any other conditions that the Commission or the Council may impose:

1. Approval by the Building Official of the report provided for in subsection A of this Section.

2. The applicant shall comply with a development schedule approved by the Community Development Director.

3. All measures to eliminate or mitigate the hazards and environmental risks associated with the site proposed in the report approved by the Building Official provided for in subsection A of this Section shall be subject to approval by the Council and shall be incorporated into the project. Such measures shall include monitoring, evaluation and control of methane gas produced by the site as the City shall determine to be necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare with respect to the production or migration of methane gas.

4. Monitoring and regular inspections and reports by a licensed civil engineer designated by the applicant and monitored, evaluated and approved by the Building Official shall be done and filed with the City from time to time as directed by the Building Official at the applicant’s cost.

5. The mitigation measures required by subsection (C)(3) shall be implemented to the satisfaction of the Building Official and City Council. In the event that the Building Official or Council finds that such measures when implemented are inadequate to protect the public health, safety, or welfare, the Building Official or Council may (1) require additional mitigation measures to be incorporated into the project, or (2) after notice to the applicant and an opportunity to be heard, declare the conditional use permit null and void if the Council finds that the public health, safety or welfare cannot be adequately protected to the satisfaction of the Council.

6. Adequate measures shall be taken to eliminate odors from the site to the satisfaction of the Building Official.

7. The applicant shall, at the applicant’s own expense, carry public liability insurance during the existence of the conditional use permit, with a company and policy to be approved by the City Attorney, covering liability for injuries or death arising out of or in connection with the use of the site pursuant to said permit in an amount not less than $5,000,000. The City shall be named as an additional assured under such insurance policy. (Ord. 79-471; Ord. 81-560, § 1)

D. Whenever both subsection A and any other Section of this Chapter require a conditional use permit for a particular property, only one (1) conditional use permit shall be required, which shall be applied for, processed and considered pursuant to the provisions of subsection B of this Section. The application and conditional use permit, if approved, shall refer to both Sections which are applicable.

E. Subsection A of this Section shall not apply to the following:

1. Any lawfully established existing use.

2. An expansion of an existing, lawfully established use on a lot on which such existing use was approved provided that the existence of an organic refuse landfill in such lot is shown by the record to have been considered by the granting body in connection with the approval of such existing use.

3. Any proposed use for which a conditional use permit requiring approval of methane gas control measures by the Council either (1) has been granted, or (2) has been applied for and is being processed on the effective date of this Section; provided, that subsection A of this Section shall apply if such conditional use permit which has been granted expires, is declared to be null and void or is otherwise terminated or if such conditional use permit for which an application is being processed is thereafter denied. (Ord. 78-449; Ord. 79-471; Ord. 81-560, § 1; Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 14))

9151.2 Interpretation of Uses Permitted.
Further definition and enumeration of uses permitted in the Open Space Zone or eligible for consideration as a Special Use shall be determined by means of Interpretation in accordance with CMC 9172.24.

9151.3 Prohibited Uses.
All uses are prohibited except as expressly permitted by the provisions of this Chapter.

9151.4 Reserved.
Special Uses

9151.5 Unique Characteristics.
A use of type identified in the Special Use column of CMC 9151.1, and which is found to meet one (1) or more of the following criteria, may be permitted under special use regulations adopted pursuant to CMC 9151.6:

A. The use requires an exceptionally large land area.

B. The use will have a major impact on the surrounding pattern of community development.

C. Provision for the use in the zoning pattern could not reasonably have been anticipated.

D. The use constitutes a major institution or mixed-use complex which does not logically or compatibly fit into the established zoning classifications.

E. The use will be owned and/or operated by another governmental agency over which the City has only limited or no zoning authority.

F. The use involves natural resources, recreational facilities or other uses permitted in the OS Zone, but under circumstances where the preservation of an open space character is not an objective.

9151.6 Establishment of Regulations.
Upon finding that a proposed use is eligible for consideration as a Special Use, the Commission or Council may initiate proceedings, to be conducted in the same manner as for a Zone Change (as provided in CMC 9172.13), to designate an additional zoning classification for such use, to establish regulations for that zoning classification, and to change the Zoning Map to show the area to which such classification applies.

9151.7 Termination.
Upon determining that an authorized Special Use will not be developed, or has been or will be permanently discontinued or abandoned, the Commission, on or before such date of abandonment or on such date of determination, whichever is later, shall initiate proceedings to restudy the General Plan as it relates to the area and to change the Zoning Map to one (1) or more appropriate zones within one (1) year of the date of such initiation.

Division 2. Accessory Uses
9152.1 Caretaker’s or Superintendent’s Residence.
In the OS Zone, a residence for the family of a caretaker or superintendent may be approved by a Conditional Use Permit as an accessory use to any permitted principal use. Only one (1) such residence for each site shall be permitted.

9152.2 Parking.
In the OS Zone, an accessory one-story garage or carport, or open parking area at or below ground level is permitted to serve permitted uses on the same site. An accessory parking structure of more than one (1) story above ground level may be approved by a Conditional Use Permit.

9152.3 Agricultural Accessory Uses.
In connection with a permitted agricultural use in the OS Zone, the following accessory uses are permitted:

A. Shelters for farm machinery and equipment used on the premises.

B. Wholesale trade (but no retail sales) of the products raised on the premises. No advertising signs are permitted.

9152.4 Reserved.
9152.5 Reserved.
9152.6 Reserved.
9152.7 Reserved.
9152.8 Reserved.
9152.9 Other Accessory Uses.
Other accessory uses, facilities or activities similar to those permitted by CMC 9152.1 through 9152.8 or found to be customary or necessary in connection with a permitted use may be permitted if so interpreted in accordance with CMC 9172.24.

Division 3. Conditional Use Criteria
9153 Conditional Use Criteria.
In addition to the general criteria for the approval of a Conditional Use Permit pursuant to CMC 9172.21(D)(1), the following shall be considered in acting upon a Conditional Use Permit in the OS Zone:

The use shall not detract from the intended open space character of the area.

Division 4. (Reserved)
Division 5. Site Requirements*
*Applicable to OS Zone only.

9155.1 Reserved.
9155.2 Minimum Lot Area and Width.
In the OS Zone, any existing lawfully established lot (including a leased area of land during the term of the lease) is deemed to have the required lot area and lot width. No such lot shall be further reduced in area or width except:

A. An acquisition of a portion of a lot may be made for public purposes; or

B. When determined, in connection with the approval of a parcel map or tract map, that the division of land will not detract from the open space character of the area; or

C. When a division of land is approved in connection with a Conditional Use permit; or

D. When all of the lot within the OS Zone is dedicated for open space use.

9155.3 Street Frontage and Access.
In the OS Zone, no lot shall be created, and no new or additional use shall be developed on an existing lawfully established lot (including a leased area of land during the term of the lease) unless there is vehicular access from a public street or alley, and such access has a width of at least twenty (20) feet. The required vehicular access shall be either directly from a public street or alley or by means of a right-of-way or easement. (Ord. 79-460, § 4)

Division 6. Site Development Standards*
*Applicable to OS Zone only.

Buildings and Structures

9156.11 Buildings and Structures Permitted.
In the OS Zone, all buildings and structures shall be incidental or subordinate to a primarily outdoor activity or open space use unless otherwise approved by a Conditional Use Permit.

9156.12 Height of Buildings and Structures.
In the OS Zone, there is no restriction on the height of buildings and structures except as may be required by a Conditional Use Permit.

9156.21 Ground Coverage.
In the OS Zone, the ground area included within the exterior walls and/or supporting columns of all roofed structures shall not exceed five (5) percent of the net lot area unless otherwise approved by a Conditional Use Permit or with the approval of a use by the Director or the Council as authorized under CMC 9151.1.

9156.22 Future Rights-of-Way.
This Section is applicable only where portions of a lot are within areas planned to be part of future streets, alleys or public rights-of-way, as determined by the Director.

In cases to which this Section is applicable, unless otherwise approved by the Commission, the portion of any lot within such future right-of-way areas shall not be occupied by structures other than those encroachments allowed in future right-of-way areas pursuant to CMC 9156.29. All other required setbacks, yards and open spaces shall be provided in addition to the future right-of-way areas, and the future right-of-way lines shall be considered to be lot lines for purposes of measuring such other setbacks, yards and open spaces.

9156.23 Front Yard and Side Yard Abutting a Street.
In the OS Zone, each lot shall have a yard with a depth of twenty-five (25) feet from each abutting street unless otherwise approved by the Director for the purpose of maintaining a larger contiguous open space on the interior portion of the lot.

9156.24 Yard Abutting Property in Another Zone.
In the OS Zone, where the side or rear of a lot abuts property in another zone, there shall be a yard on the subject property which conforms to the interior side and rear yard requirements, respectively, of such abutting zone.

9156.25 Reserved.
9156.26 Reserved.
9156.27 Reserved.
9156.28 Reserved.
9156.29 Encroachments.
Every part of a required yard or open space shall be open and unobstructed from finished grade to the sky except for those encroachments permitted pursuant to CMC 9156.5.

9156.3 Reserved.
9156.4 Reserved.
Other Site Development Standards

9156.5 Other Site Development Standards (Parking, Trash and Recycling Areas, Walls, Etc.)
If not otherwise specified pursuant to this Division or in connection with a Conditional Use Permit, a use shall be required to meet the site development standards applicable to the use (or most similar use) within the most restrictive zone which permits such use, either automatically (X) or with limitations (L). (Interpretation of this provision is to be in accordance with CMC 9172.24.) (Ord. 93-1013, § 4)

9156.6 Reserved.
9156.7 Signs.
In the OS Zone, no sign face shall have an area greater than fifty (50) square feet and the total sign area on a lot shall not be greater than two hundred (200) square feet, except as otherwise approved in connection with a Conditional Use Permit or in connection with an approval of a use by the Council as authorized in CMC 9151.1.

9156.8 Utilities.
All new utility lines, other than major transmission lines, shall be placed underground. This requirement may be waived by the Commission where topography, soil, undue financial hardship or other conditions make such underground installation unreasonable or impractical. Undergrounding shall be in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations of the utility, as currently on file with the California Public Utilities Commission.

All aboveground equipment (other than pole lines when permitted), such as transformers and pedestal terminals, which are visible from an adjacent public street or walkway, shall be within a solid enclosure or otherwise screened from public view. Such enclosure/screening shall be in accordance with the utility’s service requirement. (Amended by Int. 3-79)

9156.9 Site Planning and Design.
Within any D (Design Overlay) designated area all development subsequent to the date of such designation shall be in conformance with development plans which have been approved pursuant to the Site Plan and Design Review procedure as provided in CMC 9172.23. No permit shall be issued for grading or construction involving significant exterior changes, as determined by the Director, which is not in conformance with such approved development plans.

Division 7. Environmental Effects
9157.1 Exterior Lighting.
All lighting of buildings, landscaping, parking lots, recreation areas and similar facilities shall be directed away from all adjoining and nearby residential property. Such lighting shall be arranged and controlled so as not to create a nuisance or hazard to traffic or to the living environment. This Section is also applicable to arc lights, searchlights and similar devices.

Division 8. (Reserved)
Division 9. Special Use Zones
9159.1 SU-CEM Zone (Cemetery).
A. Applicability. The provisions of this Section shall be applicable in the SU-CEM Zone.

B. Uses Permitted.

1. Principal Use. The following principal use shall be permitted:

a. Cemetery.

2. Accessory Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit. The following accessory uses shall be permitted, provided a Conditional Use Permit therefor is approved:

a. Columbarium.

b. Crematory.

Existing facilities of the type listed in the above paragraph shall be subject to the provisions of CMC 9183.3.

In addition to the general criteria for the approval of a Conditional Use Permit pursuant to CMC 9172.21(D)(1), the following shall be considered in acting upon a Conditional Use Permit in the SU-CEM Zone:

a. The use shall be unobtrusive from adjacent residential and school areas.

b. The open space character of the overall development shall be maintained.

c. Adequate provision shall be made for continued maintenance.

d. Additional traffic hazard shall not be created.

e. There shall be no adverse environmental effects upon surrounding property

3. Permitted Accessory Uses. The following accessory uses shall be permitted:

a. Caretaker’s residence – one (1) residential unit only.

b. Offices.

c. Maintenance buildings and outdoor storage areas.

d. Off-street parking (the provisions of CMC 9152.2 shall apply).

e. Mausoleum.

f. Other accessory uses, facilities or activities found to be customary or necessary in connection with the maintenance, upkeep or visitation of the permitted use, if so interpreted in accordance with CMC 9172.24, but not including a mortuary, chapel or auditorium.

C. Site Requirement. The entire existing site shall not be reduced in size except by street dedication and shall be maintained under a single management.

D. Site Development Standards.

1. Height of Buildings and Structures. Main buildings and accessory buildings permitted under subsection (B)(2) of this Section shall not exceed a height of thirty (30) feet unless otherwise approved under a Conditional Use Permit.

2. Ground Coverage. The ground area included within the exterior walls and/or supporting columns of all roofed structures shall not exceed five (5) percent of the net lot area unless otherwise approved under a Conditional Use Permit.

3. Front Yard. There shall be a front yard with a depth of at least twenty (20) feet.

4. Side and Rear Yards. There shall be a side yard on each side of the site at least ten (10) feet in width, and a rear yard at least ten (10) feet in depth.

5. Yard Encroachments. Encroachments in required yards shall be subject to the provisions of CMC 9126.29 insofar as applicable and consistent with other provisions of this Section.

6. Screening. Outdoor storage areas, trash areas and mechanical equipment shall be enclosed within a solid fence or wall at least six (6) feet in height but not more than eight (8) feet in height.

7. Perimeter Walls. The site shall be enclosed along the side and rear lot lines with a solid wall or fence at least six (6) feet in height but not more than eight (8) feet in height. This provision shall not apply within the required front yard area nor along any lot line adjacent to the OS Zone.

8. Street Dedication and Improvement. The provisions of Division 1 of Part 6 of this Chapter shall apply.

9. Parking. The provisions of Division 2 of Part 6 of this Chapter shall apply, but only in relation to any new, additional or intensified use or development.

10. Access. Any change in the means or arrangement of access from a public street within the City of Carson shall be subject to the approval of the Director of Public Works.

11. Signs. Signs shall be limited to identification, directional and informational messages pertaining to the permitted use of the site. No sign face shall have an area greater than fifty (50) square feet and the total sign face area on the site shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet.

12. Utilities. All utility lines on the site shall be placed underground. All aboveground utility equipment shall be within a solid enclosure or otherwise screened from public view. Such enclosure/screening shall be in accordance with the utility’s service requirement.

13. Site Planning and Design. All new or additional development shall be in conformance with development plans which have been approved pursuant to the Site Plan and Design Review procedure as provided in CMC 9172.23. No permit shall be issued for grading or construction, or sign installed, involving significant exterior changes as determined by the Director, which is not in conformance with such approved development plans.

14. Landscaping. The entire site including any abutting parkway area in the street right-of-way, other than paved areas, screened storage areas and land occupied by structures, shall be covered with turf or other landscaping.

E. Environmental Effects.

1. Lighting. The provisions of CMC 9157.1 shall apply.

F. Maintenance. Within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this Section, the owner or operator of any cemetery within the SU-CEM Zone shall submit to the Director, for record purposes, a copy of documents setting forth all agreements and arrangements for continuing care and maintenance of the premises.

Any change in the agreements or arrangements for continuing care and maintenance of the premises or the method of financing such care shall be submitted to the Director. Any such change which in the opinion of the Director could result in a reduction in the quality, amount, continuity or length of time of such care shall be subject to approval in the same manner as for a modification of conditions of a Conditional Use Permit pursuant to CMC 9172.21(G).

G. Nonconformities. Any and all existing lawfully established features, development and uses of the site shall be permitted to continue without change. All new developments or use, alterations or changes shall be in conformance with the provisions of this Section.

H. Previous Approvals Superseded. Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 9183.3, except as provided in subsection (B)(2)(a) of this Section, any previous approval for the use or development of property within the SU-CEM Zone, granted prior to the effective date of this Section under the zoning regulations of the City of Carson or granted prior to the incorporation of the City under the Zoning Ordinance of the County of Los Angeles or under the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Compton is hereby declared null and void and superseded by the provisions of this Section. (Ord. 78-425)

9159.2 SU-BP Zone (Blimp Port).
A. Applicability. The provisions of this Section shall be applicable in the SU-BP Zone.

B. Uses Permitted.

1. Principal Use. The following principal use shall be permitted:

a. Blimp port, subject to the following limitations:

(1) Except in case of emergency, this facility shall be used only by lighter-than-air ships (blimps). No other types of aircraft shall use, be stored or be kept on the subject property.

(2) Only blimp operations of a public relations nature shall be permitted; except, with prior notification and approval by the Director, blimp operations shall be permitted for special events or special projects, and with Planning Commission approval, the management may sell tickets for amusement rides aboard the blimp.

(3) Airship repairs shall be permitted at this facility. All repair activities, other than emergencies, shall be conducted within an enclosed building and shall be so located or soundproofed as to prevent annoyance or detriment to surrounding property. In no case shall doors or windows be permitted in any wall within one hundred (100) feet of and facing a residential zone. Repair activities shall be confined to the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. daily.

2. Permitted Accessory Uses. The following accessory uses shall be permitted:

a. Caretaker’s residence – one (1) residential unit only.

b. Offices.

c. Maintenance buildings and outdoor storage areas.

d. Off-street parking (the provisions of CMC 9152.2 shall apply).

e. Visitor facilities and landscaped park area.

f. Blimp hangar, subject to a Conditional Use Permit.

g. Other accessory uses, facilities or activities found to be customary or necessary in connection with permitted uses, if so interpreted in accordance with CMC 9172.24.

C. Site Requirements. The entire existing site of approximately twenty-seven (27) acres shall not be reduced in size except by dedication for street purposes or other publicly owned right-of-way, and shall be maintained in a single ownership and under the management and control of one (1) organization.

D. Site Development Standards.

1. Height of Buildings and Structures. Unless otherwise approved by a Conditional Use Permit, buildings and structures, other than a blimp mooring mast(s) and one (1) identification sign, shall not exceed a height of twenty (20) feet.

2. Ground Coverage. The ground area included within the exterior walls and/or supporting columns of all roofed structures shall not exceed five (5) percent of the net lot area.

3. Yards. Abutting each street and property line, there shall be a yard with a depth of at least twenty-five (25) feet.

4. Every part of a required yard or open space shall be open and unobstructed from finished grade to the sky except that permitted signs, off-street parking and fencing may be located within such yards. Other encroachments in required yards shall be subject to the provisions of CMC 9136.29 insofar as applicable and consistent with other provisions of this Section.

5. Screening. Outdoor storage areas, trash areas and mechanical equipment shall be enclosed within a solid fence or wall at least six (6) feet in height but not more than eight (8) feet in height.

6. Perimeter Fencing. The entire site shall be enclosed with a chain link or other open-mesh type of fence at least four (4) feet in height but not more than fifteen (15) feet in height. The public parking and other visitor arrival areas shall be separated from airship operations and maintenance areas by fencing at least three and one-half (3-1/2) feet in height.

7. Street Dedication and Improvement. The provisions of Division 1 of Part 6 of this Chapter shall apply.

8. Parking. The provisions of Division 2 of Part 6 of this Chapter shall apply subject to the following additional provisions:

a. There shall be a minimum of thirty (30) improved parking spaces located on the site.

b. In case of a special event or emergency situation, the turf or sod areas of the site may be used temporarily for overflow parking.

9. Access. Vehicular access to the site, including the parking areas, shall be subject to the review and approval of the Director of Public Works.

10. Signs.

a. Not more than two (2) large identification sign structures shall be permitted, with not more than four (4) sign faces totaling not more than twenty-one thousand five hundred twenty-eight (21,528) square feet of sign face area. Said signs shall not exceed eighty-eight (88) feet in height, and three hundred seventy (370) feet in length.

b. In addition, the site shall be permitted three (3) other signs for identification, directional or informational purposes only. Unless otherwise approved by a Conditional Use Permit, each such sign face shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet in area.

11. Utilities. All utility lines on the site shall be placed underground. All aboveground utility equipment shall be within a solid enclosure or otherwise screened from public view. Such enclosure/screening shall be in accordance with the utility’s service requirement.

12. Site Planning and Design. All new or additional development shall be in conformance with development plans which have been approved pursuant to the Site Plan and Design Review procedure as provided in CMC 9172.23. No permit shall be issued for grading or construction involving significant exterior changes, as determined by the Director, which is not in conformance with such approved development plans.

13. Drainage. Provisions shall be made for all natural drainage to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works. Prior to any additional grading or construction, drainage plans shall be approved by the Director of Public Works.

14. Landscaping. The landscaping of the site, including parking areas and access thereto, shall be provided in accordance with a landscape plan approved by the Director. All portions of the property, and any abutting parkway area in a street right-of-way, other than paved areas and land occupied by structures, shall be covered with turf, sod or other suitable plant materials, and shall be provided with a suitable irrigation system. All landscaping shall be continuously maintained and cared for.

E. Environmental Effects.

1. Lighting. All floodlighting of the blimp, signs, buildings, parking lots, landscaping and other facilities shall be shielded and directed away from surrounding property, streets and freeways. This Section is also applicable to arc lights, searchlights and similar lighting devices.

2. Fire Protection. Prior to commencing construction of any additional or expanded buildings or structures on the subject property, the owner shall ascertain, from the Los Angeles County Forester and Fire Warden, what facilities are necessary to protect the property from fire hazard. Such facilities may include water mains, fire hydrants, and fire flow, which, prior to occupancy of any such buildings or structures, shall be provided as required by the Forester and Fire Warden.

F. Regulations of Other Agencies. Compliance with all applicable regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration, California Aeronautical Commission and other applicable laws and regulations of Federal, State and local agencies shall be required.

G. Nonconformities. The provisions of Division 2 of Part 8 of this Chapter shall apply.

H. Revocation. Permission to use property in the SU-BP Zone as provided in this Section is subject to revocation pursuant to CMC 9172.28. Upon revocation becoming effective, CMC 9151.7 shall become operative with respect to such property.

I. Previous Approvals Superseded. Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 9183.3, the previous approval for the use and development of the subject property, granted by the County of Los Angeles under Zone Exception Case No. 8481-(2) prior to the incorporation of the City of Carson, is hereby declared null and void and superseded by the provisions of this Section. (Ord. 78-425; Ord. 17-1616, § 1)

9159.3 SU-COL Zone (College).
A. Applicability. The provisions of this Section shall be applicable in the SU-COL Zone.

B. Uses Permitted.

1. Principal Use. The following principal use shall be permitted:

a. A public or private academic institution of education at the college or university level of instruction. This use shall include, but not be limited to, classrooms, administrative offices, student union, gymnasium, field house, library, science laboratories, auditoriums, and communication center.

2. Permitted Accessory Uses. The following accessory uses shall be permitted:

a. Parking facilities.

b. Health Center.

c. Dormitories.

d. Eating establishments.

e. Other accessory facilities customary to the permitted principal use. (Interpretation of this provision is to be in accordance with CMC 9172.24.)

C. Site Requirement. The entire existing site shall not be reduced in size except by a street dedication and shall be maintained under a single ownership.

D. Site Development Standards. Because the City is preempted under state law from regulating uses located on property in the SU-COL Zone, there are no specific site development standards; provided, that all principal and accessory uses comply with all applicable rules and regulations of the Board of Trustees of the California State University and Colleges, California State Department of Finance, California Public Works Board, Office of the State Fire Marshal and Office of the State Architect. Wherever feasible, the City should be permitted to review all future development plans of the campus to ascertain the probable impacts upon the community as a whole and to report to campus officials findings of deleterious impacts and to recommend mitigating measures, in an effort to afford better communication between the City and the campus officials and their regulatory agencies.

E. Environmental Effects. All lighting in buildings, landscaping, parking lots and similar facilities shall be directed away from all adjoining and nearby residential property. Such lighting shall be arranged and controlled so as not to create a nuisance or hazard to traffic or to the living environment. This Section is also applicable to arc lights, search lights and similar lighting devices. (Ord. 78-425)

PART 6. GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Sections:

Division 1. Street Dedication and Improvement

§ 9161.1    Purpose, Definitions and Applicability.

§ 9161.2    Exceptions.

§ 9161.3    Dedications.

§ 9161.4    Improvement Requirements for Buildings and Structures.

§ 9161.5    Agreement to Improve.

§ 9161.6    Construction Standards.

§ 9161.7    Improvement Security and In-Lieu Fees.

§ 9161.8    Relief from Compliance.

§ 9161.9    Appeals.

§ 9161.10    Parkway Trees.

Division 2. Vehicular Parking, Loading and Maneuvering Areas

§ 9162    Development Policy.

§ 9162.0    Paving and Drainage of Vehicular Areas.

Off-Street Parking

§ 9162.1    General Requirements.

§ 9162.21    Parking Spaces Required.

§ 9162.22    Parking Spaces Required for Uses Not Specified.

§ 9162.23    Computation of Required Parking Spaces.

§ 9162.24    Automobile Parking Spaces Required for Mixed Uses.

§ 9162.25    Change in Intensity.

§ 9162.26    Change in Use.

§ 9162.27    Conversion of Parking Spaces Serving a Dwelling.

§ 9162.28    Additions or Alterations to a Dwelling.

§ 9162.29    Reserved.

§ 9162.3    Location of Parking.

§ 9162.41    Automobile Parking Stall Size.

§ 9162.42    Parking for the Disabled and Associated Signing and Ramping.

§ 9162.43    Compact Automobile Parking Spaces.

§ 9162.44    Reserved.

§ 9162.45    Reserved.

§ 9162.46    Reserved.

§ 9162.47    Reserved.

§ 9162.48    Reserved.

§ 9162.49    Reserved.

§ 9162.50    Reserved.

§ 9162.51    Standards for Automobile Parking Lot Design.

§ 9162.52    Landscaping Requirements.

§ 9162.53    Lighting.

§ 9162.54    Reserved.

§ 9162.55    Perimeter Guards.

§ 9162.56    Marking of Automobile Parking Areas.

Truck Loading and Maneuvering

§ 9162.61    Truck Maneuvering and Loading Facility Standards.

§ 9162.62    Design Standards for Truck Loading Facilities, Maneuvering Areas, and Parking and Stacking Spaces.

§ 9162.63    Truck Loading Facilities and Maneuvering Areas Required.

§ 9162.64    Truck Vehicle Space Specifications.

§ 9162.65    Requirements Relating to Vehicular Parking and Truck Loading, Maneuvering, Parking and Stacking Space for Industrial Uses.

§ 9162.66    Marking of Truck Loading and Parking and Stacking Spaces.

Driveway Access and Traffic Sight Clearance

§ 9162.7    On-Site Automobile and Truck Maneuvering Standards.

§ 9162.8    Driveway Widths, Driveway Approaches and Traffic Sight Distance.

Division 3. Walls

§ 9163.1    Reserved.

§ 9163.2    Noise-Absorbing Walls on Residential Lot Lines.

Division 4. Trash and Recycling Areas

§ 9164.1    Purpose, Definitions and Applicability.

§ 9164.2    Residential Trash Areas.

§ 9164.3    Nonresidential Trash Areas.

§ 9164.4    Collection and Loading of Recyclable Materials.

§ 9164.5    Design Standards for Trash and Recycling Areas.

Division 5. Transportation Demand and Trip Reduction Measures

§ 9165.1    Transportation Demand and Trip Reduction Measures.

§ 9165.2    Transportation Information.

§ 9165.3    Bicycle Parking and Preferential Automobile Parking Spaces.

Division 6. Project Grading

§ 9166.1    Project Grading.

§ 9166.2    Conditions for Project Grading.

Division 7. Signs

§ 9167.1    Signs.

§ 9167.2    Exempt Signs.

§ 9167.3    Prohibited Signs.

§ 9167.6    Repealed.

§ 9167.7    Substitution Clause.

§ 9167.8    Removal of Unauthorized Signs from the Public Right-of-Way.

Division 8. Water Efficient Landscaping

§ 9168.1    Adoption of Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance.

§ 9168.2    Definitions.

§ 9168.3    Violations and Penalties.

§ 9168.4    Fees.

§ 9168.5    Amendments to Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance.

Division 1. Street Dedication and Improvement
9161.1 Purpose, Definitions and Applicability.
A. The purpose of this Division 1 is to establish reasonable standards to ensure that, pursuant to the City’s General Plan, all necessary street dedications are made and all required street improvements are completed, constructed, or adequately provided for prior to the issuance of building permits for certain new buildings and structures and prior to their use and occupancy.

B. For the purposes of this Division 1, the following terms shall be defined as follows:

(1) “Building” shall mean any edifice having a roof supported by columns or walls which is intended primarily for human habitation or for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons.

(2) “Structure” shall mean any edifice constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or is attached to something having a location on the ground and is not intended primarily for human habitation or for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, such as petroleum refinery facilities.

C. Subject to the specific exceptions set forth in CMC 9161.2, no building permit shall be issued for any building or structure on any lot, any portion of which abuts upon any public street, unless one-half (1/2) of the street which is located on the same side of the centerline as such lot has been dedicated and improved as provided for in this Division 1. (Ord. 83-634, § 1; Ord. 88-830, § 1)

9161.2 Exceptions.
The provisions of CMC 9161.1 and 9161.3 through 9161.7 shall not apply to building permits for the following types of buildings or structures, or modifications thereto, if such buildings or structures, or modifications thereto, comply with all other applicable requirements of this Chapter:

A. Additions or alterations to existing buildings or structures, including the addition thereto of accessory buildings or structures, for all uses permitted in the RS Zone and two-family dwellings permitted in the RM Zone.

B. Outdoor advertising and on-site signage.

C. Accessory structures, the principal use of which is for agricultural purposes.

D. Oil wells.

E. New buildings to be constructed, or existing buildings and structures to be used and occupied, on property for which all required public improvements have been identified or completed pursuant to the applicable provisions of the Subdivision Ordinance and the Subdivision Map Act in effect at the time such development was approved; provided, however, that in all such cases the curbs, gutters, pavement, street lights, sidewalks, and necessary street drainage shall, if not then completed, be constructed or installed by the applicant.

F. New buildings or structures to be constructed as part of a development project where the City Council has, in conjunction with its approval thereof, ratified, approved or adopted a specific plan, an agreement to improve, or a discretionary permit setting forth a phased schedule pursuant to which the requirements of CMC 9161.3 through 9161.7 will be satisfied at specified times.

G. The alteration, interior modification or enlargement of an existing building which, in the determination of the Director of Public Works, will not result in a significant increase in traffic as a result of the primary or intended use of the building. Existing structures shall not be subject to this exception.

H. New buildings or structures to be constructed, and the alteration, interior modification or enlargement of an existing building, or of a structure accessory thereto, all or any combination of which will take place on one (1) lot, if the total value of such construction, alteration, modification or enlargement does not require a building permit valued under the Building Code in excess of $100,000.

I. The restoration or repair of a building or structure damaged or destroyed by fire, explosion, earthquake, flood or other casualty or act of God, or by the public enemy; provided, that the use or occupancy of such building or structure thereafter continues in the same manner as lawfully existed prior to such damage or destruction. (Ord. 88-830, § 1)

9161.3 Dedications.
A. When dedication is required under this Division 1, full street dedication shall be made upon the property or properties to be improved. Streets shall be dedicated to one-half the planned ultimate width, measured from the centerline, including corner cutoffs. All such right-of-way shall be determined by the Director of Public Works in accordance with the General Plan, the Master Plan of Streets and Highways, or the Subdivision Ordinance, as applicable; provided, however, that in no event shall dedication be required to such an extent that the area or width of any lot will be reduced below that permitted by the Subdivision Ordinance when a lot is reduced by acquisition for public purposes.

B. The Director of Public Works may require, in lieu of actual dedication, an irrevocable offer of dedication. Any such irrevocable offer of dedication shall be subject to the approval of the City Council, shall be executed by all persons having any right, title, interest or lien in the property, or any portion thereof to be dedicated, and shall be acknowledged and recorded in the same manner as a conveyance of real property. Such offer of dedication, when recorded in the office of the county recorder, shall be irrevocable and may be accepted at any time by the City Council. Such offer of dedication may be terminated by the City Council, and the right to accept such offer abandoned, in the same manner as is prescribed for the summary vacation of streets or highways by Part 3 (commencing with Section 8300) of Division 9 of the California Streets and Highways Code. (Ord. 83-634, § 2; Ord. 88-830, § 1)

9161.4 Improvement Requirements for Buildings and Structures.
A. Before any building permit is issued for any building or structure subject to the provisions of this Division 1, the applicable improvements identified in subsection B below shall be installed, constructed or otherwise provided for.

B. The required improvements may include, without limitation, the following: pavement, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, drainage facilities, sewer facilities, water facilities, lighting, traffic signals, signing, striping, median improvements, parkway trees and landscaping, grading of right-of-way, right-of-way dedication, noise attenuation barriers, modifications to existing utilities to facilitate any or all of the improvements identified herein, and repairs to any or all of the improvements identified herein. Other improvements may be required if, in the determination of the Director of Public Works, such improvements are directly related to the development of the site of the proposed building or structure and are required to protect the public health, safety and welfare.

C. The estimated cost of all such required improvements shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the valuation of the structure for which a building permit is requested. The valuation shall be determined by the City Building Official using as a guide the Marshall Valuation Service compiled by Marshall and Swift Publication Company. (Ord. 88-830, § 1)

9161.5 Agreement to Improve.
A. In lieu of completing the improvements required by CMC 9161.4(B), the Director of Public Works may, subject to the approval of the City Council, require either of the following:

(1) An agreement to complete the required improvements, executed by the applicant or by any other responsible person; or

(2) A specific plan of phased development, executed by the applicant or by any other responsible person, which plan specifically provides for completion of the required improvements.

B. The required improvements shall be completed within the time specified in the agreement to improve or in the specific plan; provided, however, that the Director of Public Works may grant such additional time for completion as may be deemed necessary if, in the determination of the Director, good and sufficient reasons exist for any such extension.

C. Upon the failure of an applicant or other responsible person to complete any required improvement within the time specified in an agreement to improve or a specific plan, the City Council may, upon notice in writing of not less than ten (10) calendar days served personally upon the person, firm or corporation signing the agreement or specific plan, or upon notice in writing of not less than twenty (20) calendar days served by registered or certified mail, addressed to the last known address of the person, firm or corporation signing the agreement or specific plan, determine that the improvement work or any part thereof is incomplete and may cause to be forfeited to the City all or a portion of the improvement security given for the faithful performance of such improvement work, and may further cause to be negotiated any instrument of credit deposited with and assigned to the City in such amount as may be required to complete the improvement work. (Ord. 88-830, § 1)

9161.6 Construction Standards.
All construction work within existing or proposed street rights-of-way shall be performed in compliance with the Highway Permit Ordinance, as contained in Chapter 1, Article VII of this Code, and the requirements of the Public Works Department. (Ord. 88-830, § 1)

9161.7 Improvement Security and In-Lieu Fees.
A. All construction work within the public right-of-way shall be secured by an improvement security, the amount and type of which shall be determined as provided for in CMC 9207.13 and 9207.14.

B. In-lieu fees shall be paid to the City in the event that required improvements cannot physically be constructed at the site of the proposed building or structure, and such fees shall be paid in cash or by cashier’s check. (Ord. 83-634, § 3; Ord. 88-830, § 1)

9161.8 Relief from Compliance.
The Director of Public Works may, in the exercise of sound discretion, relieve an applicant from compliance with all or a portion of the provisions of CMC 9161.3 through 9161.7 if the Director finds:

A. The required improvements would create a drainage or traffic problem; or

B. The proposed use will be isolated from a roadway, and a connecting roadway is not likely to be improved for many years; or

C. Because of the peculiar circumstances of the property, the development of the surrounding property, or other reasons, such required improvements can best be constructed through use of an assessment proceeding. (Ord. 83-634, § 4; Ord. 84-698, § 1; Ord. 88-830, § 1)

9161.9 Appeals.
Any applicant aggrieved by a determination of the Director of Public Works pertaining to the interpretation or application of the provisions of this Division 1 may appeal to the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall provide such applicant an opportunity to be heard and shall thereafter affirm, modify or reverse the determination of the Director of Public Works. (Ord. 88-830, § 1)

9161.10 Parkway Trees.
A. Except as otherwise provided herein, parkway trees shall be provided and planted by the owner or developer of any lot in connection with any construction on such lot requiring a building permit under the Building Code valued in excess of $10,000.

B. Such parkway trees shall be planted in the public easement (parkway strip) between the street pavement and the lot line of such lot. If sidewalk exists in such parkway strip without provision for parkway trees, tree wells shall be provided as part of such parkway tree requirement.

C. Utilities shall not be released for the buildings or structures constructed on such lot until the required parkway trees have been planted or such planting has been provided for in accordance herewith and the specifications of the Director of Public Works. Such provision may be made by bond pursuant to the provisions of CMC 1400 in an amount not to exceed the estimated cost of the parkway tree requirement.

D. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Section:

(1) The total estimated cost of the parkway tree requirement shall not exceed one-third (1/3) of the estimated value of the improvements provided for in such building permit; and

(2) Where adequate public right-of-way (parkway strip) does not exist, or where the adjacent street is not improved or required to be improved with the proposed development with curb and gutter, such parkway tree requirement shall be waived in connection with such building permit. Such waiver shall not affect the requirement for parkway trees in connection with any subsequent application for a building permit with respect to such lot.

E. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to incidental construction on previously developed residential lots. Such incidental construction shall include, but not be limited to, room or patio additions, room realignment, and swimming pool and garage construction. Incidental construction, as said term is used herein, shall not include the construction of a residential unit. (Ord. 88-830, § 1)

Division 2. Vehicular Parking, Loading
and Maneuvering Areas
9162 Development Policy.
The objectives of this Division 2 of Part 6 are as follows:

A. To ensure that adequate parking spaces for automobiles, and loading, maneuvering, parking and stacking areas for trucks, are provided on every site within the City in such a manner so as not to adversely impact adjacent properties nor to create a nuisance or hazard to pedestrian and vehicle traffic within the public right-of-way; and

B. To ensure that there is adequate and safe on-site circulation with minimum conflict between pedestrians, automobiles and trucks, and to shield loading areas from the public view and adjacent properties. (Ord. 87-821, § 1)

9162.0 Paving and Drainage of Vehicular Areas.
A. Except as provided in subsections B and C of this Section, all areas used for the movement, parking, loading, repair or storage of vehicles of any type shall be paved with either:

(1) Concrete to a minimum thickness of three and one-half (3-1/2) inches over four (4) inches of crushed aggregate base; or

(2) Asphaltic concrete to a minimum thickness of three and one-half (3-1/2) inches over four (4) inches of crushed aggregate base; or

(3) Other surfacing material which, in the opinion of the Public Works Director, provides equivalent life, service and appearance.

B. All areas used for the maneuvering, parking or stacking of trucks, whether single body or double body, shall be paved with either concrete or asphaltic concrete. The minimum thickness of the paving and base shall be determined by an on-site pavement study completed by a licensed soils engineer approved by the Public Works Director.

C. The apron area for double body trucks having a minimum length of forty-five (45) feet shall be paved with concrete. The minimum thickness of the paving and base shall be determined by an on-site pavement study completed by a licensed soils engineer approved by the Public Works Director.

D. All such areas shall be graded and drained to dispose of all surface water. Drainage shall not be permitted across the surface of sidewalks or driveways, except for vehicular areas serving single-family residential uses. (Ord. 84-705, § 8; Ord. 87-821, § 2)

Off-Street Parking

9162.1 General Requirements.
Every use shall be required to provide the number of off-street parking spaces which satisfies the needs of the use. The required parking spaces shall be used only for the purpose of parking trucks, standard and compact automobiles, and other vehicles as designated. The required off-street parking may be at grade, above grade or below grade and may be open or within a partially or fully enclosed parking structure; provided, that parking below grade for residential uses shall be subject to the review and approval of a Development Plan by the Planning Commission pursuant to CMC 9172.23 (Site Plan and Design Review). Every parking space shall be directly accessible from a vehicular driveway or aisle unless otherwise specified. (Ord. 87-821, § 3; Ord. 94-1039, § 13)

9162.21 Parking Spaces Required.
The required number of off-street automobile spaces for each use shall not be less than set forth in the following table:

Use

Off-Street Parking Required

A.    Residential:

Any existing, lawfully established and maintained residential use is deemed to have the required parking.

1.    Single-family dwelling in the RS Zone, RA Zone.

2 spaces within a garage.

2.    Single-family dwelling in the RM Zone.

2 spaces within either a garage or carport.

3.    Multiple-family dwelling.

2 spaces within either a garage dwelling or carport for each dwelling unit. In addition, 1 guest parking space for every 1 multifamily unit with 3 bedrooms or more and 1 guest parking space for every 2 multifamily units with 2 bedrooms or less.

3a.    Multiple-family dwelling within a Mixed-Use (MU) District.

1 covered space for every studio unit. 2 covered spaces for each unit with 1 or more bedrooms. 1 guest space for every 4 units.

3b.    Live/work rental units within a Mixed-Use (MU) District.

2 spaces per unit for units under 2,500 square feet. Larger units require 2 spaces for residential plus the number of spaces required by this Section for commercial activities. 1 guest space for every 4 units.

4.    Condominium.

2 spaces within a garage for each dwelling unit. In addition, 1 guest parking space for every 1 multifamily unit with 3 bedrooms or more and 1 guest parking space for every 2 multifamily units with 2 bedrooms or less.

4a.    Condominiums within a Mixed-Use (MU) District.

1 covered space for every studio unit. 2 covered spaces for each unit with 1 or more bedrooms. 1 guest space for every 4 units.

4b.    Live/work rental units within a Mixed-Use (MU) District.

2 spaces per unit for units under 2,500 square feet. Larger units require 2 spaces for residential plus the number of spaces required by this Section for commercial activities. 1 guest space for every 4 units.

5.    Mobile home park.

2 spaces for each mobile home (tandem parking permitted), plus 1 guest parking space for each 4 mobile homes.

6.    Convent, rectory, monastery and other group quarters for members of a religious order.

1 space for each 3 rooming units.

7.    Boarding or rooming house, fraternity or sorority house, dormitory.

1 space for each 2 rooming units.

8.    Caretaker’s residence.

1 space for each residence.

9.    Retirement home, senior citizens’ housing (units without kitchens and not defined as a community care facility).

1 space for each rooming unit, plus 2 spaces for each resident employee. (The parking area to be improved shall be 1 space for each 2 rooming units, plus 2 spaces for each resident employee. The difference between the required parking area and the parking to be improved shall be held as open space reserve to meet additional parking needs or required parking in case of conversion to another use.)

10.    Retirement home, senior citizens’ housing (units with kitchens, and not defined as a community care facility).

2 spaces for each dwelling unit, plus 2 spaces for each resident employee. (The parking area to be improved shall be 1 space for each 2 dwelling units, plus 2 spaces for each resident employee. The difference between the required parking area and the parking to be improved shall be held as open space reserve to meet additional parking needs or required parking in case of conversion to another use.)

11.    Residential hotel without kitchens.

1 space for each rooming unit, plus 2 spaces for each resident employee.

12.    Residential hotel or motel with kitchens.

2 spaces for each unit.

13.    Second dwelling unit:

 

(a)    Studio

1 uncovered off-street parking space outside of front yard setback area.

(b)    1 bedroom

1 space within either a garage or carport. Minimum interior dimension for a one car garage shall be 10 feet wide by 20 feet long and 9 feet wide by 20 feet long for a one car carport.

(c)    2 bedrooms or unit size exceeding 700 square feet

2 spaces within a garage.

B.    Institutional:

1.    Small family home community care facility in the RS Zone.

2 spaces within a garage.

2.    Small family home community care facility in RM Zone.

2 spaces within either a garage or carport.

3.    Other community care facilities.

Required parking spaces to be determined for each conditional use permit based primarily upon the facility’s licensed capacity, type of care and number of employees.

4.    Long-term health care facility.

1 space for each 2 beds licensed by the regulatory agency.

5.    Hospital.

2 spaces for each bed licensed by the regulatory agency.

6.    Schools (public or private):

 

(a)    Elementary school, junior high school (kindergarten through grade 9).

1 space for each 200 square feet of teaching area.

(b)    Senior high school; business vocational or trade school.

1 space for each 125 square feet of teaching area.

(c)    Academic university or college.

1 space for each 500 square feet gross floor area.

7.    Library, museum, art gallery.

1 space for each 400 square feet gross floor area.

8.    Church, mortuary.

1 space for each 5 fixed seats (or 7-1/2 linear feet of fixed pew or bench) in the largest assembly room. For the area within the largest assembly room not occupied by fixed seats, pew or bench, the off-street parking required shall be 1 space for each 35 square feet of net floor area.

C.    Commercial:

1.    Gymnasium, dance hall, skating rink, theater, night club, auditorium, lodge room, sports arena, stadium and other places of public assembly or entertainment.

1 space for each 3 fixed seats (or 4-1/2 linear feet of fixed bench) in the largest room or space for public assembly or entertainment. For the area within the largest room or space for public assembly or entertainment not covered by fixed seats or bench, the off-street parking required shall be 1 space for each 21 square feet of net floor area. There shall be a minimum of 10 parking spaces provided.

2.    Dining and drinking establishments.

Areas used exclusively for entertainment shall have a parking requirement as indicated above. All other areas shall have a parking requirement of 1 space for each 100 square feet of gross floor area. There shall be a minimum of 10 parking spaces provided.

3.    Bowling alley.

3 spaces for each bowling lane, plus the parking spaces required for the other activities within the building.

4.    Transient hotel, motel.

1 space for each guest room, plus 2 spaces for the resident manager’s unit.

5.    Automobile service station.

One (1) automobile parking space shall be provided for each employee on the largest shift, plus one (1) space for each company vehicle, plus two (2) spaces for each service bay. Said spaces are to be striped and provided with bumper guards or wheel stops approved by the Director.

6.    Plant nursery.

1 space for each 1,000 square feet of indoor or outdoor sales or display area. There shall be a minimum of 5 parking spaces provided.

7.    Offices, studios, retail sales and services and other general commercial activities not classified elsewhere.

1 space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area. There shall be a minimum of 5 parking spaces provided on each site for each use.

8.    Driving skill course.

15 spaces per 400 yards of track, and 1 space per employee on the largest shift, plus the parking spaces required for other activities within buildings or on the grounds of the business.

9.    Arcade.

1 space for each 200 square feet for gross floor area.

10.    Health and exercise salons, health spas, athletics clubs, exercise and dance studios.

1 space per 150 square feet of gross floor area.

11.    Automobile dealership.

See CMC 9138.15(D)(6).

12.    Vehicle repair and service.

1 parking space shall be provided for each employee on the largest shift, plus 2 parking spaces shall be provided for each service bay. Parking for all other uses shall comply with CMC 9162.21.

13.    Indoor team training facility.

Courts/field – The maximum number of people allowed on the field/courts for a game at 1 time multiplied by 0.75 parking space.

If no court/field is required (such as professional gymnastics) – Parking shall be determined by a parking needs assessment.

There should be a minimum of 5 parking spaces provided.

D.    Industrial:

1.    Water pumping station, gas measurement station, electrical distribution substation and other public utility facilities having no employees or visitors.

No parking space is required.

2.    Vehicle impounding or dismantling yard, junk and salvage yard.

As required by CMC 9148.1(D).

3.    Mini-storage/ self-storage (As defined in CMC 9162.65).

1 parking space for every 20 units of storage area, plus 1 space for each 300 square feet of office area, plus 2 covered spaces for a caretaker unit.

4.    Uses requiring large dock-high loading facilities (As defined in CMC 9162.65).

Whichever of the following results in the greater requirement:

a.     Warehousing use – 1 parking space for each 1,500 square feet of gross floor area;

 

    Manufacturing use – 1 parking space for each 500 square feet of gross floor area;

 

    Office and service use – 1 parking space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area; or

 

b.    1 parking space for every 2 employees on the largest shift.

5.    Uses requiring small dock-high loading facilities (As defined in CMC 9162.65).

Whichever of the following results in the greater requirement:

a.    Warehouse use – 1 parking space for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area;

 

    Manufacturing use – 1 parking space for each 500 square feet of gross floor area;

 

    Office and service use – 1 parking space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area; or

 

b.    1 parking space for every 2 employees on the largest shift.

6.    Uses requiring large grade level loading facilities (As defined in CMC 9162.65).

Whichever of the following results in the greater requirement:

a.    Warehousing use – 1 parking space for each 750 square feet of gross floor area;

 

    Manufacturing use – 1 parking space for each 500 square feet of gross floor area;

 

    Office and service use – 1 parking space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area; or

 

b.    1 parking space for every 2 employees on the largest shift.

7.    Uses requiring small grade level loading facilities (As defined in CMC 9162.65).

Whichever of the following results in the greater requirement.

a.    Single tenant unit size or average multiple tenant unit size under 3,000 square feet:

 

    Warehousing and manufacturing use – 1 parking space for each 500 square feet of gross floor area;

 

    Office and service use – 1 parking space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area; or

 

    Single tenant unit size or average multiple tenant unit size over 3,000 square feet:

 

    Warehousing – 1 parking space for each 750 square feet of gross floor area;

 

    Manufacturing – 1 parking space for each 500 square feet of gross floor area;

 

    Office and service use – 1 parking space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area; or

 

b.    1 parking space for every 2 employees on the largest shift.

8.    Service and office use with no truck loading facilities.

Whichever of the following results in the greater requirement:

a.    1 parking space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area; or

 

b.    1 parking space for every 2 employees on the largest shift.

9.    Large collection recycling facility.

1 automobile parking space for each employee on the largest shift, plus 1 space for each company vehicle, plus a minimum of 10 spaces for customers.

    Processing facility for recyclables.

10.    Cargo container storage (As defined in CMC 9191.067(C).

1 automobile parking space for every 2 employees on the largest shift, plus 1 space for each 300 square feet of office space. A minimum of 5 spaces shall be provided.

E.    Recreational (public and private):

1.    Passive park:

 

a.    Less than 1 acre in size.

No parking space is required.

b.    1 acre or greater in size.

2 spaces for each net acre.

2.    Golf course.

100 spaces for a 9-hole course. 200 spaces for an 18-hole course.

(Ord. 78-452; Ord. 78-431; Ord. 80-532, § 8; Ord. 82-603; Ord. 83-662, § 1; Ord. 85-720, § 11; Ord. 87-819, § 8; Ord. 87-821, §§ 4, 5; Ord. 88-842, § 2; Ord. 89-878, § 1; Ord. 91-945, § 3; Ord. 94-1039, § 14; Ord. 02-1251, § 1; Ord. 03-1279, § 24; Ord. 03-1290, § 7; Ord. 04-1322, § 8; Ord. 06-1363, § 9; Ord. 12-1488, § 2)

9162.22 Parking Spaces Required for Uses Not Specified.
The parking space requirements for uses not provided for in this Division shall be determined by Interpretation under CMC 9172.24. Such determination shall be based upon the requirements for the most comparable uses specified herein.

9162.23 Computation of Required Parking Spaces.
When required parking spaces are based upon gross floor area, the floor area devoted exclusively to parking and maneuvering of vehicles shall not be considered in the computation.

When, as a result of computation, the total number of parking spaces results in a fractional amount, any fraction less than one-half (1/2) shall be disregarded, and any fraction equal to or greater than one-half (1/2) shall require one (1) parking space.

9162.24 Automobile Parking Spaces Required for Mixed Uses.
A. When two (2) or more different uses exist on the same lot or within the same building, the total number of parking spaces required shall equal the sum of the requirements for each use including fractional amounts. Except as provided herein, no parking space required for one use shall be considered as providing the required parking for any other use.

B. When two (2) or more uses share a parking facility, and when demonstrated by a signed affidavit that the hours of their demand do not substantially overlap, then the parking requirement may be reduced by the Planning Commission through the approval of a Conditional Use Permit pursuant to CMC 9172.21, and subject to the following additional requirements:

1. The applicant shall show evidence that there is no substantial conflict or overlap in the principal operating hours of the buildings or uses for which the shared parking facilities are proposed.

2. Any reduction in parking shall not decrease the total number of parking spaces below the level necessary to meet the collective peak parking demand for all participating uses.

3. Parking facilities may be located on a different lot from the lot on which the use to be served is located provided the distance from the lot on which the use is located and the lot used for the required parking is not greater than four hundred (400) feet. Said distance shall be measured along public walkways from the nearest lot line of the lot on which the uses are located to the nearest lot line of the lot on which the required parking is located. Property owners involved in the joint use of offstreet parking facilities shall submit an agreement for such joint use by a proper legal instrument approved by the Director as to form and content. Such instrument shall be submitted with the Conditional Use Permit application. Such instrument, when approved as conforming to the provisions of this Section, shall be recorded in the office of the County Recorder within thirty (30) days of Commission approval, and copies of said recorded documents filed with the Community Development Department.

4. The Commission shall make a finding that there is adequate parking available for all affected lots, parcels and uses located thereon.

C. Office space incidental to a manufacturing, warehouse or other industrial use shall have its required parking spaces computed at the same ratio as the industrial use, provided the office space does not exceed ten (10) percent of the total gross floor area. Office space in excess of ten (10) percent of the total gross floor area shall have its required parking spaces computed at the same ratio specified for office space. (Ord. 87-821, § 6; Ord. 93-1001, § 4)

9162.25 Change in Intensity.
Whenever the intensity of use changes through a change in the number or quantity of dwelling units, floor area, employees, fixed seats or other units of measurement specified herein to determine the required parking, the number of required spaces shall be adjusted either upward or downward to reflect the change in intensity.

9162.26 Change in Use.
Whenever a change in use results in a different parking requirement, the required automobile parking spaces shall be adjusted upward or downward to reflect such change in use. This Section shall not apply to the conversion of manufacturing or warehouse floor area to the office space, provided the total office space does not exceed ten (10) percent of the total gross floor area. (Ord. 87-821, § 7)

9162.27 Conversion of Parking Spaces Serving a Dwelling.
Any garage, carport or parking space required for a dwelling may be converted to additional living area or any other permitted nonparking use; provided, that at least the same type of parking shelter or area and number of spaces as lawfully exist at the time of such conversion are provided elsewhere on the lot and adequate access is provided thereto. Nothing in this Section shall be construed or applied so as to require parking shelters or areas or number of spaces in excess of the requirements of this Division.

9162.28 Additions or Alterations to a Dwelling.
Additions or building alterations may be made to a dwelling which does not conform to the current parking standards of this Division without requiring any additional garage, carport or parking space; provided, that such additions and building alterations neither increase the number of families that can reside in such building nor occupy the only portion of the lot which can be used for the garages, carports or parking spaces and access thereto which would be required to conform to the current standards of this Division.

9162.29 Reserved.
9162.3 Location of Parking.
A. Parking spaces required for residential uses shall be located on the same lot as the use for which such spaces are provided.

Driveways, sidewalks, and paving shall not cover more than thirty-five (35) percent of a required front yard setback for residential property with a single-car driveway, fifty (50) percent for a two-car driveway, and forty (40) percent for a driveway where the garage does not face a public street. For the purposes of this Section, paving for parking shall include that portion of the required front yard abutting a side property line nearest the driveway. Exceptions may be allowed by an approved Site Plan as follows:

1. For substandard size lots or unique properties and circumstances;

2. Where decorative type paving is approved as a landscape feature; or

3. To allow space only for the parking of vehicles as described below provided that the total amount of paved area on a standard sized lot does not exceed fifty (50) percent of a front yard setback.

a. Automobiles, motor homes, motor trucks, vans, campers/camper shells mounted on a vehicle, camp trailers, boats on trailers, and tent trailers are allowed in a required front yard, side yard, corner lot rear yard or in a yard clearly visible to a public right-of-way provided they are:

(1) Fully operable, completely assembled, supported by inflated tires and not supported by blocks, jacks or similar supports.

(2) Maintained in a clean and neat condition, not significantly damaged or continuously under repair.

(3) Not more than one (1) ton load capacity if a motor truck, including commercial vehicles when used as personal transportation to and from work, and not more than two (2) ton load capacity if a motor truck, excluding commercial vehicles.

(4) Parked or stored on an approved residential parking space or on an approved residential driveway.

b. Motor homes, unmounted campers, camper shells mounted on a vehicle, camp trailers, boats on trailers, and tent trailers may be permitted in such front and side yard areas subject to the following additional requirements:

(1) Only if there is no access to the rear yard or no other approved location can be made available on the property for parking.

(2) Limited to a maximum of one (1) motor home, tent trailer, unmounted camper, camp trailer or boat on a trailer.

(3) Limited to a maximum size of eight (8) feet in width and thirty-two (32) feet in length for motor homes.

4. Additional landscaping and/or screening may be required to improve the quality of development to a reasonable standard.

B. Parking facilities required for nonresidential uses should be located on-site wherever feasible, but may be located on a different lot from the lot on which the use to be served is located provided the distance from the lot on which the use is located and the lot used for the required parking is not greater than four hundred (400) feet. Said distance shall be measured along public walkways from the nearest lot line of the lot on which the use is located to the nearest lot line of the lot on which the required parking is located.

When the required parking is provided on a lot other than the lot on which the use to be served is located, a copy of a recorded deed or covenant shall be filed with the Community Development Department which provides that the parking lot is restricted for parking for the use served and shall be used for no other purpose unless the required parking is met in some other way in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter. (Ord. 90-917, § 3)

9162.41 Automobile Parking Stall Size.
A. The minimum dimensions for required automobile parking spaces shall be as follows:

Type

Dimensions

Residential uses (open and carport parking)

9 feet in width by 20 feet in length.

Residential uses (garage spaces)

Unobstructed minimum interior dimension of 20 feet in width by 20 feet in length for lots minimum 50 feet wide and 18 feet in width by 20 feet in length for lots less than 50 feet wide.

All other uses

8-1/2 feet in width by 18 feet in length.

Compact vehicle spaces

8 feet in width by 15 feet in length.

Parallel parking spaces

Length shall be increased to 24 feet (18 feet for the parking space plus 6 feet for maneuvering) for both standard and compact vehicles.

Parking spaces whose length abuts a wall, fence, building or other obstruction more than 10 inches in height.

Minimum width of 10 feet.

B. Any parking space of a ninety (90) degree bay which is adjacent to the terminus of a driveway or aisleway shall either be twelve (12) feet in width, or the driveway or aisleway shall be extended three (3) feet beyond the last parking space. (Ord. 87-821, § 8; Ord. 89-868, § 2)

9162.42 Parking for the Disabled and Associated Signing and Ramping.
This Section shall apply to all new on-site visitor, guest, customer and employee parking except for single-family residential uses only.

A. Parking. Parking spaces for the disabled shall be located as near as practical to a primary entrance.

When practical, the handicap accessible route of travel shall not cross lane/aisles for vehicular traffic. When crossing vehicular traffic lanes is necessary, the route of travel shall be designated and marked as a crosswalk.

When a standard handicap space is provided, it should be fourteen (14) feet wide, striped to provide a nine (9) foot parking area and a five (5) foot loading and unloading area. When more than one (1) standard handicap parking space for the disabled is provided, two (2) spaces may be provided within a twenty-three (23) foot wide area lined to provide a nine (9) foot wide parking space on each side of a five (5) foot wide loading and unloading area. Each parking space shall be at least eighteen (18) feet long.

A bumper or wheel stop shall be required for each parking space for the disabled to prevent cars from encroaching over the required width of paths and walkways.

Ramps located at the front of a parking space for the disabled may encroach into the length of the space as long as they do not limit a handicapped person’s ability to leave or enter his vehicle. (The maximum recommended distance from the curb to the end of the ramp is sixty (60) inches.) Where an unreasonable hardship exists, due to the size or location of the parking spaces, equivalent facilitation shall be provided.

Surface slopes of parking spaces for the disabled shall not exceed one-quarter (1/4) inch per foot or two (2) percent in any direction.

One (1) in every accessible spaces, but not less then one (1), shall be served by an access aisle eight (8) feet wide minimum and shall be designated as van accessible.

Number of handicapped spaces required:

Total Parking
in Lot

Required
Minimum Number of Accessible Spaces

    1 to 25

1

    26 to 50

2

    51 to 75

3

    76 to 100

4

    101 to 150

5

    151 to 200

6

    201 to 300

7

    301 to 400

8

    401 to 500

9

    1,001 and over

2 percent of total

20 plus 1 for each

100 over 100

B. Signing. All parking spaces reserved for the handicapped shall be identified as prescribed by Section 22511.8 (or any successor section to the same effect) of the Vehicle Code. All signs and markings used for this purpose shall conform to the uniform standards and specifications adopted by the California Department of Transportation.

Accessible handicap parking spaces shall be designated as reserved by a sign showing the symbol of accessibility. Van accessible handicap parking spaces shall have an additional sign “Van Accessible” mounted below the symbol of accessibility. Such signs shall be located so they cannot be obscured by a vehicle parking in the space.

In addition to the above requirements, the surface of each accessible parking space or stall shall have a surface identification outlining a profile view of a wheelchair with occupant in white on the background. The profile view shall be located so that it is visible to a traffic enforcement officer when a vehicle is properly parked in the space and shall be three (3) feet high by three (3) feet wide.

C. Curb Ramps. Curb ramps shall be constructed at each corner of a street intersection and where a pedestrian way crosses a curb. Ramps shall be a minimum of four (4) feet in width and shall lie in a single slope plain.

Curb ramps shall be constructed in conformance with California Department of Transportation Standard Plan N8-B (or any successor plan to the same effect). (Ord. 83-636, § 1; Ord. 86-731, § 1; Ord. 92-995, §§  1 – 3)

9162.43 Compact Automobile Parking Spaces.
For commercial parking, industrial parking, and guest parking for residential condominiums and multi-family dwellings, not more than one-third (1/3) of the total parking spaces may be designed and reserved for the parking of compact vehicles. Such spaces shall be so designated either by signing or marking. Where feasible, the parking area shall be designed in such a manner that the compact spaces are not situated along the primary means of access nor directly opposite another compact space. (Ord. 85-720, § 12; Ord. 87-821, § 9)

9162.44 Reserved.
9162.45 Reserved.
9162.46 Reserved.
9162.47 Reserved.
9162.48 Reserved.
9162.49 Reserved.
9162.50 Reserved.
9162.51 Standards for Automobile Parking Lot Design.
Automobile parking lots and areas shall comply with the standards set forth in the following table:

STANDARD SIZE PARKING SPACES FOR RESIDENTIAL USE
(9 x 20 PARKING SPACES)

 

 

 

 

Overall

Angle

Stall

Depth

Aisle

Layout

Length

Single

Loaded

Double

Loaded

a

b

c

d

e

f

30°

18

12

18

30

48

45°

21

15

13

36

57

60°

22

20

10.5

42

64

90°

20

26

9

46

66

SUGGESTED STANDARD SIZE PARKING SPACES FOR ALL OTHER USES
(9 x 18 PARKING SPACES)


 

 

 

Overall

Angle

Stall

Depth

Aisle

Layout

Length

Single

Loaded

Double

Loaded

a

b

c

d

e

f

30°

17

12

18

29

46

45°

19

15

13

34

53

60°

20

20

10.5

40

60

90°

18

26

9

44

62

MINIMUM STANDARD SIZE PARKING SPACES FOR ALL OTHER USES
(8.5 x 18 PARKING SPACES)

 

 

 

 

Overall

Angle

Stall

Depth

Aisle

Layout

Length

Single

Loaded

Double

Loaded

a

b

c

d

e

f

30°

16.5

12

17

28.5

45

45°

18.5

15

12

33.5

52

60°

20

20

10

40

60

90°

18

26

8.5

44

62

MINIMUM COMPACT SIZE PARKING SPACES FOR ALL USES
(8 x 15 PARKING SPACES)

 

 

 

 

Overall

Angle

Stall

Depth

Aisle

Layout

Length

Single

Loaded

Double

Loaded

a

b

c

d

e

f

30°

14.5

12

16

26.5

41

45°

16

15

11

31

47

60°

17

20

9

37

54

90°

15

26

8

41

56

MINIMUM STANDARD SIZE PARKING SPACES FOR EMPLOYEES ONLY IN INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL USES*
(8 x 18 PARKING SPACES)


 

 

 

Overall

Angle

Stall

Depth

Aisle

Layout

Length

Single

Loaded

Double

Loaded

a

b

c

d

e

f

30°

16

12

16

28

44

45°

18.5

15

11

33.5

52

60°

19.5

20

9

39.5

59

90°

18

26

8

44

62

*Only if approved pursuant to a discretionary zoning approval by the Planning Commission.



(Ord. 87-821, § 10)

9162.52 Landscaping Requirements.
A. Interior Parking Lot Facilities.

1. Except for parking lot facilities serving retail petroleum outlets, all required automobile parking facilities and any parking facilities visible from the public right-of-way shall have interior landscaping of not less than five (5) percent of the area of such facilities.

2. Required setback landscaping abutting a street, sidewalk or structure, and border plantings up to five (5) feet in width abutting a building, shall not be considered as interior landscaping for the purposes of this Section.

3. No interior landscaping shall be located in a truck maneuvering or truck loading area.

4. Interior landscaping shall be arranged so as to provide shade for vehicles and to enhance visual attractiveness from adjoining streets and walkways.

5. Interior landscaping shall be maintained with an irrigation system, permanently installed, which delivers water to all landscaped areas.

6. All landscaped areas and parking facilities shall be maintained to present an attractive appearance at all times.

7. Unless the Director shall determine that such is not feasible, all interior areas of outdoor parking facilities which, as a result of the parking design, are unused and which are visible from a public street or walkway shall be landscaped and maintained with an irrigation system, permanently installed, which delivers water directly to all landscaped areas. Such landscaping may be included in computing the five (5) percent interior landscaping requirement.

B. Screening.

1. If a parking facility is located adjacent to a public street or walkway, there shall be a landscaped strip, not less than ten (10) feet in width, running parallel to and along the public street or walkway, excluding space devoted to driveways and other access points. Such landscaped strip shall not be included in computing the five (5) percent landscaping requirement. All landscaped strips shall be maintained with an irrigation system, permanently installed, which delivers water directly to all landscaped areas.

2. All parking facilities, and truck parking, loading and maneuvering areas, shall be screened from the public right-of-way. Such screening may be accomplished by use of a decorative wall, a retaining wall, mounded landscaping planter, a densely landscaped planter, or a combination thereof.

3. All decorative walls used for screening shall be architecturally designed and treated so as to be compatible with existing or proposed improvements on the site, and shall comply with the following requirements:

a. In a required setback abutting a public right-of-way, no decorative wall shall exceed three and one-half (3-1/2) feet in height.

b. A decorative wall in a required setback abutting a public right-of-way and not within a manufacturing zone may be of a maximum height of six (6) feet; provided, that it does not impair visibility by obscuring more than ten (10) percent of the area in the vertical plane above three and one-half (3-1/2) feet. Such wall shall be tapered or eliminated within three (3) feet of any driveway or access point to protect against damage from vehicular traffic.

c. Decorative walls within a manufacturing zone which are not within a required setback may exceed eight (8) feet in height. Such decorative walls shall be designed and scaled so that their mass and height is compatible with other existing or proposed improvements on the site.

C. Setbacks. Any front, side or rear setback shall be landscaped which: (1) contains no permitted encroachment by a structure, parking facility, or other site development improvement; (2) is adjacent to a public right-of-way; and (3) is visible from the public right-of-way. Such landscaping shall be maintained with an irrigation system, permanently installed, which delivers water to all landscaped areas. Such landscaping shall not be included in the computation of the five (5) percent interior landscaping requirement.

D. Specific Landscaping and Irrigation Requirements.

1. Any area required by this Section to be landscaped, or any landscaping area otherwise provided, excluding single-family dwellings, shall have a permanently installed, well-balanced automatic irrigation system and shall be operated by electrically timed controller stations set for early morning irrigation.

2. Irrigation systems for landscaping covering clay soils and slope areas shall be equipped with low output sprinkler heads permitting a slow water application rate.

3. Prior to installing any landscape irrigation system, the area to be landscaped shall be scarified and covered with a mixture of not less than four (4) inches of topsoil, preferably native topsoil, in a reasonable quantity and type approved by the Director.

4. All landscaped areas which abut a walkway, driveway, parking space, loading area, or public right-of-way, and are not protected by a wall, shall be enclosed with six (6) inch by six (6) inch concrete curbing.

5. All landscaping and irrigation plans shall be prepared by a licensed landscape architect.

6. Any landscaped area or parking area which becomes deteriorated or blighted shall be replaced or repaired to the satisfaction of the Community Development Department. (Ord. 79-479, § 10; Ord. 78-442; Ord. 87-821, § 11; Ord. 89-890, §§ 1 – 3; Ord. 90-905, § 3)

9162.53 Lighting.
All lighting of off-street parking areas shall be directed away from nearby residential properties and streets. Such lighting shall be arranged and controlled so as not to create a nuisance or hazard to traffic or to the living environment.

Any person, firm or corporation violating any-provision of this Section shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 2 of Article I of this Code. (Ord. 79-479, § 10)

9162.54 Reserved.
9162.55 Perimeter Guards.
Bumper guards, wheel stops or concrete curbing shall be provided for all parking spaces other than parking spaces within a garage or carport, abutting the perimeter of a parking space area where such perimeter is within fifteen (15) feet of a building, structure, public right-of-way or lot line. Pedestrian walkways shall not be deemed to be perimeter guards. Bumper guards, wheel stops or concrete curbing shall be set back from a building, structure, public right-of-way or lot line at least two (2) feet for compact spaces and three (3) feet for standard spaces. Such setback, whether two (2) feet or three (3) feet, shall be considered part of the required parking stall length. (Ord. 79-479, § 10; Ord. 87-821, § 12; Ord. 89-890, § 4)

9162.56 Marking of Automobile Parking Areas.
A. All parking spaces, excluding those within a residential parking area having four (4) or fewer spaces, shall be marked with stripes in a manner clearly showing the layout of the parking stalls.

B. Parking spaces for institutional, commercial and industrial uses shall be double-striped with the stall widths measured from the midpoints of the double-striped markings; provided, however, that “employees only” parking spaces in commercial and industrial uses may be single-striped.

C. Parking spaces for residential uses may be single-striped.

D. Parallel parking spaces shall be marked so as to provide a maneuvering length of not less than six (6) feet. (Ord. 79-479, § 10; Ord. 87-821, § 13; Ord. 89-890, § 5)

Truck Loading and Maneuvering

9162.61 Truck Maneuvering and Loading Facility Standards.
A. “Truck loading facility” shall mean an off-street truck loading area, zone, ramp, door, well or dock.

B. A truck loading facility which is required or provided pursuant to CMC 9162.63 shall be designed in accordance with the Truck Maneuvering and Loading Facility Standards adopted pursuant to CMC 9172.15 and shall comply with all requirements of this Division 2, including, to the extent feasible, the design standards set forth in CMC 9162.62. (Ord. 79-479, § 10; Ord. 80-532, § 9; Ord. 80-534, § 1; Ord. 87-821, § 14)

9162.62 Design Standards for Truck Loading Facilities, Maneuvering Areas, and Parking and Stacking Spaces.
A. The following standards shall be mandatory in connection with the design and construction of truck loading facilities, maneuvering areas, and parking and stacking spaces.

1. Loading zones, loading areas, loading and off-loading operations, and on-site truck movements shall be designed or arranged so as to minimize interference with, and not constitute a hazard to, pedestrian traffic, automobile maneuvering and parking, access to ramps and wells, and other on-site activities.

2. The site containing a truck loading facility shall be designed to safely accommodate on-site maneuvers of double body trucks and to permit such trucks to enter and exit the site in a forward direction and thereby avoid backing from or into a public street.

3. A truck loading facility, whether involving a loading ramp, well or dock, shall be designed and constructed so as to provide for double body truck loading and maneuvering.

B. The following standards shall, to the extent feasible, apply to the design and construction of truck loading facilities, maneuvering areas, and parking and stacking spaces:

1. Provide for safe ingress of trucks from a public street or alley. Trucks must be able to access a site by turning right from a position with the left side of the vehicle not more than twenty (20) feet from the right curb face or, if none, the edge of the pavement. On the left side of any one-way street, trucks must be able to access a site by turning left from a position with the right side of the vehicle not more than twenty (20) feet from the left curb face or, if none, the edge of the pavement.

2. Locate and design truck loading facilities so as to minimize exposure to the public view. These facilities are required to be screened from public view by landscaping, buildings or walls.

3. Provide for the safe egress of trucks into a public street or alley by designing driveway accesses so that trucks can make a right turn from the driveway without encroaching on to any raised or marked median, or driving to the left of a double yellow stripe. Left turns are permitted.

4. Avoid any public nuisance or hazard, such as tracking of mud, or blowing and spillage of loose cargo.

5. Avoid on-site backing maneuvers of more than two hundred (200) feet to position a truck into the area of a loading facility.

6. Ensure that locations of loading facilities do not block on-site traffic flow or required automobile parking spaces.

7. Off-set driveway locations to discourage the direct backing of trucks from the street to the area of a loading facility.

8. Ensure that all areas for truck maneuvering and loading facilities, including the complete turning radii, are clear and unobstructed at all times.

9. Design all paving, bumper guards, landing strips, wells, ramps, etc., to facilitate easy maintenance.

10. Design the site to encourage trucks to circulate in a counterclockwise direction, since lefthand turns by large vehicles enable the driver to see more easily the rear of the vehicle.

11. Set back entry driveway gating far enough to allow a truck of the required size (thirty-three (33) or fifty-five (55) feet) to stop completely off the public right-of-way when the gate is closed. (Ord. 79-479, § 10; Ord. 87-821, § 15)

9162.63 Truck Loading Facilities and Maneuvering Areas Required.
A. Unless exempted under the provisions of subsection B of this Section, all commercial and industrial uses shall provide a truck loading facility, as defined in CMC 9162.61(A), which truck loading facility and related truck maneuvering area shall comply with all applicable requirements of this Division 2.

B. Subject to the provisions of subsection C of this Section, the following uses shall not be required to provide a truck loading facility:

1. Temporary uses which are determined by the Director to be exempt from the deed restriction requirement set forth in subsection (B)(2) below.

2. The following categories of uses, provided, however, that a deed restriction is recorded in the office of the County Recorder so restricting the use and proof of recordation, satisfactory to the Director, is submitted:

a. Education uses.

b. Recreation uses.

c. Public assembly uses.

d. Public and quasi-public uses.

e. Office uses.

f. Pet cemeteries.

g. Arcades.

h. Uses similar to those set forth in paragraphs a through g above, as determined in accordance with the Interpretation Procedure of CMC 9172.24.

C. Notwithstanding subsection B of this Section, a truck loading facility shall be required in each of the following instances:

1. Whenever the Director determines that an otherwise exempt use will generate a need for a truckloading facility.

2. Whenever a door larger than eight (8) feet by eight (8) feet is provided, unless the Director determines that such door cannot be utilized or is not intended to be utilized for loading and unloading.

3. Whenever a door equal to or less than eight (8) feet by eight (8) feet is provided, and the Director determines that such door can be utilized or is intended to be utilized for loading and unloading.

4. Where a truck loading facility for a specific type of industrial use is required by the applicable provisions of CMC 9162.65 or by the provisions of Part 4 of this Chapter 1. (Ord. 87-821, § 16)

9162.64 Truck Vehicle Space Specifications.
The minimum truck vehicle space specifications are established as follows:

 

REAR ACCESS REQS.

SIDE ACCESS REQS.

Type

Size

Turning Radius

Loading/ Stacking/ Parking

Maneuvering

Dock Approach Length

Maneuvering

Dock Approach Length

Single Body Truck

10 ft. x 33 ft.

45 ft.

12 ft. x 33 ft.

33 ft.

66 ft.

18 ft.

51 ft.

Double Body Truck

10 ft. x 55 ft.

48 ft.

12 ft. x 55 ft.

44 ft.

99 ft.

36 ft.

91 ft.

(Ord. 87-821, § 17)

9162.65 Requirements Relating to Vehicular Parking and Truck Loading, Maneuvering, Parking and Stacking Space for Industrial Uses.
A. Whenever a truck loading facility is required or provided for an industrial use pursuant to CMC 9162.63, the development shall comply with the applicable requirements set forth in the following table:

Large Dock-High

Loading Facilities

Small Dock-High

Loading Facilities

Large Grade Level

Loading Facilities

Small Grade Level

Loading Facilities

Mini-Storage

Self-Storage

DEFINITIONS

Facilities with greater than or equal to 25% of their loading doors, either dock-high, ramps or wells and with the single tenant unit size or average multiple tenant unit size greater than 5,000 square feet.

Facilities with greater than or equal to 25% of their loading doors, either dock-high, ramps or walls, and with the single tenant unit size or average in multiple tenant unit size less than 5,000 square feet.

Facilities with less than 25% of their loading doors, either dock-high, ramps or walls, and with the single tenant unit size or average multiple tenant unit size greater than 10,000 square feet.

Facilities with less than 25% of their loading doors, either dock-high, ramps or walls, and with the single tenant unit size or average multiple tenant unit size less than 10,000 square feet.

Units under 300 square feet in size for the sole purpose of storing household goods or business related documents.

VEHICULAR PARKING REQUIREMENTS

Whichever of the following results in the greater requirement:

Whichever of the following results in the greater requirement:

Whichever of the following results in the greater requirement:

Whichever of the following results in the greater requirement:

1 parking space per 20 units of storage area plus 1 parking space per 300 square feet of office area plus 2 covered parking spaces for a caretaker unit.

A. Warehousing use = 1 parking space per 1,500 square feet of gross floor area;

A. Warehousing use = 1 parking space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area;

A. Warehousing use = 1 parking space per 750 square feet of gross floor area;

A. Single tenant unit size or average multiple tenant unit size under 3,000 square feet;

Manufacturing use = 1 parking space per 500 square feet of gross floor area;

Manufacturing use = 1 parking space per 500 square feet of gross floor area;

Manufacturing use = 1 parking space per 500 square feet of gross floor area;

Warehousing and Manufacturing uses = 1 parking space per 500 square feet of gross floor area;

 

Office and Industrial Service uses = 1 parking space per 300 square feet of gross floor area; or

Office and Industrial Service uses = 1 parking space per 300 square feet of gross floor area; or

Office and Industrial uses = 1 parking space per 300 square feet of gross floor area; or

Office and Service uses = 1 parking space per 300 square feet of gross floor area;

 

B. 1 parking space for every 2 employees on the largest shift.

B. 1 parking space for every 2 employees on the largest shift.

B. 1 parking space for every 2 employees on the largest shift.

Single tenant unit size or average multiple tenant unit size over 3,000 square feet:

 

 

 

 

Warehousing uses = 1 parking space per 750 square feet of gross floor area;

 

 

 

 

Manufacturing use = 1 parking space per 500 square feet of gross floor area;

 

 

 

 

Office and Service uses = 1 parking space per 300 square feet of gross floor area; or

 

 

 

 

B. 1 parking space for every 2 employees on the largest shift.

 

TRUCK MANEUVERING AND LOADING STANDARDS

All loading docks, ramps, wells, areas, zones and doors are to be designed for double body vehicles.

All loading docks, ramps, wells, areas, zones and doors are to be designed for double body vehicles.

For primary Warehouse and Manufacturing uses, a minimum of 1 double body loading, dock, area, zone, ramp, well or door is to be provided per 30,000 square feet of gross floor area or 1 per building, whichever results in the greater requirement. The remaining loading doors, zones or ramps can be designed for single body vehicles.

For primary Warehouse and Manufacturing uses, if the single tenant unit size or average multiple tenant unit size is under 3,000 square feet, or if the entire building area is under 30,000 square feet, all loading doors can be designed for single body vehicles.

Whichever standard applies:

1. Units that are enclosed within a building require designated single body loading areas adjacent to the entrances.

2. Units that have direct exterior access require single body side loading along the driveway. Typical dimensions for a driveway that serves more than one unit are 20 feet for a driveway plus 20 feet for loading.

If the single tenant unit size or average multiple tenant unit size is over 3,000 square feet or the entire building area is over 30,000 square feet, a minimum of 1 double body loading door, ramp, zone, well, area or dock is required per 10 ground level units, whichever results in the greater requirement.

For Office and Service uses, there is no requirement for double body loading facilities. All loading doors can be designed for single body vehicles.

All loading doors for all large grade level loading facilities are to be designed at the minimum for single body vehicles.

 

 

All other loading doors can be designed for single body vehicles.

 

For Office and Service uses, there is no requirement for double body loading facilities. All loading doors can be designed for single body vehicles.

 

 

 

All loading doors for all small grade level loading facilities are to be designed at the minimum for single body vehicles.

 

TRUCK STACKING/PARKING REQUIREMENTS

For Warehouse uses, 1 space per 7 loading docks, ramps, doors, zones, wells or areas is required. A minimum of 1 per site is required.

For Warehouse uses, 1 space per 7 loading docks, ramps, doors, wells, zones or areas is required.

For a total gross floor building area under 30,000 square feet or if the site has no loading facilities, there is no requirement.

For a total gross floor building area under 30,000 square feet, or, if the site has no loading facilities, there is no requirement.

No requirement.

For Manufacturing uses, 1 space per 10 loading docks, doors, ramps, wells, zones or areas is required. A minimum of 1 per site is required for facilities with a gross floor area over 30,000 square feet.

For Manufacturing uses, 1 space per 10 loading docks, doors, ramps, wells or areas is required. A minimum of 1 per site is required for facilities with a gross floor area over 30,000 square feet.

For a total gross floor building area over 30,000 square feet, the following is required:

For a total gross floor building area over 30,000 square feet, the following is required:

 

For Warehouse uses, 1 space per 7 loading docks, doors, ramps, zones, wells or areas. A minimum of 1 per site is required.

For Warehouse uses, 1 space per 7 loading docks, doors, ramps, zones, wells or areas. A minimum of 1 per site is required.

 

No requirement for Office and Service uses.

No requirement for Office and Service uses.

For Manufacturing uses, 1 space per 10 loading docks, doors, ramps, wells or areas. A minimum of 1 per site is required for facilities with a gross floor area over 30,000 square feet.

For Manufacturing uses, 1 space per 10 loading docks, doors, ramps, wells or areas. A minimum of 1 per site is required for facilities with a gross floor area over 30,000 square feet.

 

 

 

No requirement for Office and Service uses.

No requirement for Office and Service uses.

 

(Ord. 87-821, § 18)

9162.66 Marking of Truck Loading and Parking and Stacking Spaces.
Those truck loading facilities consisting of zones, areas and doors shall be marked with stripes in a manner clearly showing the layout of such loading facilities, and shall be striped for the required size truck, either thirty-three (33) or fifty-five (55) feet in length by twelve (12) feet in width. The truck parking and stacking spaces shall be designated. (Ord. 87-821, § 19)

Driveway Access and Traffic
Sight Clearance

9162.7 On-Site Automobile and Truck Maneuvering Standards.
The minimum maneuvering area for trucks sideloading, parking or stacking is eighteen (18) feet for single-body trucks and thirty-six (36) feet for double-body trucks. The minimum maneuvering area for trucks rearloading, parking or stacking is thirty-three (33) feet for single body trucks and forty-four (44) feet for double body trucks. The turning area required to maneuver a truck constitutes the total maneuvering area. The minimum maneuvering area for standard and compact automobiles is set forth in CMC 9162.51, “Standards for Automobile Parking Lot Design.” The minimum maneuvering area for automobiles parallel parking is six (6) feet. For both automobiles and trucks, neither the maneuvering or loading facilities nor parking and stacking spaces are permitted in a building or public right-of-way; provided, however, that loading docks and wells may be located within a building. All maneuvering areas shall be open and unobstructed. Maneuvering areas may serve dual purposes in terms of providing the required maneuvering area for more than one (1) truck, more than one (1) automobile, or a combination of trucks and automobiles. However, any maneuvering area that serves more than one (1) user is required to meet the most restrictive maneuvering standards for the type of truck or automobile involved. Where more than one (1) truck stacking space is provided parallel to another, no maneuvering area is required to be provided other than that adjacent to the first space in the line. (Ord. 87-821, § 20)

9162.8 Driveway Widths, Driveway Approaches and Traffic Sight Distance.
A. The location of driveway approaches, driveway widths, and limitations on the location and height of walls, landscaping, buildings, signs, and other facilities which may affect the operation of vehicles or sight distance at driveway approaches, shall be as required by the Director of Public Works or by the Los Angeles County Fire Prevention Bureau.

B. Driveway approaches shall be designed as follows:

1. For commercial, industrial or residential driveway approaches having an anticipated average daily traffic of one hundred (100) vehicles or less, the driveway approach shall be designed as either a standard or flared approach.

2. For commercial, industrial or residential driveway approaches having an anticipated average daily traffic of more than one hundred (100) vehicles and less than one thousand (1,000) vehicles, the driveway approach shall be designed as a flared approach.

3. For residential driveway approaches serving more than sixty (60) dwelling units, or each commercial or industrial driveway approach having an anticipated average daily traffic of one thousand (1,000) vehicles or more, the driveway approach shall be designed as a local street with curb, spandrel, and cross gutter, which design shall be approved by the Director of Public Works.

C. The width of each type of driveway approach and driveway/aisleway shall be as set forth in the following tables; provided, however, that deviations from these standards may be required or permitted by the Director of Public Works if necessary to promote traffic safety or to comply with Fire Department regulations.

STANDARD DRIVEWAY APPROACH WIDTHS

Use

Driveway Approach Width

Driveway/ Aisleway Width

Residential – Single-family shelter

Minimum 12 ft.

Maximum 28 ft.

Minimum 12 ft.

Maximum 26 ft.

 

Residential – Commercial driveway for 4 or less units

Minimum 18 ft.

Maximum 28 ft.

Minimum 18 ft.

Maximum 26 ft.

 

Residential – Common driveway for 4 units or less

Minimum 20 ft.

Maximum 28 ft.

Minimum 20 ft.

Maximum 26 ft.

 

Residential – Common driveway for 5 or more units

Two-Way traffic

Minimum 26 ft.

Maximum 28 ft.

One-way traffic

Minimum 12 ft.

Two-Way traffic

Minimum 24 ft.

Maximum 26 ft.

One-way traffic

Minimum 12 ft.

 

Commercial or Industrial – for public access

Two-Way traffic

Minimum 26 ft.

Maximum 40 ft.

One-way traffic

Minimum 14 ft.

Maximum 20 ft.

Two-Way traffic

Minimum 26 ft.

Maximum 38 ft.

One-way traffic

Minimum 14 ft.

Maximum 20 ft.

 

Commercial or Industrial – for service access only

Minimum 20 ft.

*

Minimum 20 ft.

*

 

*In all cases, any additional width required for proper turning radii or truck loading facility requirements shall be provided.

FLARED DRIVEWAY APPROACH WIDTHS

Use

Driveway Approach Width

Driveway/ Aisleway Width

Residential – Single automobile shelter

Minimum 12 ft.

Maximum 26 ft.

Minimum 12 ft.

Maximum 20 ft.

 

Residential – Common driveway for 4 or less units

Minimum 20 ft.

Maximum 28 ft.

Minimum 20 ft.

Maximum 26 ft.

 

Residential – Common driveway for 5 or more units

Two-Way traffic

Minimum 24 ft.

Maximum 26 ft.

One-way traffic

Minimum 12 ft.

Two-Way traffic

Minimum 24 ft.

Maximum 26 ft.

One-Way traffic

Minimum 12 ft.

Commercial or Industrial for public access

Two-Way traffic

Minimum 26 ft.

Maximum 40 ft.

One-way traffic

Minimum 12 ft.

Maximum 27 ft.

Two-Way traffic

Minimum 26 ft.

Maximum 38 ft.

One-Way traffic

Minimum 12 ft.

Maximum 27 ft.

Commercial or Industrial for service access only

Minimum 20 ft.

Minimum 20 ft.

LOCAL STREET DRIVEWAY APPROACH WIDTHS

Use

Driveway Approach Width

Driveway/ Aisleway Width

Residential

Minimum 32 ft. width, 15 ft. radius, curb returns

Minimum 32 ft. width

Commercial or Industrial

Minimum 38 ft. width with 25 ft. radius, curb returns

Minimum 38 ft. width

For purposes of utilizing this table, the anticipated average daily traffic for each use shall be based on the Standard Traffic Generation Table prepared by the San Diego Association of Governments or such other source as may be specified by the Public Works Director.

Refer to CMC 9162.51 to determine driveway or aisleway widths that provide direct access to an automobile or truck parking space. (Ord. 87-821, § 21; Ord. 91-445, § 2)

Division 3. Walls
9163.1 Reserved.
9163.2 Noise-Absorbing Walls on Residential Lot Lines.
Where a building is permitted to be located on a residential lot line under CMC 9126.24, the building wall along the lot line shall have no openings and shall be of a type of construction that has a minimum rating of 35 STC (Sound Transmission Class).

Division 4. Trash and
Recycling Areas*
*Editor’s Note: Prior ordinances codified herein include portions of Ordinance Nos. 79-479 and 84-705.

9164.1 Purpose, Definitions and Applicability.
A. The purpose of this Division 4 is to establish reasonable standards to ensure that adequate and convenient areas for collecting and loading of trash and recyclable materials are provided for development projects.

B. For the purposes of this Division 4, the following terms shall be defined as follows:

1. “Development Project” shall mean any of the following:

a. A project for which a building permit is required for a commercial, industrial, or institutional building, or residential building having five (5) or more living units, where solid waste is collected and loaded and any residential project where solid waste is collected and loaded in a location serving five (5) or more living units.

b. Any new public facility where solid waste is collected and loaded and any improvements for areas of a public facility used for collecting and loading solid waste.

2. “Recycling Area (Areas for Recycling)” shall mean space allocated for collecting and loading of recyclable materials. Such areas shall have the ability to accommodate receptacles for recycling materials. Recycling areas shall be accessible and convenient for those who deposit as well as those who collect and load any recyclable materials placed therein.

C. Subject to provisions set forth in this Division 4, single-family residential development is exempt from CMC 9164.2 (Residential Trash Areas) and 9164.4 (Collection and Loading of Recycling Materials), and residential multiple-family development (four (4) or less units), is exempt from CMC 9164.4 (Collection and Loading of Recyclable Materials). (Ord. 93-1013, § 5)

9164.2 Residential Trash Areas.
For each lot developed with multiple dwellings or group quarters, trash and garbage collection and storage areas shall be provided to secure the residential uses as set forth in this Section.

A. Location. All trash areas shall be located and arranged both for convenience to residents and for convenient vehicular access and pick-up and shall not interfere with other pedestrian or vehicular traffic.

B. Enclosure. Trash areas shall be either enclosed within a building or be bounded on three (3) sides by walls, six (6) feet in height, of material compatible in color, texture and appearance with the main structure and having a gated opening of sufficient width to permit the removal and replacement of standard size commercial trash bins. The gate of said enclosure shall be self-closing and constructed of solid, opaque material. Trash bins shall remain in the enclosure, except during trash pick-up. All trash areas shall include a four (4) inch concrete pad.

C. Number and Size.

1. For residential facilities of one (1) to three (3) units: No specific number or size requirement.

2. For residential facilities of four (4) to twelve (12) units, trash areas shall be provided as follows:

a. If individual trash areas are provided, the individual trash areas shall be at least three (3) feet by four (4) feet for each unit, and there shall be one (1) additional area of at least three (3) feet by four (4) feet.

b. If a common trash area is provided, the common trash area shall be at least four and one-half (4-1/2) by six (6) feet with not less than five (5) square feet of additional space for each unit over four (4).

3. For residential facilities of more than twelve (12) units, trash areas shall be provided as follows:

a. If individual trash areas are provided, the individual trash areas shall be at least three (3) feet by four (4) feet for each unit, and there shall be one (1) additional area of at least four and one-half (4-1/2) feet by six (6) feet.

b. If a common trash area is provided, the common trash area shall be at least four and one-half (4-1/2) feet by fifteen (15) feet with an additional five (5) square feet of trash area for each unit over thirteen (13). (Ord. 93-1013, § 5)

9164.3 Nonresidential Trash Areas.
For each lot developed with a nonresidential use, adequate trash and garbage collection and storage areas shall be provided to accommodate all accumulation of refuse on the premises, subject to the following minimum requirements.

A. Location. All trash areas shall be located and arranged both for convenient vehicular access and pick-up and shall not interfere with other pedestrian and vehicular traffic.

B. Enclosures. Trash areas shall be either enclosed within a building or be bounded on three (3) sides by walls, six (6) feet in height, of materials compatible in color, texture and appearance with the main structure and having a gated opening of sufficient width to permit the removal and replacement of standard size commercial trash bins. The gate of said enclosure shall be self-closing and constructed of solid opaque material. Trash bins shall remain in the enclosure, except during trash pick-up. All trash areas shall include a four (4) inch concrete pad. Trash enclosure requirements for an industrial use may be waived if, in the opinion of the Director, such facilities are not within public view and are consistent with existing and anticipated development.

C. Number and Size. There shall be at least one (1) outdoor trash storage area. Each trash storage area shall be at least four and one-half (4-1/2) feet by six (6) feet. (Ord. 93-1013, § 5)

9164.4 Collection and Loading of Recyclable Materials.
A. General Requirements.

1. Any new development project for which an application for a building permit is submitted (on or after September 1, 1993) and any improvements for areas of a public facility used for collecting and loading solid waste shall provide adequate, accessible and convenient areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials.

2. Any existing development project for which an application for a building permit is submitted (on or after September 1, 1993) for a single alteration subsequently performed that adds thirty (30) percent or more square footage to the existing floor area of the development project shall provide adequate, accessible, and convenient areas for collection and loading recyclable materials.

3. Any existing development project for which multiple applications for building permits are submitted within a twelve (12) month period (beginning on or after September 1, 1993) for multiple alterations which are subsequently performed that collectively add thirty (30) percent or more square footage to the existing floor area of the development project shall provide adequate accessible and convenient areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials.

4. Any existing development project occupied by multiple tenants, one (1) of which submits (on or after September 1, 1993) an application for a building permit shall comply with the following requirements:

a. For a single alteration which is subsequently performed that adds thirty (30) percent or more square footage to the existing floor area of that portion of the development project which said tenant leases shall provide adequate, accessible and convenient areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials. Such recycling areas shall, at a minimum, be sufficient in capacity and number of distribution to serve that portion of the development project which said tenant leases.

b. For multiple alterations which are conducted within a twelve (12) month period which collectively adds thirty (30) percent or more square footage to the existing floor area of that portion of the development project which said tenant leases shall provide adequate, accessible and convenient areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials. Such recycling areas shall, at a minimum, be sufficient in capacity, number and distribution to serve that portion of the development project which said tenant leases.

5. Any existing development project occupied by multiple tenants and space, which submits within a twelve (12) month period (beginning on or after September 1, 1993) multiple applications for building permits for multiple alterations which are subsequently performed that collectively add thirty (30) percent or more square footage to the existing floor area of that portion of the development project which said tenant leases shall provide adequate, accessible and convenient areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials. Such recycling areas shall at a minimum be sufficient in capacity, number and distribution to serve that portion of the development project which said tenant leases.

6. Any costs associated with adding recycling space to existing development projects shall be the responsibility of the party or parties who are responsible for financing the alterations.

B. Location.

1. All recycling areas shall be located and arranged both for convenient vehicular access and pick-up and shall not interfere with other pedestrian and vehicular traffic patterns.

2. Recycling areas shall not be located in any area required by this Chapter to be constructed or maintained as unencumbered, according to fire and other applicable building and/or public safety laws.

3. Any recycling area(s) shall be located so they are at least as convenient as the location(s) where solid waste is collected and loaded. Whenever feasible, areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials should be adjacent to or incorporated within the trash collection areas.

4. Each recycling area within a multi-family residential development shall be no greater than two hundred fifty (250) feet from each living unit.

C. Enclosures. Recycling areas shall be either enclosed within a building or be bounded on three (3) sides by walls, six (6) feet in height, of materials compatible in color, texture and appearance with the main structure and having a gated opening of sufficient width to permit the removal and replacement of standard size commercial recycling bins. The gate of said enclosure shall be self-closing and constructed of solid opaque material. Bins shall remain in the enclosure except during trash pick-up. All recycling areas shall include a four (4) inch concrete pad. Recycling enclosure requirements for an industrial use may be waived if, in the opinion of the Director, such facilities are not within public view and are consistent with existing and anticipated development in the area.

D. Number and Size. There shall be at least one (1) outdoor recycling storage facility. Recycling enclosures shall be adequate in capacity, number, distribution and size to serve the development and its recycling needs. An adequate number of bins or containers to allow for the collection and loading of recyclable materials generated by the development should be located within the recycling areas of development projects. Dimensions of the recycling areas shall accommodate containers consistent with current methods of collection in the area in which the project is to be located. (Ord. 93-1013, § 5)

9164.5 Design Standards for Trash and Recycling Areas.
A. The following standards shall be mandatory in connection with the design and construction of trash and/or recycling areas.

1. All trash and recycling areas shall include a four (4) inch concrete pad.

2. The design and construction of trash and recycling areas shall be compatible with surrounding land uses. Materials of walls shall be compatible in color, texture and appearance with the main structure.

3. Recycling areas shall be secured to prevent the theft of recyclable materials by unauthorized persons, while allowing authorized persons access for disposal of materials.

4. Recycling areas or the bins or containers placed therein must provide protection against adverse environmental conditions which might render the collected materials unmarketable.

5. Driveways or travel aisles shall provide unobstructed access for collection vehicles and personnel and provide at least the minimum clearance required by the collection methods and vehicles utilized by the hauler in the area in which the development project exists.

6. A sign clearly identifying all recycling and solid waste collection and loading areas and the materials accepted therein shall be posted adjacent to all points of access to the recycling areas.

7. The property owner is responsible for arranging the pick up of recyclable materials. Recyclable material shall not be allowed to accumulate such that a visual or public health or safety nuisance is created.

8. Trash and recycling enclosures may not be located in any required parking, landscape or setback area.

9. Trash and recycling enclosures may not be located in alleyways or other City owned right-of-way, where they may disrupt circulation patterns.

B. The following standards shall, to the extent feasible, apply to the design and construction of trash and/or recycling areas:

1. Residential developers and property owners are encouraged to include recycling areas or systems within the residence; such as roll-out drawers below the sink for recycling receptacles; fire-proof, cleanable, secure chutes from the living space to the space for collecting and loading recyclable materials, etc. Recommended internal storage space for individual living units or residential development projects is three (3) cubic feet.

2. Exterior trash and recycling enclosures should be designed to allow walk-in access without having to open the main enclosure gate or door. (Ord. 93-1013, § 5)

Division 5. Transportation Demand
and Trip Reduction Measures
9165.1 Transportation Demand and Trip Reduction Measures.
A. The purpose of this Division 5 is to establish reasonable standards to ensure that, pursuant to the City’s General Plan, all necessary transportation demand and trip reduction measures are completed, constructed and adequately provided for prior to the issuance of building permits for certain new buildings and structures and prior to their use and occupancy.

B. The provisions of this Division 5 shall not apply to existing buildings or structures, if such buildings or structures comply with all other applicable requirements of this Chapter.

C. The provisions of this Division 5 shall apply to all new buildings or structures to be constructed, and the expansion or addition to an existing building or structure. The alteration or interior modification to an existing building or structure shall be considered an expansion if in the determination of the Director, there is a change in occupancy or usage of the building or structure which would require a significant increase in the number of offstreet automobile parking spaces for the primary or intended use. Any expansion, addition or intensification of use which is subject to the provisions of this Division shall be required to provide only the transportation demand and trip reduction measures needed to serve the expansion, addition or intensification of the use. (Ord. 93-1002, § 1)

9165.2 Transportation Information.
Nonresidential development of twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet or more shall provide the following:

A. A bulletin board, display case, or kiosk displaying information located where the greatest number of employees are likely to see it. Information shall include, but is not limited to, the following:

1. Current maps, routes, and schedules for public transit routes serving the site;

2. Telephone numbers for referrals on transportation information including numbers for the regional ridesharing agency and local transit operators;

3. Ridesharing promotional material supplied by commuter-oriented organizations;

4. Bicycle route and facility information, including regional/local bicycle maps and bicycle safety information;

5. A listing of facilities available for carpoolers, vanpoolers, bicyclists, transit riders and pedestrians at the site. (Ord. 93-1002, § 1)

9165.3 Bicycle Parking and Preferential Automobile Parking Spaces.
Nonresidential development of fifty thousand (50,000) square feet or more shall comply with CMC 9165.2 and shall provide all of the following measures:

A. Not less than 10 percent of employee parking area shall be located as close as is practical to the employee entrance(s), and shall be reserved for use by potential carpool/vanpool vehicles, without displacing handicapped and customer parking needs. The preferential carpool/vanpool parking area shall be identified on the site plan upon application for building permit and be approved by the Director. A statement that preferential carpool/vanpool spaces for employees are available and a description of the method for obtaining such spaces must be included on the required transportation information board (CMC 9165.2). Spaces must be signed or striped designating them for carpool/vanpool parking.

Employee parking shall be calculated as follows:

Type of Use

Percent of Total Required Parking Devoted to Employees

Commercial

30%

Office/Professional

85%

Industrial/Manufacturing

90%

B. Preferential parking spaces reserved for vanpools must be accessible to vanpool vehicles. When located in a parking structure, a minimum vertical interior clearance of seven (7) feet two (2) inches shall be provided for those spaces and accessways to be used by such vehicles. Adequate turning radii and parking space dimensions shall be included in vanpool parking areas.

C. Bicycle racks or other secure bicycle parking shall be provided to accommodate four (4) bicycles for the first fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of nonresidential development and one (1) bicycle for each additional fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of nonresidential development. Calculations which result in a fraction of 0.5 or higher shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. A bicycle parking facility may also be a fully enclosed space or locker accessible only to the owner or operator of the bicycle which protects the bicycle from inclement weather. Specific facilities and location (e.g., provision of racks, lockers, or locked room) shall be approved by the Director.

D. Nonresidential development of one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet or more shall comply with CMC 9165.2 and this Section, and shall provide all of the following measures:

1. A safe and convenient zone in which vanpool and carpool vehicles may deliver or board their passengers.

2. Sidewalks or other designated pathways following direct and safe routes from the external pedestrian circulation system to each building in the development.

3. If determined necessary by the Director to mitigate the project impact, bus stop improvements shall be provided. The Director will consult with the Director of Engineering Services and local bus service providers in determining appropriate improvements. When locating bus stops and/or planning building entrances, entrances must be designed to provide safe and convenient access to nearby transit stations/stops.

4. Safe and convenient access from the external circulation system to bicycle parking facilities onsite. (Ord. 93-1002, § 1)

Division 6. Project Grading
9166.1 Project Grading.
If project grading requires the removal or importation of more than 10,000 cubic yards of dirt, soil, sand, gravel, rock, clay, decomposed granite or other similar material from or to a lot, and if more than 20 occupied dwelling units in single-family dwellings, multiple-family dwellings or mobile homes, or any combination thereof, or a hospital or accredited public school by the Education Code of the State of California is located within a parallel corridor 300 feet wide on each side of and measured from the edge of the existing right-of-way of the streets forming the proposed transport route, and within a distance equal to the extent of such route, or, within a distance of 2,640 feet, whichever is less, measured from the proposed point of access to such project, then a person shall not engage in project grading in any zone unless such a person either:

A. Obtains a Conditional Use Permit; or

B. Submits a plot plan to the Director, who shall approve the plan upon finding that the proposed project grading will comply with the requirements of this Division. The plan approval shall be valid for the time stated by the Director. If no time is stated, such approval shall be good for one (1) year. If the Director finds that there is good cause shown, and that the applicant, in moving material pursuant to such approval, has not violated this or any other ordinance or statute, he may extend the duration of such approval for not more than one (1) year if the applicant files a request for such extension prior to the expiration date of his original approval. Only one (1) extension may be granted.

If more than one hundred thousand (100,000) cubic yards of material are to be moved, and the project is not in conjunction with construction, maintenance or repair by a governmental agency, such person shall obtain a Conditional Use Permit.

9166.2 Conditions for Project Grading.
Project grading subject to the provisions of this Division shall comply with the following requirements:

A. A grading permit, when required, shall first be obtained as provided in the Building Code before the commencement of any project grading.

B. The application to the Director or for a Conditional Use Permit, as the case may be, shall contain statements setting forth the following information:

1. The names and addresses of all persons owning all or any part of the property from which such material is proposed to be removed and to which such material is proposed to be transported.

2. The names and addresses of the person or persons who will be conducting the operations proposed.

3. The proposed ultimate use of the lot.

4. Such other information as the Director finds necessary in order to determine whether the application should be granted.

5. In the case of an application for a Conditional Use Permit, the information required pursuant to CMC 9172.21(A) and 9173.1.

C. The applicant shall submit a map showing in sufficient detail the location of the site from which such material is proposed to be removed, the proposed route over streets, and the location to which such material is to be imported.

D. All hauling as approved under this Section shall be restricted to a route approved by the Director of Public Works.

E. Compliance shall be made with all applicable requirements of the City and other governmental agencies.

F. If any condition of this Section is violated, or if any law, statute or ordinance is violated, the privileges granted herein shall lapse and such approval shall be suspended.

G. Neither the provisions of this Section nor the granting of any permit provided for in this Division authorizes or legalizes the maintenance of a public or private nuisance.

Division 7. Signs
9167.1 Signs.
In no case shall a lighted sign or lighting device thereof be so placed or directed so as to permit the beams and illumination therefrom to be directed or beamed upon a public street, walkway or adjacent premises so as to cause glare or reflection that may constitute a traffic hazard or nuisance.

When signs are constructed with two (2) or more faces, all faces may be used except as otherwise specified in this Chapter; provided, that the total sign face area shall be considered to be the sum of the areas of the faces.

Any sign which does not conform to the provisions of this Chapter shall be made to conform or shall be removed as provided in Division 2 of Part 8 of this Chapter.

All signs shall be maintained in good repair, including display surfaces which shall be kept neatly painted or pasted.

Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this Section shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 2 of Article I of this Code. (Ord. 79-479, § 10)

9167.2 Exempt Signs.
The provisions of this Chapter regulating signs shall not apply to the following signs except as otherwise indicated herein:

A. Official notices issued by any court, public body, or public officer.

B. Notices posted by any public officer in performance of a public duty, or for any person in giving legal notices.

C. Traffic, directional, warning or informational signs required or authorized by the public authority having jurisdiction.

D. Official signs used for emergency purposes only.

E. Permanent memorial or historical signs, plaques or markers.

F. Public utility signs, provided such signs do not exceed three (3) square feet in sign face area.

9167.3 Prohibited Signs.
The following advertising signs shall be prohibited in all zones:

A. “A” frame or “sandwich board” signs.

B. Flashing or scintillating signs. (Ord. 80-513, § 3)

C. Revolving signs.

D. Devices dispensing bubbles and free-floating particles of matter.

E. Any notice, placard, bill, card, poster, sticker, banner, sign, advertising, or any device calculated to attract the attention of the public which any person posts, prints, sticks, stamps, tacks or otherwise affixes or causes the same to be done to or upon any public street, walkway, crosswalk, or right-of-way, curb, lamp post, hydrant, tree, telephone, lighting system, or any fixture of the police or fire alarm system.

F. Devices projecting, or otherwise reproducing, the image of an advertising sign or message or any surface or object.

G. Signs which project into an existing or future street right-of-way.

H. Signs, affixed to a building, which project above the height of a building wall or roof fascia.

I. Signs, Flags, Streamers, Etc., on Vehicles. No real estate advertising sign or open house sign, and no flag, streamer, pennant, lead-in, or directional sign, or similar sign that is not permanently affixed to a vehicle, shall be placed in or upon any vehicle, trailer or other device that is parked on a public street, right-of-way, or place for the purpose of drawing attention to any property for sale, lease or rent. No person owning or having possession or control of any vehicle shall permit a vehicle to be used for such purpose. (Ord. 15-1563, §§ 9, 10)

9167.6 Tobacco and Alcoholic Beverage Outdoor Billboard Advertisements.
Repealed by Ord. 12-1500. (Ord. 98-1140, § 2)

9167.7 Substitution Clause.
Any sign authorized by Article IX (Planning and Zoning) of the Carson Municipal Code may contain noncommercial copy in lieu of any other copy. Signs containing noncommercial copy are subject to the same time, place, and manner restrictions as business signs. (Ord. 15-1563, § 11)

9167.8 Removal of Unauthorized Signs from the Public Right-of-Way.
The Director may summarily and without prior notice remove any unauthorized sign in the public right-of-way that is placed in violation of any of the provisions of the Carson Municipal Code. Provided, that the owner of the sign appears on the face of the sign, the Director may mail written notice within forty-eight (48) hours after such removal to the sign’s owner or agent.

The Director shall release any sign removed pursuant to this Section to the owner thereof upon payment of a per-sign fee, as determined by City Council resolution, for the removal and keeping of the sign. If the sign is not claimed within ten (10) days after removal, the Director shall order the destruction of the sign. (Ord. 15-1563, § 12)

Division 8. Water Efficient Landscaping
9168.1 Adoption of Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance.
Except as hereinafter provided, Chapter 71 of Title 26 (Building Code) of the Los Angeles County Code and Chapter 20.09 of Title 20 (Utilities Code) of the Los Angeles County Code, as amended and in effect on the effective date of this Division, are hereby adopted by reference. The above-mentioned Chapters which are hereby adopted shall constitute and may be cited as the Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance of the City of Carson.

Copies of Chapter 71 of Title 26 (Building Code) of the Los Angeles County Code and Chapter 20.09 of Title 20 (Utilities Code) of the Los Angeles County Code have been deposited in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Carson and shall be at all times maintained by the City Clerk for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 93-998, § 1)

9168.2 Definitions.
Whenever any of the names or terms defined in this Section are used in this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance, each such name or term shall have the meaning ascribed to it in this Section.

“Building Official” shall mean County Engineer of the County of Los Angeles acting as the City Engineer.

“Chapter 20.09 of Title 20” or “Title 20, Division 1 of the Los Angeles County Code” shall mean Chapter 20.09 of this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance.

“Chapter 70” or “Chapter 70 of Title 26” shall mean Chapter 70 of the Building Code of the City of Carson. References to Sections within Chapter 70 shall refer to Sections of the Building Code of the City of Carson.

“Chapter 71” or “Chapter 71 of Title 26” shall mean Chapter 71 of this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance. References to Sections within Chapter 71 of Title 26 shall refer to Sections of this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance.

“County” or “County of Los Angeles” shall mean the City of Carson.

“Director” or “Director of Public Works” shall mean the Director of Community Development of the City of Carson.

“Division V of Article 11 of Part III of Title 32” shall mean Division VII of Article 11 of the Fire Code of the City of Carson. (Ord. 93-998, § 1)

9168.3 Violations and Penalties.
A. No person shall perform any landscaping in the City of Carson, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the applicable provisions of the Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance.

B. Violation of any provision of the Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance shall be punishable as an infraction as specified in CMC 1200. (Ord. 93-998, § 1)

9168.4 Fees.
A. A landscape permit fee shall be paid to the Building Official in the amount set forth in the most current resolution of the City Council establishing fees pursuant to this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance at the time of issuance of such permit.

B. A plan checking fee for landscaping shall be paid to the Building Official in the amount set forth in the most current resolution of the City Council establishing fees pursuant to this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance at the time of submitting plans and other required documents.

C. Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 9168.1, the amount of each and every fee set forth in this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance shall be the amount set forth in the most current resolution of the City Council establishing fees pursuant to this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance. (Ord. 93-998, § 1)

9168.5 Amendments to Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance.
Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 9168.1, the Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance is amended as follows:

A. The last four (4) sentences of Section 20.09.020 are deleted.

B. Paragraph 3 of Subsection (j) of Section 7105 is amended to read as follows:

3. A grading plan check and grading permit may be required in accordance with Chapter 70 of the Building Code of the City of Carson.

(Ord. 93-998, § 1)

PART 7. PROCEDURES
Sections:

Division 1. Procedures in General

§ 9171.1    Types of Procedure.

§ 9171.2    Elements of Procedure.

§ 9171.3    Interchangeability.

§ 9171.4    Environmental Review Requirements.

Division 2. Procedures by Type

Legislative

§ 9172.11    Text Change.

§ 9172.12    Urgency Measures.

§ 9172.13    Zone Change.

§ 9172.14    Prezoning.

§ 9172.15    Adoption or Amendment of Standards.

Administrative/Quasi-Judicial

§ 9172.21    Conditional Use Permit.

§ 9172.22    Variance.

§ 9172.23    Site Plan and Design Review.

§ 9172.24    Interpretation Procedure.

§ 9172.25    Extension of Nonconforming Privilege.

§ 9172.26    Relocation Review.

§ 9172.27    Request for Reasonable Accommodations.

§ 9172.28    Revocation.

Division 3. Elements of Procedure

Applications

§ 9173.1    Applications.

Hearings

§ 9173.21    Setting of Hearing.

§ 9173.22    Notification of Hearing (California Government Code Sections 65854 through 65854.5).

§ 9173.23    Conduct of Hearing.

Decisions

§ 9173.31    Findings and Decision.

§ 9173.32    Notification of Decision.

§ 9173.33    Effective Date.

Appeals

§ 9173.4    Appeals.

§ 9173.5    Statute of Limitations.

§ 9173.6    Reserved.

§ 9173.7    Reserved.

§ 9173.8    Reserved.

Fees

§ 9173.9    Fees.

Division 1. Procedures in General
9171.1 Types of Procedure.
The procedures to be utilized in changing and administering this Chapter include the following:

A. Legislative Procedures.

1. Text Change – Any ordinance or amendment changing the wording of this Chapter.

2. Zone Change – Any ordinance or amendment changing a zoning boundary as shown on the Zoning Map (CMC 9114.1).

3. Adoption or Amendment of Standards – Procedure for approval of standards specifically called for by the provisions of this Chapter to supplement the ordinance regulations, such as for parking lot design, truck maneuvering and loading area layout, and design standards and guidelines for the Site Plan and Design Review procedure.

B. Administration /Quasi-Judicial Procedures.

1. Conditional Use Permit – A discretionary action concerning a specified land use and pursuant to criteria set forth in this Chapter, to determine whether such use would be permitted at a given location and to determine the conditions or limitations on development in each case.

2. Variance – A quasi-judicial determination, under criteria established in State law and this Chapter, to vary from the literal application of regulations in this Chapter in a case where the effect of a literal application of the regulations would produce results contrary to the intent of this Chapter, and would unequally discriminate against the property owner because of particular, unusual or unanticipated circumstances pertaining to the subject property.

3. Site Plan and Design Review – The review and conditional approval of development plans within designated districts or when required as a condition of other approval, in order to achieve compatibility with surrounding uses, special standards of landscape design, architectural quality, functional effectiveness and site arrangement. (Ord. 84-699, § 1)

4. Interpretation – A procedure for resolving uncertainties or ambiguities in the meaning of any provision of this Chapter. Such Interpretations are uniformly applicable to all subsequent situations in which the same set of circumstances is present.

The Interpretation procedure may include minor adjustment of zone boundaries (up to fifty (50) feet) as shown on the Zoning Map in order to conform to lot lines or to resolve uncertainty as to the precise location of such lines.

5. Extension of Nonconforming Privilege – Procedure for extending the time period during which a legal nonconforming situation is allowed to continue in those specific cases where it is found that the period set forth in this Chapter is insufficient to allow a reasonable amortization of the fixed investments.

6. Revocation – Procedure for revoking any specific development approval or nonconforming privilege granted pursuant of this Chapter, where one (1) or more violations of zoning requirements or other laws are found to have occurred, including the use of deceit, fraud, misrepresentation or the maintenance of a public nuisance.

7. Relocation Review – The review and conditional approval of relocation development plans in order to achieve compatibility with the General Plan and/or and specific plans for the area, compatibility of use, architecture, and design with existing and anticipated development in the vicinity, convenience and safety of circulation for pedestrians and vehicles, attractiveness, effectiveness and restraint in signing, graphics and color, and development scheduling if applicable. (Added by Ord. 84-699, § 1)

9171.2 Elements of Procedure.
Insofar as possible, uniform rules shall be applied to comparable steps required under the various procedures, including applications, hearings, notices and appeals. These rules are contained in Division 3 of this Part.

9171.3 Interchangeability.
From the standpoint of the applicant, there may be two (2) or more alternative procedures under which a specific result might be obtained. (For example, the permission to establish a given use on a parcel of land might, under appropriate circumstances, be accomplished by a change in the text of the use regulations, by a change in the zoning classification of the property, by a Conditional Use Permit or by an Interpretation of the regulations.) In some cases it is not possible to determine the most appropriate procedure until the facts of the case have been developed, subsequent to the filing of an application. In order to avoid the necessity of multiple filings and/or repetitive processing under different procedures, it is hereby provided that an application or other initiation of action under any of the procedures authorized in this Part may be construed as an application or initiation of action under any and all of the other procedures authorized in this Part; provided, that, for each and every action taken, the procedural steps required for that action have been accomplished and the applicable fees paid. Nothing in this Section shall preclude an applicant from initiating, by means of separate application, any and all alternative procedures available.

9171.4 Environmental Review Requirements.
A. Under the California Environmental Quality Act, amendments to this Chapter, changes in the Zoning Map and various other actions taken pursuant to this Chapter, may or may not require preceding or concurrent action pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act involving one (1) of the following:

1. The preparation and approval of an Environmental Impact Report; or

2. The preparation and filing of a Negative Declaration; or

3. A determination that the zoning action is exempt from the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act; or

4. A determination that the zoning action does not constitute a project under the California Environmental Quality Control Act.

B. The environmental review procedure required by the California Environmental Quality Act shall be conducted in accordance with the Environmental Impact Report Guidelines of the City of Carson. The following relationships shall exist between the environmental review procedure and the zoning procedures set forth in this Chapter:

1. Any hearing on an Environmental Impact Report shall be held before or concurrently with a hearing on a zoning matter to which it relates.

2. Certification of a Final Environmental Impact Report or adoption of a Negative Declaration, when required, shall be made, prior to a final decision on a zoning matter. (Ord. 81-566, § 2)

Division 2. Procedures by Type
Legislative

9172.11 Text Change.
Any ordinance or amendment to change or amend the provisions of this Chapter, except a change in the Zoning Map, shall be adopted in accordance with the following procedures: (California Government Code Sections 65850 through 65863.5.)

A. Initiation. Consideration shall be initiated by order of either the Council or Commission, or upon the written request of any person.

B. Time Limit for Hearing. When the Council has requested the Commission to study and report upon an amendment to this Chapter and the Commission fails to act upon such request within a reasonable time, the Council may, by written notice, require the Commission to render its report within forty (40) days. Upon receipt of the written notice, the Commission, if it has not done so, shall conduct the public hearing as required by subsection C of this Section. Failure to so report to the Council within the above time period shall be deemed to be approval of the proposed zoning ordinance or amendment. (California Government Code Section 65853.)

When consideration has been initiated by the written request of any person, the matter shall be considered at a Commission hearing held within thirteen (13) months from the receipt of the request. A separate hearing or determination shall not be required for each individual request.

C. Commission Hearing and Notice. The Commission shall hold a public hearing on any such ordinance or amendment, giving notice by posting, and, in addition, giving notice to any person who has filed a written request therefor, all as provided in CMC 9173.22, and in such other manner as prescribed by the laws of the State of California and as the Commission may deem necessary or desirable. The City Clerk may give such additional notice, and in such manner, as may be deemed necessary or desirable by the City Clerk or the Council. (California Government Code Section 65854.)

D. Findings, Recommendation and Transmittal to Council. After the public hearing, the Commission shall, by resolution, render its decision in the form of a written recommendation to the Council. Such recommendation shall include the reasons for the recommendation, shall specify the relationship of the proposed ordinance or amendment to applicable general and specific plans, and shall be transmitted to the Council. (California Government Code Section 65855.)

E. Council Hearing and Notice. Upon receipt of the recommendation of the Commission, the Council shall hold a public hearing. Notice of the time and place of said hearing shall be given in the time and manner provided for the giving of notice of the hearing by the Commission as specified in subsection C of this Section and in CMC 9173.22. (California Government Code Section 65856.)

F. Council Action. After the public hearing, the Council may approve, modify or disapprove the recommendation of the Commission; provided, that any modification of the proposed ordinance or amendment by the Council not previously considered by the Commission during its hearing, shall first be referred to the Commission for report and recommendation, but the Commission shall not be required to hold a public hearing thereon. Failure of the Commission to report within forty (40) days after the reference, or such longer period as may be designated by the Council, shall be deemed to be approval of the proposed modification. (California Government Code Section 65857.)

9172.12 Urgency Measures.
An urgency measure adopted as an interim ordinance shall be adopted in accordance with the following procedures (California Government Code Section 65858):

A. Interim Ordinance. Without following the procedures otherwise required prior to adoption of a zoning ordinance, the Council, to protect the public safety, health and welfare, may adopt as an urgency measure an interim ordinance prohibiting any uses which may be in conflict with a contemplated zoning proposal which the Council, Planning Commission or Community Development Department is considering or studying or intends to study within a reasonable time. Such urgency measure shall require a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the Council for adoption. Such interim ordinance shall be of no further force and effect forty-five (45) days from the date of adoption thereof providing, however, that after notice pursuant to Government Code Section 65090 and public hearing, the Council may extend such interim ordinance for ten (10) months and fifteen (15) days and subsequently after like notice and public hearing may extend the ordinance one (1) year. Any such extension shall also require a four-fifths (4/5) vote for adoption. Not more than two (2) extensions may be adopted. Any ordinance adopted pursuant to this Section must contain the findings required by Government Code Section 65858(c).

B. Adoption After Noticed Hearing. Alternately, an interim ordinance may be adopted by a four-fifths (4/5) vote following notice pursuant to Government Code Section 65090 and public hearing, in which case it shall be of no further force and effect forty-five (45) days from the date of adoption thereof; provided, that after notice pursuant to Government Code Section 65090 and public hearing, the Council may by a four-fifths (4/5) vote extend such interim ordinance for twenty-two (22) months and fifteen (15) days.

C. Subsequent Ordinance. When any such interim ordinance has been adopted, every subsequent ordinance adopted pursuant to this Section, covering the whole or a part of the same property, shall automatically terminate and be of no further force or effect upon the termination of the first such ordinance or any extension thereof as herein provided.

D. Report. Ten (10) days prior to the expiration of an interim ordinance or any extension, the Council shall issue a written report describing the measures taken to alleviate the condition which led to the adoption of the ordinance. (Ord. 89-896, § 1)

9172.13 Zone Change.
Any ordinance which changes any property from one (1) zone to another shall be adopted in accordance with the following procedure: (California Government Code Sections 65850 through 65863.5.)

A. Initiation. Consideration shall be initiated by order of either the Council or Commission or by the filing of an application by the owner of the subject property or his authorized representative in accordance with CMC 9173.1.

B. Time Limit for Hearing. When the Council has requested the Commission to study and report upon a change of zone and the Commission fails to act upon such requests within a reasonable time, the Council may, by written notice, require the Commission to render its report within forty (40) days. Upon receipt of the written notice, the Commission, if it has not done so, shall conduct the public hearing as required by subsection C of this Section. Failure to so report to the Council within the above time period shall be deemed to be approval of the proposed zoning ordinance or amendment. (California Government Code Section 65853). When consideration has been initiated by means of an application, the Commission shall hold a public hearing within six (6) months from the date of acceptance of the application.

C. Commission Hearing and Notice. The Commission shall hold a public hearing on any such ordinance or amendment, giving notice pursuant to CMC 9173.22 (Notification of Hearing) by posting, by notice to property owners within seven hundred fifty (750) feet and, in addition, by giving notice to any person who has filed a written request therefor, and in such other manner as prescribed by the laws of the State of California and as the Commission may deem necessary or desirable. The City Clerk may give such additional notice, and in such manner, as may be deemed necessary or desirable by the City Clerk or the Council. (California Government Code Section 65854.)

D. Findings, Recommendation and Transmittal to Council. After the hearing, the Commission shall, by resolution, render its decision in the form of a written recommendation to the Council. Such recommendation shall include the reasons for the recommendation, shall specify the relationship of the proposed ordinance to applicable general and specific plans, and shall be transmitted to the Council. (California Government Code Section 65855.)

E. Council Consideration. If the Commission has recommended against a change of zone, the Council may but shall not be required to take any further action thereon unless an interested party shall request a hearing by filing a written request with the City Clerk within fifteen (15) days after the Commission action or within five (5) days of the transmittal of the Commission recommendation to the Council, whichever is greater. (California Government Code Section 65856.)

F. Council Hearing and Notice. Except in a case where no action is taken as provided in subsection E of this Section, upon receipt of the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the Council shall hold a public hearing. Notice of said hearing shall be given in the time and manner provided for the giving of notice of the hearing by the Commission as specified in subsection C of this Section and in CMC 9173.22. (California Government Code Section 65856.)

G. Council Action. After the public hearing, the Council may approve, modify or disapprove the recommendation of the Commission; provided, that any modification of the proposed ordinance or amendment by the Council, not previously considered by the Commission during its hearing, shall first be referred to the Commission for report and recommendation, but the Commission shall not be required to hold a public hearing thereon. Failure of the Commission to report within forty (40) days after the reference, or such longer period as may be designated by the Council, shall be deemed to be approval of the proposed modification. (California Government Code Section 65857.) (Ord. 19-1904, § 3)

9172.14 Prezoning.
A. The City may prezone unincorporated territory adjoining the City for the purpose of determining the zoning that will apply to such property in the event of subsequent annexation to the City. The method of accomplishing such prezoning shall be as provided in CMC 9172.13, except that notice of public hearing need only be given by publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, published and circulated in the area to be prezoned, or if there is none, by posting in three (3) public places in the area to be prezoned. Such zoning shall become effective at the same time that the annexation becomes effective. (California Government Code Section 65854 and 65859.)

B. If the City has not prezoned territory which is annexed, it may adopt an interim ordinance in accordance with the provisions of CMC 9172.12. (California Government Code Section 65859.)

9172.15 Adoption or Amendment of Standards.
Where the provisions of this Chapter allow or require the use of standards to supplement the provisions contained in this Chapter, such standards shall be adopted or amended in accordance with the following procedure:

A. Initiation. Preparation or amendment of such standards may be initiated by the Director or by order of the Commission or Council.

B. Preparation. The Director shall prepare or cause to be prepared such proposed standards.

C. Commission Hearing and Notice. A public hearing shall be held and notice thereof made in the same manner as provided in CMC 9172.11(C).

D. Recommendation and Transmittal to Council. After the hearing, the Commission shall, by resolution, make its written recommendation to the Council.

E. Council Hearing and Notice. Upon receipt of the recommendation of the Commission, the Council shall hold a public hearing and notice thereof made in the same manner as provided in CMC 9172.11(C).

F. Council Action. After the public hearing, the Council shall, by resolution, approve, modify or disapprove the recommendation of the Commission, or refer the matter to the Commission for further study.

Administrative/Quasi-Judicial

9172.21 Conditional Use Permit.
A Conditional Use Permit shall be considered in accordance with the following procedure: (California Government Code Sections 65900 through 65909.)

A. Initiation. Consideration shall be initiated upon the filing of an application by the owner of the subject property or his authorized representative in accordance with CMC 9173.1.

B. Hearing and Time Limit. The Commission shall hold a public hearing within six (6) months of the date of acceptance of the application.

C. Commission Hearing Notice. Notice of hearing shall be given pursuant to CMC 9173.22 (Notification of Hearing) by posting and by notice through the United States mails to the applicant, to the owners of property within seven hundred fifty (750) feet, and to any person who has filed a written request therefor, and in such other manner as prescribed by the laws of the State of California and as the Commission may deem necessary or desirable. The City Clerk may give such additional notice, and in such manner, as may be deemed necessary or desirable by the City Clerk or the Council.

D. Commission Findings and Decision.

1. After the hearing, the Commission shall, by resolution, render its decision. The Commission shall approve a Conditional Use Permit if it is able to make affirmative findings based on the following criteria:

a. The proposed use and development will be consistent with the General Plan.

b. The site is adequate in size, shape, topography, location, utilities, and other factors to accommodate the proposed use and development.

c. There will be adequate street access and traffic capacity.

d. There will be adequate water supply for fire protection.

e. The proposed use and development will be compatible with the intended character of the area.

f. Such other criteria as are specified for the particular use in other Sections of this Chapter.

If the Commission finds that any adverse effects will occur as a result of the proposed use and development, such effects must be found to be justified by the benefits to the public interest which will occur as a result of such use and development.

If the Commission does not make affirmative findings with respect to the above criteria and is unable to impose conditions to mitigate any adverse finding, the Commission shall disapprove a Conditional Use Permit.

In making its decision, the Commission shall adopt written findings with respect to the above criteria.

2. Notice of the Commission decision shall be given as provided in CMC 9173.32.

E. Conditions. In granting a Conditional Use Permit, conditions related to the proposed use and development may be imposed as deemed necessary to carry out the intent of this Chapter and to protect the public health, safety and general welfare.

F. Effective Date and Appeal.

1. The decision of the Commission shall become effective and final fifteen (15) days after the date of its action unless an appeal is filed in accordance with CMC 9173.4.

2. An appeal shall be considered by the Council as provided in CMC 9173.4.

G. Subsequent Modification of Conditions.

1. After a Conditional Use Permit has been granted, modification of the conditions of the permit, including additions or deletions, may be considered upon filing of an application by the owner of the subject property or his authorized representative in accordance with CMC 9173.1.

2. A public hearing on a proposed modification of conditions need not be held unless requested by the applicant, Director, Commission or Council. If the Director, Commission or Council concludes that the proposed modification of conditions extends beyond the intent of the original approval of the Conditional Use Permit and the conditions previously adopted, a public hearing shall be held.

3. The decision and any appeal in connection with a modification of conditions shall be in the same manner as for a Conditional Use Permit.

H. Expiration of Permit.

1. Expiration. A Conditional Use Permit shall become automatically null and void, unless otherwise provided in this Chapter or unless extended as provided in subsection (H)(2) of this Section, if any of the following occurs:

a. Unused Permit. The permit has not been used within the time specified in the permit or, if no time is specified, within one hundred eighty (180) days of its effective date.

b. Time Limit as a Condition of Permit. Circumstances which terminate the permit pursuant to any termination provision included as a condition of the permit.

c. Discontinued Use. The use has been suspended or has ceased to exist for a period of one (1) year.

d. Automatically Permitted Use. Upon a change of zoning classification or of ordinance provisions so as to automatically permit the use. Each nonconformity, if any, existing at the time of expiration of a Conditional Use Permit pursuant to this Subparagraph shall be brought into conformance pursuant to Division 2 of Part 8 of this Chapter.

e. Ineligible Use. Upon a change of zone or of ordinance provisions so as to no longer provide that the use is eligible for a Conditional Use Permit. Termination of the use and each nonconformity thereof shall be in accordance with Division 2 of Part 8 of this Chapter.

If none of the above circumstances transpires, the Conditional Use Permit shall remain in effect indefinitely.

2. Extension. Upon application by the permit holder filed with the Director on or before the date of expiration of the permit, a permit which would otherwise expire may be extended by the Commission, or by the Council upon appeal, if the Commission or Council finds that the termination of the permit would constitute an undue hardship upon the permit holder and that the continuation of the permit would not be materially detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of the public. Extensions shall not be granted for more than a total of one (1) year unless a public hearing is held and approval granted in the same manner and based upon the same criteria as for the issuance of a new permit. (Ord. 19-1904, § 4)

9172.22 Variance.
A Variance shall be considered in accordance with the following procedure: (California Government Code Sections 65900 through 65909.)

A. Initiation. Consideration shall be initiated upon the filing of an application by the owner of the subject property or his authorized representative, in accordance with CMC 9173.1.

B. Hearing and Time Limit. The Commission shall hold a public hearing within six (6) months of the date of acceptance of the application.

C. Commission Hearing Notice. Notice of hearing shall be given pursuant to CMC 9173.22 (Notification of Hearing) by posting and by notice through the United States mails to the applicant, to the owners of the property within seven hundred fifty (750) feet, and to any person who has filed a written request therefor, and in such other manner as prescribed by the laws of the State of California and as the Commission may deem necessary or desirable. The City Clerk may give such additional notice, and in such manner, as may be deemed necessary or desirable by the City Clerk or the Council.

D. Commission Findings and Decision.

1. After the hearing, the Commission shall, by resolution, render its decision to approve or disapprove a Variance. A Variance from the terms of this Chapter shall be granted only when, because of special circumstances applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, the strict application of this Chapter deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under identical zoning classification. (California Government Code Section 65906.) In making its decision, the Commission shall adopt written findings with respect to this requirement.

A Variance shall not be granted for a parcel of property which authorizes a use or activity which is not otherwise expressly authorized by the zone regulation governing the parcel of property. (California Government Code Section 65906.)

2. Notice of the Commission decision shall be given as provided in CMC 9173.32.

E. Conditions. Any Variance granted shall be subject to such conditions as will assure that the adjustment thereby authorized shall not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone in which such property is situated (California Government Code Section 65906), and shall be subject to such conditions as will assure that any potential adverse effects will be mitigated where feasible.

F. Effective Date and Appeal.

1. The decision of the Commission shall become effective and final fifteen (15) days after the date of its action unless an appeal is filed in accordance with CMC 9173.4.

2. An appeal shall be considered by the Council as provided in CMC 9173.4.

G. Subsequent Modification of Conditions.

1. After a Variance has been granted, modification of the conditions of the Variance, including additions or deletions, may be considered upon filing of an application in accordance with CMC 9173.1.

2. A public hearing on a proposed modification of conditions need not be held unless requested by the applicant, Director, Commission or Council. If the Director, Commission or Council concludes that the proposed modification of conditions extends beyond the intent of the original approval of the Variance and the conditions previously adopted, a public hearing shall be held.

3. The decision and any appeal in connection with a modification of conditions shall be in the same manner as for a Variance.

H. Expiration of Variance.

1. Expiration. A Variance shall become automatically null and void, unless otherwise provided in this Chapter or unless extended as provided in subsection (H)(2) of this Section, if any of the following occurs:

a. Unused Variance. The Variance has not been used within the time specified in the Variance or, if no time is specified, within one hundred eighty (180) days of its effective date.

b. Time Limit as a Condition of Variance. Circumstances which terminate the Variance pursuant to any termination provision included as a condition of the Variance.

c. Changed or Discontinued Use or Development. The use has been suspended or has ceased to exist for a period of one (1) year, or has been changed to another use in connection with which the Variance is not required, or the deviation from the regulation which was authorized by the Variance has ceased to exist for a period of one (1) year.

d. Automatically Permitted Condition. Upon a change of zoning classification or of ordinance provisions so as to automatically permit in all respects that which was permitted by Variance.

e. Nonconforming Use Termination. The use is or becomes a nonconforming use and is terminated pursuant to the provisions for termination of nonconforming uses.

If none of the above circumstances transpires, the Variance shall remain in effect indefinitely.

2. Extension. Upon application by the Variance holder filed with the Director on or before the date of expiration of the Variance, a Variance which would otherwise expire may be extended by the Commission, or by the Council upon appeal, if the Commission or Council finds the termination of the Variance would constitute an undue hardship upon the Variance holder and that the continuation of the Variance would not be materially detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of the public. Extensions shall not be granted for more than a total of one (1) year unless a public hearing is held and approval is granted in the same manner and based upon the same criteria as for the issuance of a new Variance. (Ord. 19-1904, § 5)

9172.23 Site Plan and Design Review.
When Site Plan and Design Review is required pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, a development plan shall be submitted and approved according to the following procedures before any grading permit, electrical permit, plumbing permit or building permit is issued, or sign installed, which involves significant exterior changes in the opinion of the Director:

A. Submittal. An application shall be filed in accordance with CMC 9173.1. Prior to accepting an application, the Director may require that a conference be held with the project designer.

B. Approval Authority.

1. An application for approval of a Development Plan shall be submitted to the Commission for determination in any case involving any of the following:

a. Any construction of a new building or structure having an estimated valuation of $50,000 or more.

b. Any expansion, addition, alteration or repair to an existing structure, or other construction if the estimated cost of the work is $50,000 or more and the work involves changes in exterior architectural design, landscaping design or parking facilities.

c. Any conversion of a residential structure to a commercial use if the estimated cost of the work is less than $50,000.

d. Any major wireless telecommunications facility and minor wireless telecommunications facility located within one hundred (100) feet of a residential zone.

2. The Director shall have the authority to approve a Development Plan for work involving any of the following:

a. Any construction of a new building or structure having an estimated valuation less than $50,000.

b. Any expansion, addition, alteration or repair to the exterior of an existing structure, or other construction, except for any conversion of a residential structure to a commercial use, if the estimated cost of the work is less than $50,000 and the work involves changes in exterior architectural design, landscaping design or parking facilities.

c. Any construction involving only interior modifications to an existing building, regardless of the estimated valuation of the work.

d. Signs.

e. Solar energy equipment installation.

f. Fences, walls and hedges.

g. Minor wireless telecommunications facilities not located within one hundred (100) feet of a residential zone regardless of estimated valuation.

The valuation of construction delineated by this subsection shall be established by the Building Official, using as a guide, the Marshall Valuation Service compiled by the Marshall and Swift Publication Company.

C. Commission Hearing and Notice. For applications required by subsection (B)(1) of this section and for appeals authorized by subsection (E)(2) of this section, the Commission shall hold a public hearing within six (6) months of the date of acceptance of the application or date of appeal, as applicable, except that, for applications required under subsection (B)(1)(c) of this section, the Planning Commission shall not be required to hold a public hearing.

Notice of a public hearing, if required, shall be given pursuant to CMC 9173.22 (Notification of Hearing) by posting and through the United States mail to the applicant, to the owners of property within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of the subject property, and to any person who has filed a written request therefor. The City Clerk shall give such additional notices, and in such manner, as prescribed by the law of the State of California and as the Commission or City Council may deem necessary or desirable.

D. Approving Authority Findings and Decision.

1. After the public hearing, the Commission shall, by resolution, render its decision. The Commission shall approve a Development Plan if it is able to make affirmative findings based on the following criteria:

a. Compatibility with the General Plan, any specific plans for the area, and surrounding uses.

b. Compatibility of architecture and design with existing and anticipated development in the vicinity, including the aspects of site planning, land coverage, landscaping, appearance and scale of structures and open spaces, and other features relative to a harmonious and attractive development of the area.

c. Convenience and safety of circulation for pedestrians and vehicles.

d. Attractiveness, effectiveness and restraint in signing graphics and color.

e. Development scheduling (if phased development) which will satisfy the above criteria in each phase.

f. Conformance to any applicable design standards and guidelines which have been adopted pursuant to CMC 9172.15. Such design standards and guidelines may be generally applicable or may specify different requirements for different areas.

2. If the proposed development complies with all applicable requirements and standards of this Chapter and other laws and regulations, and the approving authority finds that the criteria of subsection (D)(1) of this subsection are adequately met, or can be met if specified conditions are observed, the Development Plan shall be approved, subject to such specified conditions. If the approving authority finds that the proposal cannot meet and cannot be modified to meet the requirements of this Chapter and the above criteria, the Development Plan shall be disapproved. In all cases, findings shall be made concerning the grounds for approval or disapproval.

3. Notice of the decision by the Commission or Director, as the case may be, shall be given as provided in CMC 9173.32.

E. Effective Date and Appeal.

1. The decision of the Director or Commission, as the case may be, shall become effective and final fifteen (15) days after the date of the decision unless an appeal is filed in accordance with CMC 9173.4.

2. An appeal from a decision of the Director shall be considered by the Commission, and an appeal from a decision of the Commission shall be considered by the Council as provided in CMC 9173.4.

F. Compliance. After approval of a Development Plan and before City authorization to connect utilities, or before final inspection approval by the Building Official pertaining to any facilities constructed under the Development Plan, the Planning Division shall inspect the site for compliance with the approved Development Plan and conditions. Any deficiencies which are not corrected to the satisfaction of the Director shall be submitted to the Commission for determination as to compliance upon written request to the Director by the property owner or his authorized representative.

G. Exemption of Existing Improvements. Approval under this procedure shall not result in requirements to alter or improve any existing improvements, unless:

1. Such existing improvements are to be altered in connection with the proposed construction, grading or remodeling; or

2. Such existing improvements are directly affected by such proposed construction, grading or remodeling; or

3. The value of the proposed new or replacement construction, alterations, remodeling or other improvements being made exceeds fifty (50) percent of the value of existing improvements. (Ord. 78-433)

H. Subsequent Modification of Conditions.

1. After a Site Plan and Design Review Permit has been granted modification of the Development Plan and/or any conditions of the permit, including additions or deletions, may be considered upon filing of an application by the owner of the subject property or his authorized representative in accordance with CMC 9173.1.

2. A public hearing on a proposed modification of the Development Plan and/or conditions need not be held unless required by subsection (B)(1) of this Section or unless the Director, Commission or Council concludes that the proposed modification extends beyond the intent of the original approval of the Site Plan and Design Review Permit.

3. The decision and any appeal in connection with modification of a Development Plan and/or conditions of the permit shall be the same manner as set forth in CMC 9173.4. (Added by Ord. 84-699, § 3)

I. Expiration of Permit.

1. Expiration. A Site Plan and Design Review Permit shall become automatically null and void, unless otherwise provided in this Chapter or unless extended as provided in subsection (I)(2) of this Section, if any of the following occurs:

a. Unused Permit. Within two (2) years from the Approving Authority’s action, a construction permit, if necessary, shall be issued by the Building Official for the Development Plan. Work authorized by the permit shall commence within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of issuance of said permit and such work shall not be suspended or abandoned at any time after commencement for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days or more.

b. Time Limit as a Condition of Permit. Circumstances which terminate the permit pursuant to any termination provision included as a condition of the permit.

c. Automatically Permitted Development. Upon a change of zoning classification or of ordinance provisions so as to automatically permit the development. Each nonconformity, if any, existing at the time of expiration of a Site Plan and Design Review Permit pursuant to this Subparagraph shall be brought into conformance pursuant to Division 2 of Part 8 of this Chapter.

d. Ineligible Use. Upon a change of zone or of ordinance provisions so as to no longer provide that the use is eligible for a Site Plan and Design Review Permit. Termination of this use and each nonconformity thereof shall be in accordance with Division 2 of Part 8 of this Chapter.

If none of the above circumstances transpires, the Site Plan and Design Review Permit shall remain in effect indefinitely.

2. Extension. Upon application by the permit holder filed with the Director on or before the date of expiration of the permit, a permit which would otherwise expire may be extended by the Commission, or by the Council upon appeal, if the Commission or Council finds that the termination of the permit would constitute an undue hardship upon the permit holder and that the continuation of the permit would not be materially detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of the public. Extensions shall not be granted for more than a total of one (1) year unless a public hearing is held and approval granted in the same manner and based upon the same criteria as for the issuance of a new permit. (Added by Ord. 84-699, §§ 2, 3; Ord. 90-905, § 4; 93-1021, § 2; Ord. 03-1284, § 6; Ord. 19-1904, §§ 6, 7)

9172.24 Interpretation Procedure.
In case of uncertainty or ambiguity as to the meaning or intent of any provision of this Chapter, or to further define or enumerate the uses permitted in the various zones, and upon proper initiation as provided in CMC 9172.24(A), the following procedure shall be followed if a Text Change is not initiated. Adjustment of a zoning boundary up to fifty (50) feet from the scaled location on the Zoning Map also may be accomplished under this procedure if a Zone Change is not initiated and if such adjustment is in order to conform to lot lines or to resolve uncertainty as to the precise location of such zoning boundary. Except in the case of a Zoning Boundary Adjustment, Interpretations shall be generally applicable to all future situations of the same type and shall not be limited or directed to specific properties or circumstances thereon.

A. Initiation. The preparation of an Interpretation may be initiated by the Council, Commission or Director, or upon the written request of any person.

B. Basis of Interpretation. An Interpretation shall be based on an examination of the intent of this Chapter, considering all of the relevant provisions thereof, and shall be consistent with such intent. Consideration shall be given to the relationship among regulations of the various zoning classifications and the uses and development standards therein.

In the case of an Interpretation involving further definition or enumeration of uses permitted in a particular zone, consideration shall be given to the similarities and differences between the characteristics of each use subject to Interpretation and the characteristics of those uses expressly permitted in the zone.

C. Preparation, Notice and Transmittal.

1. Within thirty (30) days after the initiation of an Interpretation, the Director shall prepare a written Interpretation and transmit it to the Commission and the Council and shall give public notice that such Interpretation has been prepared. Such notice shall be made in the same manner as required for a Text Change (CMC 9172.11(C)), or in the case of a Zone Boundary Adjustment, in the same manner as required for a Zone Change (CMC 9172.13(C)).

2. Within fifteen (15) days after the date of the notice, the Commission, Council or any interested person may make a written request to the Director for a hearing. If no such request for a hearing is received, the Interpretation shall become effective and final fifteen (15) days after the date of the notice.

D. Commission Hearing and Action.

1. If a request for hearing is received, a hearing shall be held by the Commission within thirty (30) days of the date of such request.

2. After the hearing, the Commission may, by resolution, adopt the proposed Interpretation, adopt a modified or different Interpretation, or refer the matter to the Director for further study. Failure of the Commission to act within thirty (30) days after the close of the hearing shall be deemed an approval of the Director’s Interpretation.

3. If the Commission refers the matter to the Director for further study, the Director shall prepare and submit another Interpretation in accordance with the provisions of this Section.

4. Unless the Commission refers the Interpretation to the Director for further study, the decision of the Commission shall become effective and final fifteen (15) days after the date of its action unless an appeal is filed in accordance with CMC 9173.4.

E. Appeal. The action of the Commission to adopt an Interpretation may be appealed to the Council in accordance with CMC 9173.4 except that the Council shall hold a hearing within thirty (30) days of the filing of an appeal and shall make its decision within thirty (30) days after the close of the hearing. Failure of the Council to act within such time shall be deemed to affirm the decision of the Commission.

9172.25 Extension of Nonconforming Privilege.
An extension of the date for a termination of a nonconformity as provided in Division 2 of Part 8 of this Chapter shall be considered in accordance with the following procedure:

A. Initiation. Consideration shall be initiated by order of either the Council or Commission or upon the filing of an application by the owner of the subject property or his authorized representative, in accordance with CMC 9173.1, and said application shall be filed before the date for termination of the nonconformity, or within three (3) months of receiving City notification of the nonconformity, whichever time period is later. (Ord. 80-532, § 10; Ord. 81-567, § 1)

B. Hearing and Time Limit. The Commission shall hold a public hearing within sixty (60) days of the date of the order or acceptance of the application. (Ord. 81-567, § 1)

C. Commission Hearing Notice. Notice of hearing shall be given pursuant to CMC 9173.22 (Notification of Hearing) by posting and by notice through the United States mails to the applicant, to the owners of property within seven hundred fifty (750) feet, and to any person who has filed a written request therefor, and in such other manner as prescribed by the laws of the State of California and as the Commission may deem necessary or desirable. The City Clerk may give such additional notice, and in such manner, as may be deemed necessary or desirable by the City Clerk or the Council.

D. Commission Findings and Decision.

1. After the hearing, the Commission shall by resolution approve the request for the extension of time if the Commission finds that the required time for termination of the nonconformity as provided in Division 2 of Part 8 of this Chapter is insufficient for the reasonable amortization of the fixed investment in such nonconformity. If the Commission is unable to make such a finding, it shall disapprove the request for the extension of time. In granting such extension, no expansion or increase in the degree of any nonconformity shall be approved.

2. Notice of the Commission decision shall be given as provided in CMC 9173.32.

E. Conditions. In granting an extension of time, the Commission may impose conditions relating to the continuation, modification, conversion or termination of the use and facilities in order to protect surrounding property and to serve the intent of this Chapter.

F. Effective Date and Appeal.

1. The decision of the Commission shall become effective and final fifteen (15) days after the date of its action unless an appeal is filed in accordance with CMC 9173.4.

2. An appeal shall be considered by the Council as provided in CMC 9173.4.

G. Subsequent Modification of Conditions.

1. After an extension has been granted, modifications of the conditions thereof, including additions or deletions, may be considered upon filing of an application by the owner of the subject property or his authorized representative, in accordance with CMC 9173.1.

2. A public hearing on a proposed modification of conditions need not be held unless requested by the applicant, Director, Commission or Council. If the Director, Commission or Council concludes that the proposed modification of conditions extends beyond the intent of the original approval of the extension of time and the conditions previously adopted, a public hearing shall be held.

3. The decision and any appeal in connection with a modification of conditions shall be in the same manner as for the original extension of time. (Ord. 19-1904, § 8)

9172.26 Relocation Review.
Whenever a structure is proposed to be relocated to a site within the City of Carson, a Relocation Development Plan shall be submitted and approved according to the following procedures before any grading permit, foundation permit, electrical permit, plumbing permit, building permit, or relocation permit is issued, or sign installed:

A. Submittal. An application shall be filed in accordance with CMC 9173.1. In addition, prior to accepting an application, the Director may require that a conference be held with the project designer.

B. Approval Authority. An application for approval of a Relocation Development Plan shall be submitted to the Commission for determination. In cases where the site of a proposed relocation is located within a D (Design Overlay) designated area, the Relocation Review procedure shall be considered as simultaneously satisfying the Site Plan and Design Review requirement set forth in CMC 9172.23. In addition, only the fee for Relocation Review, as set forth in CMC 9173.9, shall be paid.

C. Commission Hearing and Notice. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing within six (6) months of the date of acceptance of the Relocation Development Plan. Notice of hearing shall be given pursuant to CMC 9173.22 (Notification of Hearing) by posting and by notice through the United States mail to the owners of property within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of the proposed new location, and to any person who has filed a written request therefor, and in such other manner as prescribed by the laws of the State of California and as the Commission may deem necessary or desirable. The City Clerk may give such additional notice, and in such manner, as may be deemed necessary or desirable by the City Clerk or the Council.

D. Commission Findings and Decision.

1. After the hearing, the Commission shall by resolution, render its decision. The Commission shall approve a Relocation Development Plan if it is able to make affirmative findings based on the following criteria:

a. The proposed use and development will be consistent with the General Plan, any specific plans for the area, and surrounding uses.

b. Compatibility of architecture and design with existing and anticipated development in the vicinity, including the aspects of site planning, land coverage, landscaping, appearance, age, and scale of structures and open spaces, and other features relating to a harmonious and attractive development of the area.

c. Convenience and safety of circulation for pedestrians and vehicles.

d. Attractiveness, effectiveness, and restraint in signing, graphics and color.

e. Development scheduling (if phased development) which will satisfy the above criteria in each phase.

f. Conformance of any applicable design standards and guidelines which have been adopted pursuant to CMC 9172.15. Such design standards and guidelines may be generally applicable or may specify different requirements for different areas.

2. If the proposed development complies with all applicable requirements and standards of this Chapter and other laws and regulations, and the approving authority finds that the criteria of subsection (D)(1) of this Section are adequately met, or can be met if specified conditions are observed, the Relocation Development Plan shall be approved, subject to such specified conditions. If the approving authority finds that the proposal cannot meet and cannot be modified to meet the requirements of this Chapter and the above criteria, the Relocation Development Plan shall be disapproved. In all cases, findings shall be made concerning the ground for approval or disapproval.

3. Notice of the decision by the Commission shall be given as provided in CMC 9173.32. (Ord. 84-699, § 4)

E. Effective Date and Appeal.

1. The decision of the Commission shall become effective and final fifteen (15) days after the date of the decision unless an appeal is filed in accordance with CMC 9173.4.

2. An appeal from a decision of the Commission shall be considered by the Council as provided in CMC 9173.4.

F. Compliance. After approval of a Relocation Development Plan and before City authorization to connect utilities, or before final inspection approval by the Building Official pertaining to any facilities constructed under the Relocation Development Plan, the Planning Division shall inspect the site for compliance with the approved Relocation Development Plan and conditions. Any deficiencies which are not corrected to the satisfaction of the Director shall be submitted to the Commission for determination as to compliance upon written request to the Director by the property owner or his authorized representative.

G. Alterations or Improvement to Existing Improvements. Every Relocation Development Plan shall include any existing improvements on the site. The approving authority may require alterations or modifications to said existing improvements when any of the following conditions are present:

1. Such existing improvements are to be altered in connection with the proposed relocation; or

2. Such existing improvements are directly affected by such proposed relocation; or

3. The value of the proposed relocation being made exceeds fifty (50) percent of the value of existing improvements. (Ord. 79-474)

H. Subsequent Modification of Conditions.

1. After a Relocation Review Permit has been granted, modification of the Relocation Development Plan and/or any conditions of the permit, including additions or deletions, may be considered upon filing of an application by the owner of the subject property or his authorized representative in accordance with CMC 9173.1.

2. A public hearing on a proposed modification of the Relocation Development Plan and/or conditions need not be held unless requested by the applicant, Director, Commission or Council. If the Director, Commission or Council concludes that the proposed modification of conditions extends beyond the intent of the original approval of the Relocation Review Permit and/or the conditions previously adopted, a public hearing shall be held.

3. The decision and any appeal in connection with a modification of a Relocation Development Plan and/or conditions of the permit shall be in the same manner as set forth in CMC 9173.4.

I. Expiration of Permit.

1. Expiration of Permit. A Relocation Review Permit shall become automatically null and void, unless otherwise provided in this Chapter or unless extended as provided in subsection (I)(2) of this Section, if any of the following occurs:

a. Incomplete Work. The construction has not been completed within one (1) year from the date of issuance of the Building/Relocate Permit for the relocation of structures unless a greater period of time is authorized by subsection (I)(1)(b) of this Section.

b. Time Limit as a Condition of Permit. Circumstances which terminate the permit pursuant to any termination provision included as a condition of the permit.

c. Discontinued Development Work authorized by the Building/Relocation Permit shall commence within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of issuance of said permit and such work shall not be suspended or abandoned at any time after commencement for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days or more.

If none of the above circumstances transpires, the Relocation Review Permit shall remain in effect indefinitely.

2. Extension. Upon written application by the permit holder filed with the Director on or before the date of expiration of the permit, a permit which would otherwise expire may be extended by the Commission, or by the Council upon appeal, if the Commission or Council finds the termination of the permit would constitute an undue hardship upon the permit holder and that the continuation of the permit would not be materially detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of the public. Extensions shall not be granted for more than a total of one (1) year unless a public hearing is held and approval is granted in the same manner and based upon the same criteria as for the issuance of a new Relocation Permit.

3. Abatement. Upon the expiration of the Relocation Review Permit or subsequent denial of a time extension by the Commission or Council, the Building Official shall initiate the procedure established in Chapter 99 of the Uniform Building Code (Rehabilitation Ordinance). (Added by Ord. 84-699, § 4; Ord. 19-1904, § 9)

9172.27 Request for Reasonable Accommodations.
A. Purpose. The purpose is to provide a procedure for individuals with disabilities to request reasonable accommodation, as provided by the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (the Acts), as those regulations are amended from time to time.

B. Definitions.

1. “Act” means the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988.

2. “Applicant” means an individual making a request for reasonable accommodation pursuant to this division.

3. “Code” means the Carson Municipal Code.

4. “Department” means the Economic Development Department and Planning Division of the city of Carson.

5. “Reasonable accommodation” means any waiver or modification to regulations, policies, procedures and standards that is both reasonable and necessary for a person with a disability to have an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a residential use. Examples of reasonable accommodation include, if reasonable and necessary, allowing a wheelchair ramp in a required setback, allowing an increase in building height to permit an elevator installation, or allowing an applicant time to submit material.

6. “Disabled person” means any person who has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities; anyone who is regarded as having such impairment; or anyone who has a record of such impairment. People who are currently using illegal substances are not covered under the Act or this division unless they have a separate disability.

7. “Group home” refers to any and all facilities which are regulated by the provisions of the California Community Care Facilities Act (Health and Safety Code Section 1500 et seq.), the California Residential Care Facilities for the Elderly Act (Health and Safety Code Section 1569) or any alcoholism or drug abuse recovery or treatment facility as defined by Health and Safety Code Section 11834.02 or any successor statutes.

8. “Increased occupancy” refers to a request to increase the number of individuals permitted or licensed by State or local law to occupy a group home.

C. Application – Filing.

1. Any individual with a disability, someone acting on his or her behalf, or a provider or developer of housing for individuals with disabilities, desiring to obtain accommodation in accordance with this Part 7 of the CMC shall file an application with the Planning Officer.

2. A request for accommodation shall contain the following information:

a. Name and address of the applicant and of all persons owning any or all of the subject property.

b. Evidence that the applicant is the owner of the subject property or has written permission of the owner or owners to make such request.

c. Location of the subject property, including address (or vicinity) and Assessor’s parcel number(s).

d. Legal description of the subject property.

e. Description of the current use of the property.

f. The specific regulations, policies, procedures and/or standards that are requested to be waived or modified.

g. A statement setting forth the basis for the request, including verifiable documentation of disability status.

3. The Planning Officer may request additional information as necessary that complies with the Acts and the privacy rights of the individual with a disability.

D. Findings.

1. The Planning Officer shall grant a request for accommodation where all of the following are established:

a. The accommodation requested is intended to be used by an individual with a disability, who resides or will reside on the property; and

b. The requested accommodation is necessary to afford an individual with a disability equal opportunity to use and enjoy a residential use; and

c. The requested accommodation will not impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the city; and

d. The requested accommodation will not require a fundamental alteration in the nature of the land use and zoning program of the city.

2. An accommodation is granted to an individual and shall not run with the land unless the Planning Officer finds that the modification is physically integrated on the property and cannot feasibly be removed or altered.

E. Commission Review Where Concurrent. When a request for accommodation is filed in conjunction with a permit, variance or any other discretionary land use action as provided by Part 7 and Division 2, the Commission shall grant a request for a reasonable accommodation concurrently with such permit, variance or other discretionary land use action in accordance with the required findings pursuant to the CMC.

F. Notice of Determination.

1. The Planning Officer or Commission shall notify the applicant of the action taken on a request for reasonable accommodation; said notice shall include the required findings.

2. Notices of determination on application considered by the Planning Officer shall be issued thirty (30) days of the date the application is deemed complete.

3. A copy of the notice of determination shall be provided to abutting owners of the subject property.

4. The notice of determination shall give notice of the right to appeal, as set forth in subsection (H) of this section and CMC 9173.4, Appeals.

G. Recordation. The applicant shall record the findings of the grant in the office of the county recorder.

H. Appeals.

1. An appeal shall be made in writing, pursuant to the procedures established in CMC 9173.4.

2. All determination on the appeal shall address and be based upon the same findings required in accordance with the CMC.

3. Decisions on appeal shall be effective on the date of decision and no further administrative appeals may be heard. (Ord. 12-1485, § 1)

9172.28 Revocation.
A Conditional Use Permit, Variance, nonconforming privilege or other permission for a specific use or development pursuant to this Chapter, may be revoked through the following procedure:

A. Initiation. Revocation proceedings may be initiated by the Council, Commission or Director.

B. Commission Hearing and Notice. The Commission shall conduct a hearing with notice in the same manner as for a Conditional Use Permit (CMC 9172.21(C)), except that notice to the owner of the subject property shall be given by service in the manner of a summons or by registered mail.

C. Commission Decision. After the hearing, the Commission may, by resolution, revoke the permission for the use or development if any of the following are found:

1. Approval was obtained by fraud, deceit or misrepresentation.

2. The property is or has in the recent past been used or developed in violation of the conditions of approval or of other laws or regulations.

3. The property is or has in the recent past been used or developed in a manner materially detrimental to public health, safety or welfare, or constitutes a public nuisance.

D. Effective Date and Appeal.

1. Such revocation shall become effective fifteen (15) days after the date of action by the Commission unless an appeal is filed in accordance with CMC 9173.4.

2. An appeal shall be considered by the Council as provided in CMC 9173.4.

Division 3. Elements of Procedure
Applications

9173.1 Applications.
A. Form, Content and Information Required. The form and content of all applications and the nature of the information to be submitted therewith shall be as prescribed by the Director.

B. Acceptance. No application shall be formally accepted by the Director until:

1. All required information has been submitted.

2. A period of at least six (6) months has elapsed since final action has been taken on any application for the same or substantially the same matter.

3. The application fee, if any, has been paid. If, after accepting an application, the Director finds that all required information has not been submitted, the processing of the application and the running of any applicable time limits shall be suspended upon written notice to the applicant.

Hearings

9173.21 Setting of Hearing.
A. All required hearings shall be held, in the first instance, by the Commission.

B. The Director shall set the time and place for Commission hearing.

C. Any hearing on appeal from a Commission action, or other required hearing subsequent to a Commission hearing shall be held by the Council.

D. The City Clerk shall set the time and place for Council hearing.

9173.22 Notification of Hearing (California Government Code Sections 65854 through 65854.5).
A. Time. Notice of hearing shall be given at least ten (10) calendar days before the hearing.

B. Content. A notice of hearing shall include:

1. Time and place of hearing.

2. A general explanation of the matter to be considered.

3. A general description of the area affected.

C. Posting. When a notice by posting is required, such notice shall be posted in at least three (3) public places in the City as designated by the Council. In addition, any property that is the subject of an administrative/quasi-judicial public hearing shall be posted by the applicant ten (10) days prior to the hearing in accordance with the requirements prescribed by the Director.

D. Notice to Owners of Property within Seven Hundred Fifty (750) Feet.

1. When notice to owners of property within three hundred (300) feet of the subject property is required by Sections 65091, 65095 and 65854 of the Government Code, or by any other applicable statute, such notice shall be made by first class mail or delivery to all persons, including businesses, corporations or other public or private entities, shown on the last equalized assessment roll as owning real property within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of the subject property.

2. In connection with a legislative matter, in the event that the number of owners to whom notice would be sent pursuant to the preceding paragraph is greater than one thousand (1,000), as an alternative to such notice, notice may be given by either of the following procedures:

a. By placing a display advertisement of at least one-eighth (1/8) page in a newspaper of general circulation published nearest to the City of Carson; or

b. By placing an insert with any generalized first class mailing sent by the City to property owners in the area affected.

c. Such advertisement or mailing insert shall specify:

(i) The type and magnitude of the changes proposed.

(ii) The place where copies of the proposed changes may be obtained.

(iii) The time, date and place of hearing.

(iv) The right to appear and be heard.

E. Notice to Persons Requiring Notice. In all cases, in addition to other notices, notice shall be given by first class mail to any person who has filed a written request therefor with the Commission. Such a request may be submitted at any time during the calendar year and shall apply for the balance of such calendar year. A reasonable fee may be imposed on persons requesting such notice for the purpose of recovering the cost of such mailing.

F. Notice to Affected Agencies. When notice to local agencies expected to provide water, sewage, streets, roads, schools or other essential facilities is required, such notice shall be made by first class mail or delivery to each such agency. (Ord. 19-1904, § 10)

9173.23 Conduct of Hearing.
A. Rules. The Commission shall adopt and publish rules for the conduct of its hearings.

B. Continuances. Any hearing may be continued from time to time if the time and place of the continuance is announced prior to adjournment.

C. Record of Hearing. Each hearing shall be recorded electronically or stenographically. A transcript shall be prepared and provided to any person on request and the payment of a fee to recover the cost of such preparation.

Decisions

9173.31 Findings and Decision.
A. In connection with each decision by the Commission or Director, written findings shall be adopted relating to the applicable criteria of the State Planning and Zoning Law and of this Chapter, and based upon the hearing and the record of the case.

B. When more than one (1) type of decision is being made on a case, the findings and decision for each type of decision shall be presented as a separate document.

9173.32 Notification of Decision.
For each decision, notice of the decision shall be sent by first class mail to:

A. The applicant or person initially requesting consideration of the matter.

B. Each person who has filed a written request therefor. (Ord. 78-434)

9173.33 Effective Date.
Except as otherwise provided in the decision or by law:

A. Decisions which are subject to appeal shall become effective fifteen (15) days from the date of action by the Commission or, in the case of Director’s decision, fifteen (15) days from the date of the written notice containing the decision, unless appealed.

B. Decisions not subject to appeal shall become effective immediately.

Appeals

9173.4 Appeals.
A. Appellate Authority. Any decision made by the Director pursuant to this Chapter may be appealed to the Commission. Any decision made by the Commission pursuant to this Chapter may be appealed to the Council.

B. Filing of Appeal.

1. An appeal may be filed by any person, including any member of the City Council or the City Manager. In the event of an appeal by any member of the City Council or the City Manager, CMC 9173.9 shall not apply and there shall be no fee required from any member of the City Council or the City Manager to perfect an appeal.

2. An appeal shall be filed in writing within fifteen (15) days of the date of the Commission action, or in the case of an action by the Director, within fifteen (15) days of the date of the notice of decision.

3. The form and content of an appeal shall include:

a. The street address, if there is one, otherwise the legal description and location of the premises included in the action.

b. The administrative file number (case number) identifying the matter which is being appealed.

c. The specific matter being appealed.

d. A statement of the grounds for appeal or how there is error in the decision of the matter being appealed; provided, however, that in the event of an appeal by any member of the City Council or the City Manager, subsections (a), (b), and (c) of this Section shall not apply and the statement of grounds need only provide, in substance and effect, a request that a specific decision, administrative case number, or resolution number, as the case may be, be reviewed by the Planning Commission or City Council, as the case may be. No other grounds for appeal need be stated to perfect such appeal and such statement need only be filed with the City Clerk.

4. Unless otherwise provided, all appeals shall be filed with the City Clerk.

5. If the appeal is found to be deficient, the City Clerk shall deliver or mail to the appellant, by certified mail, a notice specifying the particulars in which the appeal is deficient. If such deficiency has not been corrected by the appellant within seven (7) days after such mailing of such a notice of deficiency by filing with the City Clerk a sufficient amendment to the appeal, the appeal shall be deemed to be withdrawn and the appeal fee shall be returned to the appellant.

C. Consideration and Decision.

1. Upon acceptance of the filing of an appeal, the City Clerk shall set the matter for public hearing before the appellate body, in the same manner as required for a Commission hearing of such matter. The City Clerk shall notify the Director who shall transmit to the appellate body a summary of the factual data and the record of action taken on the case.

2. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, in acting on an appeal the appellate body may:

a. Affirm the decision; or

b. Modify the decision; or

c. Refer the matter back to the body from which the appeal originated, with instructions; or

d. Reverse the decision.

3. Unless referred back to the body from which the appeal originated, the appellate decision shall be supported by written findings.

D. Failure to Act. The appellate body shall, within sixty (60) days of the filing of an appeal, act to either affirm, reverse, modify, continue or refer matter back.

E. Following the denial of any permit application by the Director, the Planning Commission, or the City Council, as the case may be, or upon the revocation of any permit, use permit, or conditional use permit by the Director, the Planning Commission, or the City Council, as the case may be, no application for a permit, use permit, or conditional use permit for the same or substantially the same use or conditional use on the same or substantially the same real property shall be filed within one (1) year from the date denial or revocation of the permit, use permit, or conditional use permit became final within the meaning of this Chapter. (Ord. 78-458, § 1; Ord. 83-668, § 1; Ord. 84-701, § 1; Ord. 17-1634, §§ 1 – 3)

9173.5 Statute of Limitations.
A. Any court action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void or annul any decision regarding the General Plan or any matter mentioned in this Chapter (other than a matter governed by Government Code Section 65907) or concerning any of the proceedings, acts or determinations taken, done or made prior to such decision, shall not be maintained by any person unless such action or proceeding is commenced within sixty (60) days after the date on which such decision becomes final. Thereafter all persons are barred from any such action or proceeding or any defense of invalidity or unreasonableness of such decision or of such proceedings, acts or determinations.

B. Any court action brought pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 to attack, review, set aside, void or annul any decision denying an application for a permit or revoking a previously granted permit, shall not be maintained by any person unless such action is commenced within ninety (90) days after the date on which such decision becomes final. This subsection has been adopted pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. (Ord. 78-458, § 1)

9173.6 Reserved.
9173.7 Reserved.
9173.8 Reserved.
Fees

9173.9 Fees.
The fees to be paid in connection with applications, appeals and other matters of procedure provided for in this Chapter shall be determined by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 74-479; Ord. 82-589U, § 2; Ord. 82-607, § 1; Ord. 82-618, § 2)

PART 8. IMPLEMENTING PROVISIONS
Sections:

Division 1. Applicability of Regulations

§ 9181.1    Property Affected.

§ 9181.2    Persons Affected.

§ 9181.3    Activities Affected.

Division 2. Nonconformities

General Provisions

§ 9182.01    Applicability.

§ 9182.02    Changes and Alterations.

§ 9182.03    Facilities Under Construction.

§ 9182.04    Repair of Accidental Damage.

§ 9182.05    Extension of Nonconforming Privilege.

§ 9182.06    Off-Site Relocation.

§ 9182.07    No Reversion to Nonconformance.

§ 9182.08    Continuation of Nonconformities with a Nonconforming Use.

§ 9182.09    Conversion of Residential Structures to Commercial Uses.

Site Nonconformities

§ 9182.1    Site Nonconformity.

§ 9182.21    Nonconforming Use Eligible for Conditional Use Permit or Other Approval.

§ 9182.22    Termination of Existing Nonconforming Use.

§ 9182.23    Discontinued Use.

§ 9182.24    Continuation of Residential Use within a Mixed-Use (MU) District.

§ 9182.25    Continuation of Churches, Temples or Other Places of Religious Worship Located within the CR (Commercial, Regional) Zone or MU-CS (Mixed-Use – Carson Street) Zone.

§ 9182.26    Continuation of Vehicle Repair and Service.

§ 9182.27    Continuation of Existing, Lawfully Established Truck Terminals.

§ 9182.28    Payday Loans.

§ 9182.29    Continuation of Legal Nonconforming Walls Located within an Industrial Zone.

Density Nonconformities

§ 9182.3    Nonconforming Residential Density.

§ 9182.31    Nonconforming Residential Density for Sex Offenders.

Site Development Nonconformities

§ 9182.41    Nonconformity Requiring Capital Expenditure to Conform.

§ 9182.42    Nonconformity Involving Only Noncapital Expenditure or Loss to Conform.

Division 3. Relationship of Zoning Regulations to Other Laws and Regulations

§ 9183.1    Continuity of Zoning Regulations.

§ 9183.2    Pending Proceedings.

§ 9183.3    Rights Under Previous Approvals.

§ 9183.4    Previous Violation or Conviction.

§ 9183.5    Severability.

§ 9183.6    Conflicting Regulations.

§ 9183.7    Private Agreements.

§ 9183.8    Reserved.

§ 9183.9    Nuisances.

Division 4. Interpretation of Provisions

§ 9184.1    References to Other Laws and Regulations.

§ 9184.2    Fractional Quantities.

Division 5. Violations and Penalties

§ 9185.1    Misdemeanor.

§ 9185.2    Public Nuisance.

§ 9185.3    Past Actions and Obligations Previously Incurred.

Division 6. Assignment of Authority, Powers and Duties

§ 9186.1    Enforcement.

§ 9186.2    Delegation of Commission Authority.

§ 9186.3    Delegation of Staff Authority.

Division 1. Applicability of Regulations
9181.1 Property Affected.
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply, to the extent permissible under other laws, to all property within the City of Carson, whether such property is in public or private ownership, except freeways, streets, alleys and walkways which are dedicated for public use.

Parts 1, 6, 7, 8 and 9 of this Chapter are generally applicable to all zones. Unless otherwise specifically indicated, Parts 2, 3, 4 and 5 of this Chapter apply as follows:

Part 2 applies to the RA, RS and RM Zones.

Part 3 applies to the CN, CR and CG Zones.

Part 4 applies to the ML and MH Zones.

Part 5 applies to the OS Zone and such Special Use Zones as may be established.

9181.2 Persons Affected.
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply, to the extent permissible under other laws, to all persons, agencies and organizations, both public and private, except that in circumstances where an overriding public interest is found to be served by an action or development undertaken by a public agency, the Commission or Council may waive the requirements of this Chapter to the extent deemed necessary.

9181.3 Activities Affected.
A. New or Changed Development or Use. Each provision of this Chapter shall apply, to the extent permissible under other laws, to all actions, activities or development initiated subsequent to the effective date of such provision, including but not limited to the following:

1. The division or leasing of land.

2. Construction, alteration, remodeling, expansion, replacement or relocation of any building, structure or other facility or portion thereof.

3. The use and occupancy of land, buildings, structures or other facilities.

B. Existing Development or Use. Any lawfully established development or use shall be permitted to continue without change, even though no conformance with provisions of this Chapter due to subsequent changes in such provisions, except as otherwise provided in Division 2 of this Part or elsewhere in this Chapter.

Division 2. Nonconformities
General Provisions

9182.01 Applicability.
The provisions of this Division shall regulate the continuation, termination and modification of development and/or uses which were lawfully established but which are no longer in conformance with the provisions of this Chapter due to changes in such provisions. A mere change in ownership or tenancy without any change in use, occupancy or development shall not affect any of the nonconforming rights, privileges and responsibilities provided under this Division.

9182.02 Changes and Alterations.
In connection with any development or use which involves a nonconformity, no change of use, expansion, addition, alteration, improvement, relocation on the same site or other changes shall be made unless the Director finds that at least one (1) of the following criteria is satisfied:

A. The change is required by other applicable laws.

B. The change is incident to the public acquisition of a portion of the site, no greater degree of nonconformity will be created other than that caused as a result of public acquisition, and the changed development will conform to current regulations to the maximum extent feasible.

C. The changed facilities and/or use are, in themselves, in conformance with the provisions of this Chapter.

D. The changes are limited to minor alterations, improvements, repairs or changes of use which do not increase the degree of nonconformity present and do not constitute or tend to produce an expansion or intensification of a nonconforming use. Any new structure incidental to a use defined by CMC 9182.21 is deemed to be an expansion or intensification of the legal, nonconforming use and shall not be permitted unless subsection A of this Section applies. (Ord. 80-526, § 1)

No change or alteration made to any development or use shall be construed as authorizing an extension of any time limit for the termination of a nonconformity.

9182.03 Facilities Under Construction.
Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be deemed or construed to prevent the subsequent completion and use, in accordance with this Division, of any building or structure under construction before the effective date of this Chapter or any amendment thereto, provided:

A. That such construction or the proposed use of such building or structure is not at said effective date in violation of any other law or regulation.

B. That such building or structure is completed within:

1. One (1) year from said effective date if less than three (3) stories in height and not more than seventy thousand (70,000) square feet in gross floor area, except that one (1) additional month shall be permitted for each fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in excess of said seventy thousand (70,000) square feet.

2. One and one-half (1-1/2) years from said effective date if three (3) but less than seven (7) stories in height and not more than one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet in gross floor area, except that one (1) additional month shall be permitted for each fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in excess of said one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet.

3. Two (2) years from said effective date if seven (7) stories or more in height and not more than one hundred fifty thousand (150,000) square feet in gross floor area, except that one (1) additional month shall be permitted for each fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in excess of said one hundred fifty thousand (150,000) square feet.

The Director may extend any of the above time limits for completion and use of a building or structure if he finds that reasonable progress toward completion is being made.

C. That such building or structure is constructed under authorization of a building permit issued prior to said effective date or issued pursuant to a vested right acquired prior to said effective date.

Any nonconformity existing in any building, structure or use completed in accordance with the provisions of this Section shall be subject to termination pursuant to this Division.

In the case of a grading permit issued for a development or use prior to the effective date of any provision of this Chapter which makes such development or use nonconforming, said grading permit shall be null and void unless a vested right has been acquired prior to said effective date.

9182.04 Repair of Accidental Damage.
A. A nonconforming building or structure which is accidentally damaged may be repaired provided the cost of the repairs does not exceed fifty (50) percent of the value of the repaired building or structure, said cost and value to be estimated by the Building Official. In the case of a building or structure which is necessary to the functioning of a complex of buildings and/or structures, the estimates of cost and values shall be for such interdependent complex as a whole. In the case of successive incidents of damage, the estimate of repair cost shall be for all uncompleted repairs following the most recent damage.

B. The repair of buildings or structures pursuant to this Section shall not be construed as authorizing an extension of any time limit for the termination of a nonconformity.

C. Repairs made pursuant to this Section shall be made in conformance with the current regulations of this Chapter to the maximum extent feasible, in the opinion of the Director, and shall fully comply with all other applicable laws and regulations. This provision shall not be construed to require a reduction in intensity of use from that existing prior to the damage. The degree of nonconformity shall not be increased under any circumstances.

9182.05 Extension of Nonconforming Privilege.
In accordance with the provisions of CMC 9172.25, the Commission may approve one (1) or more extensions of any time limit specified for termination of a nonconforming use or other nonconformity.

9182.06 Off-Site Relocation.
When a building or structure is relocated to another site it shall be made conforming in all respects with the provisions of this Chapter and all other applicable laws and regulations.

9182.07 No Reversion to Nonconformance.
When any nonconformity is eliminated or brought into conformance with current regulations, the nonconforming rights and privileges with respect to that nonconformity are thereupon terminated and may not be restored.

9182.08 Continuation of Nonconformities with a Nonconforming Use.
Whenever a nonconformity exists incidental to a nonconforming use, said nonconformity shall be terminated in accordance with the termination provisions of this Division, except such nonconformity may continue until the time specified for the termination of the nonconforming use if such nonconformity is brought into compliance with the regulations of the most restrictive zone wherein the use is permitted.

9182.09 Conversion of Residential Structures to Commercial Uses.
A. Mandatory Standards. The following standards shall be mandatory in connection with the conversion of residential structures to commercial uses in commercial zones:

1. All conversions are subject to site plan and design review pursuant to CMC 9172.23.

2. All conversions are required to comply with applicable Site Development Standards (Division 6 of Part 3 of this Chapter) and General Development Standards (Part 6 of this Chapter), including, but not limited to front yard setbacks (CMC 9136.23), side yard setbacks (CMC 9136.24), rear yard setbacks (CMC 9136.25), space between buildings (CMC 9136.27), encroachments (CMC 9136.29), fences, walls and hedges (CMC 9136.3), trash and recycling areas (CMC 9136.4), paving and drainage of vehicular areas (CMC 9162.0), required parking spaces (CMC 9162.21), and required landscaping (CMC 9162.52).

3. All conversions are subject to regulations established in the City Building Code.

4. All units on the subject property shall be converted to commercial uses.

5. Structures which do not conform in all respects to Zoning Ordinance and Building Code requirements are subject to CMC 9182.22 (Termination of Existing Nonconforming Use) of this Division.

B. Design Standards. The following design standards shall, to the extent feasible, apply to conversion of residential structures to commercial uses in commercial zones:

1. Architectural features and general improvements shall be compatible with those of newer commercial structures in the general vicinity.

2. The facade shall be repainted or restuccoed. Colors and facade treatments shall be compatible with those of newer commercial structures in the general vicinity.

3. Roof material shall be replaced with a material compatible with that of newer commercial structures in the general vicinity. A clay tile or concrete material is recommended.

4. Window and door treatments shall be compatible with design characteristics of newer commercial structures in the general vicinity.

5. Canvas awnings are recommended for all first floor storefront windows. Colors of awnings shall be compatible with the facade color of the structure and of newer commercial structures in the general vicinity.

6. Business signs shall be integrated with the building design as well as compatible with the design of newer commercial structures in the general vicinity. Pole signs are discouraged.

7. All existing and proposed landscaping shall be properly maintained, or replaced with landscaping of equal or greater prominence. Drought-tolerant landscaping and irrigation practices are recommended.

8. All ground floor level street facades shall include elements of pedestrian scale. (Added by Ord. 93-1021, § 3)

Site Nonconformities

9182.1 Site Nonconformity.
Any lawfully created lot which becomes nonconforming as to lot area, lot width, street frontage, or vehicular access requirements may continue indefinitely with such nonconformity and may be developed and used as if it were a conforming lot, except that a new or additional use shall not be developed on a lot which is nonconforming as to vehicular access. This Section shall not be construed as authorizing the establishment of a use for which special site requirements exist differing from the basic requirements of the zone unless the site meets such special requirements at the time such use is established. (Ord. 79-460, § 5)

9182.21 Nonconforming Use Eligible for Conditional Use Permit or Other Approval.
Any use lawfully established as an automatically permitted use which subsequently is designated as a use requiring a conditional use permit or other special approval shall be considered to be a nonconforming use until such time as a conditional use permit or other such special approval is granted.

In granting a conditional use permit or special approval for such use, conditions may be included which provide for either the continuation or termination of each nonconformity existing on the site. Such conditional use permit or other approval shall not authorize the creation of additional or expanded uses or facilities which are not in conformance with current regulations. Any extension of a nonconformity beyond the time limit otherwise required shall be subject to the criteria of CMC 9172.25(D).

This Section shall not apply to:

A. Those uses lawfully established on property prior to the designation of said property as ORL (Organic Refuse Landfill) and which would not be subject to the requirement of a conditional use permit except for such designation.

B. Mobile home, and trailer parks lawfully established on property in the residential and commercial zones prior to enactment of the conditional use permit requirement. (Ord. 78-449; Ord. 81-585, § 3)

C. Existing alcoholic beverage sales and service businesses lawfully established on property in the commercial and industrial zones prior to January 21, 1983. Notwithstanding the preceding, the provisions of this Section shall apply to each business that ceases to operate continuously without substantial change in mode or character of operation. Additionally, the provisions of this Section shall apply to each such business that does any of the following:

1. Knowingly allows, during three (3) or more months within any twenty-four (24) month period, a nuisance activity to occur within the premises or in close proximity to the premises. For purposes of this provision, “nuisance activity” refers exclusively to the following: disturbance of the peace, illegal drug activity, public drunkenness, public alcohol consumption, public urination, and excessive loud noise.

2. Allows the business license for such business to lapse for more than thirty (30) days after written notification of the lapse. The written notification shall be provided by either (a) hand delivery, receipt of which shall be acknowledged in writing, to the store operator at the business address; (b) certified mail, return receipt requested to both the business address and the address listed on the business license; or (c) other method offering equivalent proof of actual notice.

Any existing alcoholic beverage sales and service business that does any of the above shall, upon determination of the Planning Commission after a public hearing, be considered a nonconforming use until such time as a conditional use permit is granted. The Planning Commission shall make such determination by resolution, and shall specify in its resolution the grounds resulting in the nonconforming use designation. The Planning Commission’s determination may be appealed to the City Council in accordance with CMC 9173.4. Alcoholic beverage sales at each such business shall terminate no later than sixty (60) days from the date of the nonconforming use designation by the Planning Commission, or the date of the City Council’s decision on appeal if an appeal was timely filed and the nonconforming use designation was upheld, unless an application for a conditional use permit has been filed for the business. Each such business shall thereafter be operated in accordance with the terms of the approved conditional use permit or shall cease alcoholic beverage sales if the conditional use permit application is denied. (Ord. 78-449; Ord. 81-585, § 3; Ord. 82-621, § 5; Ord. 01-1231, § 3)

D. Reserved.

E. Existing multiple dwelling and planned unit developments lawfully established on property within multiple dwelling residential zones prior to September 20, 1984.

F. Existing, lawfully established residential uses located within a Mixed-Use (MU) District prior to the enactment of the conditional use permit requirement, except as provided in CMC 9182.1.

G. Lawfully established restaurants and service stations which received discretionary approval within the last five (5) years from the date of a zone change to the CA (Commercial, Automotive) Zone District.

H. Existing, lawfully established truck terminals prior to the enactment of the Conditional Use Permit requirement, as described in CMC 9182.27.

I. Existing, lawfully established automobile laundries located within the MU-CS zoning district prior to enactment of the conditional use permit requirement, except as provided in CMC 9182.1.

J. Existing, lawfully established caretaker’s residences that have received proper discretionary approval by the Planning Commission located in an industrial zoning district prior to enactment of the conditional use permit requirement, except as provided in CMC 9182.1.

K. Existing, lawfully established sale of diesel fuel or LPG located at an automobile service station that has been approved by the Planning Commission prior to enactment of the conditional use permit requirement, except as provided in CMC 9182.1. (Added by Ord. 84-700, § 6; Ord. 94-1039, § 16; Ord. 03-1279, § 25; Ord. 04-1308, § 7; Ord. 06-1363, § 9; Ord. 11-1479, § 16)

9182.22 Termination of Existing Nonconforming Use.
A lawfully established use which becomes a nonconforming use, including any buildings, structures or facilities designed or intended only for uses which are nonconforming, shall be terminated and such buildings, structures or facilities shall be removed or made conforming in all respects within the time period specified in subsection A or B of this Section, whichever is applicable and results in the later termination date.

A. The time period indicated in the following table measured from the date of becoming a nonconforming use:

 

Use

Allowable Life

Use of land without buildings or structures.

1 year

Use involving only buildings or structures which would not require a building permit to replace such buildings or structures (but not including a mobile home park).

3 years

Mobile home park; mobile homes on individual lots.

35 years

Use involving buildings or structures which would require a building permit to replace such buildings or structures.

20 years

Outdoor advertising use.

5 years

Trailer parks.

20 years

Producing oil wells, oil storage tanks.

20 years

Sale of convenience goods at automobile service stations within 300 feet of any school.

20 years

Arcades.

5 years

Existing indoor mini-marts, auction house.

10 months

Truck-related uses defined in CMC 9148.8 which require a conditional use permit.

1 year

Cargo container storage; provided, however, that effective February 5, 1988:

6 months

(1)    No cargo container storage shall be permitted within fifty (50) feet of any residentially zoned property which involves any stacking more than one (1) container high;

 

(2)    No cargo container storage shall be permitted within one hundred (100) feet of any residentially zoned property which involves any stacking more than two (2) containers high; and

 

(3)    In no event shall any cargo container storage be permitted on any site which involves any stacking more than three (3) containers high.

 

Existing food/grocery stores in residential zones.

Expires December 31, 2003

Multiple-family residential uses located within a Mixed-Use (MU) District with ten (10) or more units (except existing mobile home parks), subject to CMC 9182.24.

2 years

Residential uses located within a Mixed-Use (MU) District with nine (9) units or less, subject to CMC 9182.24.

5 years

Adult business.

5 years

Massage service.

1 year

Tattoo service.

1 year

Wireless telecommunications facility, transmitter, receiver or repeater station – radio, television, microwave.

5 years

Second dwelling unit.

5 years

Vehicle repair and service located within the Commercial, Regional (CR) Zone, the Mixed-Use Residential (MUR) Overlay District and properties in all zones within one hundred (100) feet of residential zones, subject to CMC 9182.26.

5 years

Truck yard.

1 year

Alcoholic and beverage control (ABC) license, on-sale and off-sale only (subject to the requirements of CMC 9138.5).

3 years

Alcoholic and beverage control (ABC) license, on-sale and off-sale only with a conditional use permit shall be subject to the requirements of CMC 9138.5.

1 year

Transient hotels, motels with a conditional use permit shall be subject to the requirements of CMC 9138.19.

1 year

Payday loans.

3 years

B. The time period indicated in the following table measured from the date of construction of the most recently constructed main building or other major facilities which are designed or intended for the nonconforming use:

Structure Type According to Building Code*

Type of Structure*

Old Classification

New Classification

Use

Allowable Life

Light metal or wood frame

IV,

V

II (1 -Hour)

II-N, V

Nonresidential

25 years

Light metal or wood frame

IV,

V

II (1-Hour)

II-N, V

Residential except single-family dwellings

30 years

Light metal or wood frame

IV,

V

II (1-Hour)

II-N, V

Single-family dwellings

35 years

Heavy timber, masonry, concrete

II,

III

II (Fire Resistive) III, IV

All

40 years

Fire resistive heavy steel and/or concrete

I

I

All

50 years

*Building Code classification shall take precedence over type of material in case of conflict.

(Ord. 2-79; Ord. 81-550, § 1; Ord. 84-679, § 2; Ord. 84-685, § 9; Ord. 86-763U, § 3; Ord. 87-813, § 5; Ord. 87-822, § 3; Ord. 92-982, § 3; Ord. 93-1024, § 1; Ord. 94-1035U, § 7; Ord. 94-1037, § 8; Ord. 94-1039, § 17; Ord. 03-1279, § 26; Ord. 03-1284, § 7; Ord. 03-1290, § 11; Ord. 04-1308, § 6; Ord. 04-1322, § 9; Ord. 06-1349, § 6; Ord. 06-1363, § 9; Ord. 09-1419, § 7)

9182.23 Discontinued Use.
When a nonconforming use has ceased to operate for a period of one (1) year, all nonconforming rights and privileges pertaining to such use shall be terminated. This Section shall not apply to any use for which a different period of discontinuance or abandonment is specified pursuant to other provisions of this Chapter.

9182.24 Continuation of Residential Use within a Mixed-Use (MU) District.
A. Existing, lawfully established multiple-family residential uses within a Mixed-Use (MU) District with ten (10) or more units per property (except existing mobile home parks) shall obtain the approval of a Development Plan by the Planning Commission pursuant to CMC 9172.23 (Site Plan and Design Review). An application for a Site Plan and Design Review shall be submitted in accordance with the provisions of this Section within a two (2) year period of the effective date of this Section or prior to the termination of the amortization period, whichever provides the greater amount of time.

When approving a Development Plan, the Commission shall make findings regarding the adequacy of on-site parking and applicable site development standards contained in Part 6 of this Chapter. The Commission shall require, as a condition precedent to continued use of the property under the Development Plan, that a report be submitted by the applicant, which shall provide and include plans to eliminate or mitigate any Building, Plumbing, Electrical and Fire Code deficiencies. The Planning Commission may require additional improvements to the property, or any buildings or structures thereon, which may include but are not limited to the following:

1. New or rehabilitated landscaping;

2. Exterior changes to promote compatibility of buildings and structures with surrounding development;

3. General repairs to vehicular maneuvering or parking areas;

4. Modifications designed to bring a structure more nearly into compliance with the applicable standards for multiple-family residential uses.

B. Existing, lawfully established multiple-family residential uses located within a Mixed-Use (MU) District with nine (9) or less units per property shall be allowed to continue indefinitely under existing ownership of the property, except that the provision of CMC 9182.22 shall apply if ownership of the property changes and the use shall be terminated if the property is occupied by structures declared substandard pursuant to Chapter 99 of the Building Code. For purposes of this Section, a change of ownership shall be defined by Sections 60 through 69.5 et sub. of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California. (Added by Ord. 94-1039, § 15; Ord. 06-1363, § 9)

9182.25 Continuation of Churches, Temples or Other Places of Religious Worship Located within the CR (Commercial, Regional) Zone or MU-CS (Mixed-Use – Carson Street) Zone.
A. All existing churches which were lawfully established within the CR (Commercial, Regional) Zone shall be subject to the approval of a Development Plan by the Director of Community Development pursuant to CMC 9172.23 (Site Plan and Design Review) and CMC 9138.22 (Church Uses within the CR (Commercial, Regional) Zone). Existing churches, temples, or other places of worship lawfully established within, and prior to the adoption of the MU-CS (Mixed-Use – Carson Street) Zone shall be subject to the approval of a Site Plan and Design Review pursuant to CMC 9172.23 as determined by the Planning Commission. An application for a Site Plan and Design Review shall be submitted in accordance with the provisions of this Section within a one (1) year period of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Section or prior to the termination of the amortization period, whichever provides the greater amount of time.

B. When approving a Development Plan, the Director of Community Development shall make findings regarding the adequacy of on-site parking and applicable site development standards contained in Part 6 (General Development Standards) of this Chapter. The Director of Community Development shall require as a condition precedent to continued use of the property under the Development Plan, that a report be submitted by the applicant, which shall provide and include plans to eliminate or mitigate any Building, Plumbing, Electrical, and Fire Code deficiencies. The Director of Community Development may require additional improvements to the property, or any buildings or structures thereon, which may include but are not limited to the following:

1. New or rehabilitated landscaping;

2. Exterior changes to promote compatibility of buildings and structures with the surrounding development;

3. General repairs to vehicular maneuvering or parking areas;

4. Modifications designed to bring a structure more nearly into compliance with the applicable standards for public assembly uses as per applicable Building and Safety Codes in effect at the time of application. (Ord. 97-1115, § 3; Ord. 09-1420, § 3)

9182.26 Continuation of Vehicle Repair and Service.
A. Existing lawfully established vehicle repair and service uses located within the CR (Commercial, Regional), MU (Mixed-Use) District and all zones within one hundred (100) feet of residential zones shall obtain a Conditional Use Permit by the Planning Commission pursuant to CMC 9172.21. An application for a Conditional Use Permit shall be submitted within a five (5) year period of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Section or prior to the termination of the amortization period, whichever provides the greater amount of time.

When approving a Conditional Use Permit, the Commission shall make findings regarding the adequacy of on-site parking and applicable development standards contained in CMC 9138.2. The Commission shall require, as a condition precedent to the continued use of the property under the Conditional Use Permit, that a report be submitted by the applicant, which shall provide and include plans to eliminate or mitigate any Building, Plumbing, Electrical and Fire Code deficiencies. The Commission may require additional improvements to the property, or any buildings or structures thereon, which may include but are not limited to the following:

1. New or rehabilitated landscaping;

2. Exterior changes to promote compatibility of buildings and structures with surrounding development;

3. General repairs to vehicular maneuvering or parking areas;

4. Modifications designed to bring a structure more nearly into compliance with the applicable standards for commercial uses.

This section shall not validate any existing illegal vehicle repair and service facilities. (Ord. 04-1322, § 10; Ord. 06-1363, § 9)

9182.27 Continuation of Existing, Lawfully Established Truck Terminals.
Existing, lawfully established truck terminals, prior to the enactment of the Conditional Use Permit requirement, shall continue as legal, conforming uses pursuant to the existing provisions of the Carson Municipal Code, just as if the foregoing Code amendments had never been enacted. The City Council hereby finds that the only existing, lawfully established truck terminals, prior to the enactment of the Conditional Use Permit requirement, are as follows:

1. The land and improvements commonly known as 21300 S. Wilmington Avenue, Carson, California 90810 including, without limitation, the land known as Assessor Parcel Number 7316-023-033.

2. The land and improvements commonly known as 1101 E. Janis Street, Carson, California 90746 including, without limitation, the land known as Assessor Parcel Number 7319-032-004.

3. The land and improvements commonly known as 20805 S. Fordyce Avenue, Carson, California 90810 including, without limitation, the land known as Assessor Parcel Numbers 7318-015-019 and 7318-015-020. (Ord. 04-1308, § 8)

9182.28 Payday Loans.
Existing lawfully established payday loan facilities as of April 7, 2009, may continue to operate without complying with the conditional use permit requirements of CMC 9172.21. (Ord. 09-1419, § 8)

9182.29 Continuation of Legal Nonconforming Walls Located within an Industrial Zone.
A. Existing, lawfully established walls encroaching to a required front or side yard setback within an industrial zone shall obtain approval of a Development Plan by the Planning Commission pursuant to CMC 9172.23 (Site Plan and Design Review) if the properties are determined to no longer have nonconforming rights and privileges pertaining to the location of said walls. All such walls shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission at a public hearing. If it is determined that the property can be brought into compliance with the setback requirements, either wholly or in part, such existing nonconforming wall shall be subject to abatement.

B. When approving a Development Plan, the Planning Commission shall make findings regarding the following:

1. The wall is in good condition and well maintained;

2. The wall is constructed of brick, stone or concrete block and determined to coordinate with the building to which it is associated and compatible with the existing or anticipated character of the area;

3. The wall is three and one-half (3-1/2) feet or higher;

4. The length of the existing wall is one hundred (100) feet or greater;

5. Physical conditions of the site or the operation conducted at the site make it difficult to meet the setback requirements; and

6. A landscape maintenance plan has been provided.

C. The Planning Commission may as a condition of approval require additional improvements to the property, the wall or any buildings or structures thereon to ensure that the site meets acceptable design standards to justify the retention of a portion of the legal, nonconforming wall. The Planning Commission shall include, but is not limited to, applying the following standards to the property:

1. Up to fifty (50) percent of existing nonconforming walls may remain subject to an approved development plan. Up to sixty-five (65) percent may be approved if there are extenuating circumstances. Minimum of thirty-five (35) to fifty (50) percent of the wall length shall meet the required setback by providing at least ten (10) feet of landscape area for the applicable front or side yard setback;

2. The remaining portion of the wall may be permitted to remain as a nonconforming wall in the existing location and shall cease to retain any nonconforming rights and privileges if subsequent development permits comply with applicable setback requirements;

3. Modifications may be required to bring the wall more nearly into compliance with the applicable standards for industrial zones, to find that the design of the wall is adequate and to address compatibility with the surrounding area; and

4. Landscaping for the front yard or side yard setback shall be provided and designed in a way to provide an attractive appearance and to screen any section of the wall that is located along the street or subject to potential graffiti. The landscaping shall be designed to complement the entire site design. Large shrubs (minimum fifteen (15) gallon) shall be used as part of the screening. Enhanced landscaping may include hardscape, pedestrian accommodations, ornamental fencing, public art, special monumentation at street corners, or other amenities as approved by the Planning Division. (Ord. 13-1518, § 2)

Density Nonconformities

9182.3 Nonconforming Residential Density.
A. Existing lawfully established multiple dwelling units located in the RS or RA Zone shall obtain a conditional use permit by the Planning Commission pursuant to CMC 9172.21. An application for a conditional use permit shall be submitted within a five (5) year period of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Section or prior to the termination of the amortization period, whichever provides the greater amount of time.

When approving a conditional use permit, the Commission shall make findings regarding the adequacy of on-site parking and applicable development standards contained in CMC 9125.5 and 9125.6, as applicable. The Commission shall require, as a condition precedent to the continued use of the property under the conditional use permit, that a report be submitted by the applicant, which shall provide and include plans to eliminate or mitigate any building, plumbing, electrical and fire code deficiencies. The Commission may require additional improvements to the property, or any buildings or structures thereon, which may include but are not limited to the following:

1. New or rehabilitated landscaping;

2. Exterior changes to promote compatibility of buildings and structures with surrounding development;

3. General repairs to vehicular maneuvering or parking areas;

4. Modifications designed to bring a structure more nearly into compliance with the applicable standards for multiple dwelling units.

For a property with three (3) or more units, a full inspection report for all units on the property is required.

This Section shall not validate any existing illegal second or multiple dwelling units. An application for a permit may be made pursuant to CMC 9122.8, 9125.5, and 9125.6 to convert illegal second or multiple dwelling units to conforming second or multiple dwelling units, and the standards and requirements for said conversion shall be the same as for newly proposed second or multiple dwelling units.

B. In the RS or RA Zone, a lawfully established residential use of a type or with a density of dwelling units no longer permitted in the RS or RA Zone shall be considered to be a nonconforming use subject to the provisions of CMC 9182.21 through 9182.23 until such time as a conditional use permit or other such special approval is granted.

C. In the RM Zone, a lawfully established residential use which becomes nonconforming with respect to the density of dwelling units, but is otherwise a permitted use, shall be permitted to continue indefinitely provided there is no further increase in the number of units. (Ord. 03-1290, § 10; Ord. 14-1539, § 1)

9182.31 Nonconforming Residential Density for Sex Offenders.
A. A lawfully established temporary or permanent residence for a sex offender subject to the provisions of CMC 9122.9 and 9138.72 shall be permitted to continue indefinitely provided the residential dwelling unit is not occupied by more than one (1) sex offender, unless those persons are legally related by blood, marriage or adoption.

B. A lawfully established temporary or permanent residence for a sex offender subject to the provisions of CMC 9122.9 and 9138.72 which becomes nonconforming as a result of two (2) or more sex offenders, not legally related by blood, marriage or adoption, residing in the residential dwelling unit shall be made conforming within six (6) months from the effective date of the ordinance which results in the nonconformity. (Ord. 08-1413U, § 4; Ord. 08-1414U, § 3; Ord. 08-1413, § 4)

Site Development Nonconformities

9182.41 Nonconformity Requiring Capital Expenditure to Conform.
Lawfully established site development, improvements, buildings and/or structures which become nonconforming with respect to site development regulations, and which cannot be made conforming without incurring a capital expenditure or loss, either shall be made conforming or allowed to continue as indicated in the following table, unless otherwise provided in this Chapter. Any site development which is not listed herein, or for which there is no specified time period for conformance, shall conform within six (6) months from the effective date of the regulation or ordinance which results in the nonconformity (i.e., date of nonconformance).

Nonconformity

Requirement

A.

Building height, yard area, open space and/or encroachment therein. Wall, fence or hedge of excess height. Storage space.

Existing conditions allowed to continue indefinitely.

B.

Wall, fence (other than of excess height), screen enclosure or building enclosure.

Shall be provided in a conforming manner within 3 years from date of nonconformance, except:

 

 

1.     If Director finds an existing enclosure is available for transportable material or equipment, it shall conform within 60 days.

 

 

2.    When a wall is required along a zoning boundary, said wall shall be provided by a property owner if such property owner, or his predecessor in interest, was the applicant for the zone change which created the nonconformity, or, in other cases, by the abutting property owner who first makes other improvements on his property requiring a building permit with a valuation as determined by the Building Official of more than $5,000.

C.

Lot improvements of areas used for parking, loading, maneuvering, and/or storage of vehicles (includes paving, drainage, perimeter guards and lighting; excludes striping).

Shall conform within 6 months of the date of nonconformance.

D.

Lot layout, number and size of parking spaces, and landscaping of parking area (except parking for a dwelling).

Allowed to continue indefinitely, except that any expansion or intensification of use which requires additional parking space shall be required to provide only the parking space needed to serve the expansion or intensification of use.

E.

Nonconformity with respect to truck vehicle space specifications and/or maneuvering area standards (does not apply to lot improvements set forth in subsection C of this Section).

Allowed to continue indefinitely, except that any expansion of use shall require that all truck loading and maneuvering areas be made conforming to the extent feasible in the opinion of the Director.

F.

Parking for a dwelling, including number of spaces and type of enclosure.

Allowed to continue indefinitely, except that an addition to a dwelling may be made without making the parking conforming provided the number of dwelling units is not increased and the addition does not occupy the only available space on the lot which could be used to meet the parking requirement.

G.

Striping or marking of vehicular parking spaces or stalls.

Allowed to continue indefinitely except that any resurfacing or alteration of an existing parking area which removes existing striping, shall be made conforming.

H.

Trash areas.

Shall conform within 1 year from the date of nonconformance.

I.

“A” frame signs, “sandwich” signs, portable signs, streamers, banners, pennants, etc.

Shall be removed within 60 days from the date of nonconformance.

J.

Temporary signs announcing termination or conversion of a use.

Shall be removed within 30 days from the date of nonconformance.

K.

Flashing, scintillating and revolving signs.

Shall be removed or converted to a conforming sign within 180 days from the date of nonconformance.

L.

Other signs.

Shall be removed or made conforming within 5 years from the date of nonconformance.

M.

Utilities.

Allowed to continue indefinitely, except that any replacement of an existing line shall be made in a conforming manner to the extent feasible in the opinion of the Director.

(Ord. 87-821, § 22; Ord. 92-967, § 1; Ord. 93-1012, § 1)

9182.42 Nonconformity Involving Only Noncapital Expenditure or Loss to Conform.
Unless otherwise specified, lawfully established facilities, operations or other circumstances which become nonconforming, but which can be made conforming without a capital expenditure or capital loss, shall be made conforming within one (1) year from the date of nonconformance.

9182.43 Nonconformity for Discount Stores.
Existing lawfully established discount stores may continue to operate indefinitely without complying with the provisions of CMC 9138.19. The existing stores may expand their floor area without complying with the provisions of CMC 9138.19. All expansions shall require a site plan and design review application to ensure upgrading the facade of the building(s), the signs, and the landscaping for the site. (Ord. 16-1603, § 4)

9182.44 Nonconformity for Convenience Stores.
Existing lawfully established convenience stores, including those associated with other businesses such as automobile service stations, may continue to operate indefinitely without complying with the provisions of CMC 9138.12 and 9138.14. Existing convenience stores including those associated with other businesses such as automobile service stations may expand their floor area without complying with the provisions of CMC 9138.12 and 9138.14. All expansions shall require a site plan and design review application to ensure upgrading the facade of the building(s), signage, and the landscaping for the site. (Ord. 16-1602, § 10)

9182.45 Nonconformity for Automobile Service Stations.
Existing lawfully established automobile service stations, including those associated with other businesses, may continue to operate indefinitely without complying with the provisions of CMC 9138.14. Existing automobile service stations including those associated with other businesses may expand their floor area without complying with the provisions of CMC 9138.14. All expansions shall require a site plan and design review application to ensure upgrading the facade of the building(s), signage, and the landscaping for the site. (Ord. 16-1602, § 11)

Division 3. Relationship of
Zoning Regulations to Other
Laws and Regulations
9183.1 Continuity of Zoning Regulations.
The provisions of this Chapter, insofar as they are substantially the same as previous provisions of the Carson Municipal Code or any other ordinance repealed, amended or superseded upon the enactment of the provisions of this Chapter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations of said previous provisions, and not as new enactments.

9183.2 Pending Proceedings.
Proceedings initiated under provisions repealed, amended or modified by the provisions of this Chapter, and any vested right, shall not be affected by the enactment of the provisions of this Chapter, except that subsequent proceedings shall conform to the provisions of this Chapter insofar as possible.

9183.3 Rights Under Previous Approvals.
An Exception, Variance, Special Use Permit or other approval previously granted by the City and which would be eligible for consideration as a Variance, Conditional Use Permit or other approval under this Chapter shall be deemed to be approved under this Chapter, subject to the terms of such approval, with respect to existing uses and facilities. Any change in use or major expansion of facilities shall be subject to the provisions of this Chapter.

An Exception, Special Use Permit or other approval granted prior to the incorporation of the City and which would be eligible for consideration as a Variance, Conditional Use Permit or other approval under this Chapter shall be deemed to be approved under this Chapter, subject to the terms of such approval, upon the receipt by the Director of a written request therefor from the property owner or his authorized representative, with respect to existing uses and facilities. Any change in use or major expansion of facilities shall be subject to the provisions of this Chapter.

All other Exceptions, Special Use Permits and other approvals or conditions thereof, not in conformance with the provisions of this Chapter, shall be deemed to be nonconforming and subject to the provisions of Division 2 of this Part.

Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Section, if an Exception, Special Use Permit or other approval deemed to be approved pursuant to this Section, or any condition thereof, has resulted in a nonconformity, such nonconformity shall be subject to the provisions of Division 2 of this Part (CMC 9182.01 through 9182.42). (Ord. 86-735U, § 1; Ord. 86-741U, § 1; Ord. 86-752, § 1)

9183.4 Previous Violation or Conviction.
Any violation of and/or conviction under any provision repealed, amended or modified by the provisions of this Chapter shall be considered as a violation of and/or conviction under this Chapter.

9183.5 Severability.
If any provision of this Chapter, and the application thereof, to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this Chapter, and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected thereby.

9183.6 Conflicting Regulations.
Whenever any provision of this Chapter covers the same subject matter, overlaps, conflicts with or is contradictory to any other law or regulation, that provision, law or regulation which is more restrictive or imposes the higher standard shall control, except as otherwise expressly provided.

9183.7 Private Agreements.
The provisions of this Chapter are not intended to abrogate, annul or impair any easement, covenant or other agreement between parties, except, where this Chapter imposes a greater restriction or higher standard than that required by private agreement, this Chapter shall control.

9183.8 Reserved.
9183.9 Nuisances.
Neither the provisions of this Chapter nor any approval pursuant thereto authorizes the establishment or maintenance of any use or circumstance which constitutes a public or private nuisance.

Division 4. Interpretation
of Provisions
9184.1 References to Other Laws and Regulations.
When a reference is made in this Chapter to any other provision of this Chapter or to any other law or regulation, such reference shall apply to any and all subsequent amendments and additions to the provision referred to and to any renumbered or retitled provisions which continue or supersede the provision referred to.

9184.2 Fractional Quantities.
Unless otherwise specifically provided, when a regulation requires the determination of a whole number, any fractional quantity resulting from any computation made in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number if such fraction is equal to or greater than one-half (1/2), and shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number if such fraction is less than one-half (1/2).

Division 5. Violations and Penalties
9185.1 Misdemeanor.
Every person violating any provision of this Chapter or the terms or conditions of any permit or other approval granted pursuant to this Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00, or by imprisonment for not to exceed six (6) months, or by both fine and imprisonment.

Each separate day or any portion thereof during which any violation of this Chapter, or any permit or approval thereunder, occurs or continues constitutes a separate offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as provided in this Section.

9185.2 Public Nuisance.
Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter or in violation of any permit or approval thereunder shall be deemed a public nuisance. Each day that such a condition continues shall be deemed to be a new and separate offense.

9185.3 Past Actions and Obligations Previously Incurred.
Neither the adoption of this Chapter nor the repeal hereby of any ordinance of this City shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violation of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such ordinance, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinance relating to the collection of any such license or penalty or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof, required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance, and all rights and obligations thereunto appertaining shall continue in full force and effect.

Division 6. Assignment of Authority, Powers and Duties
9186.1 Enforcement.
The enforcement of this Chapter and regulations, decisions and orders made pursuant to this Chapter shall be enforced by the City Administrator or his duly authorized representative.

9186.2 Delegation of Commission Authority.
Whenever an administrative power or duty is granted to or imposed upon the Commission, the Commission may delegate such power or duty to the Director subject to such instructions as the Commission may prescribe.

9186.3 Delegation of Staff Authority.
Whenever a power or duty is granted to or imposed upon the Director, Building Official or other official, such power or duty may be exercised by the duly authorized representative of such official subject to such instructions as such official may prescribe.

PART 9. DEFINITIONS
Sections:

§ 9190    Definitions.

§ 9191.002    Abut or Abutting.

§ 9191.006    Access.

§ 9191.010    Accessory.

§ 9191.014    Action.

§ 9191.016    Adult Business.

    Massage Service.

    Tattoo Service.

§ 9191.018    Alley.

§ 9191.022    Alley, Public.

§ 9191.026    Alter or Alteration.

§ 9191.026.5    Alternative Transportation.

§ 9191.027    Amusement Machine.

§ 9191.028    Arcade.

    Area.

§ 9191.030    Authorized Agent or Representative of Owner.

    Automobile Dismantling or Wrecking Yard.

    Automobile Impounding Yard.

§ 9191.034    Basement.

§ 9191.038    Boarding House.

§ 9191.040    Bona Fide Restaurant.

§ 9191.042    Borrow Pit.

§ 9191.046    Building.

    Building or Structure, Accessory.

§ 9191.054    Building Code.

§ 9191.058    Building Height.

§ 9191.062    Building, Main.

§ 9191.066    Building Official.

§ 9191.066.5    Buspool.

§ 9191.067    Cargo Container Storage Facilities – Terms Defined.

§ 9191.070    Carport.

§ 9191.072    Carpool.

§ 9191.073    Carson Civic Center.

§ 9191.074    Cellar.

§ 9191.078    Cemetery.

§ 9191.082    Centerline.

§ 9191.084    Check Cashing or Check Cashing Business.

§ 9191.086    Child or Children.

§ 9191.090    Child Day Care.

§ 9191.094    Church.

§ 9191.098    Clinic, Dental or Medical.

§ 9191.102    Club, Private.

§ 9191.106    Commission.

§ 9191.110    Common Area.

§ 9191.114    Community Care Facility.

§ 9191.118    Community Care Facility, Residential.

§ 9191.122    Community Care Facility, Small-Family Home.

§ 9191.126    Community Day Care Facility.

§ 9191.130    Compatible Use.

§ 9191.134    Conditional Use Permit.

§ 9191.138    Condominium Common Area.

§ 9191.142    Condominium Documents.

§ 9191.146    Condominium Owner.

§ 9191.150    Condominium Plan.

§ 9191.154    Condominium Project.

§ 9191.158    Condominium Project Elements.

§ 9191.162    Condominium, Residential.

§ 9191.166    Condominium Unit.

    Convalescent Home or Convalescent Hospital.

§ 9191.168    Cooperative, Residential Stock.

§ 9191.170    Council.

§ 9191.174    Curb Return.

§ 9191.176    Deferred Deposit or Deferred Deposit Originator.

§ 9191.178    Department Store.

    Day Care for Children.

§ 9191.180    Developer.

§ 9191.182    Development.

§ 9191.184    Development Plan.

§ 9191.185    Development Project.

§ 9191.186    Director.

§ 9191.190    Director of Public Works.

§ 9191.194    Display.

§ 9191.198    Driveway.

§ 9191.200    Driving Skill Course.

§ 9191.202    Dwelling.

§ 9191.206    Dwelling, Multiple.

§ 9191.208    Dwelling, Second Unit.

§ 9191.210    Dwelling, Single-Family.

§ 9191.214    Dwelling Unit.

§ 9191.218    Easement.

§ 9191.219    Efficiency Unit.

§ 9191.222    Electric Distribution Substation.

§ 9191.224    Emergency Shelter.

§ 9191.226    Exception.

§ 9191.230    Expansion.

§ 9191.234    Family.

§ 9191.238    Finished Grade.

§ 9191.242    Finished Grade, Average.

    Flea Market.

§ 9191.246    Floor Area, Gross.

§ 9191.250    Floor Area, Net.

§ 9191.252    Floor Area Ratio (FAR).

    Foster Home.

§ 9191.254    Freeway.

§ 9191.258    Frontage.

§ 9191.262    Future Right-of-Way Area.

§ 9191.266    Future Right-of-Way Line.

§ 9191.270    Garage.

§ 9191.271    Garage, Subterranean.

§ 9191.272    Garage, Partial Subterranean.

§ 9191.274    General Plan.

§ 9191.278    Group Quarters.

§ 9191.280    Gymnasium.

§ 9191.282    Hedge.

§ 9191.286    Heliport.

§ 9191.290    Helistop.

§ 9191.294    Hospital.

§ 9191.298    Hotel, Residential.

§ 9191.302    Hotel, Transient.

§ 9191.303    Indoor Team Training Facility.

§ 9191.304    Intensification.

§ 9191.307    Intermodal Container Transfer Facility.

§ 9191.310    Junk and Salvage.

§ 9191.314    Junk and Salvage Yard.

§ 9191.318    Kennel.

§ 9191.322    Kitchen.

§ 9191.326    Laboratory.

§ 9191.330    Landscaping.

§ 9191.334    Livestock.

§ 9191.338    Loading Area.

§ 9191.342    Long-Term Health Care Facility.

§ 9191.346    Lot.

§ 9191.350    Lot Area.

§ 9191.354    Lot Area, Net.

§ 9191.358    Lot, Corner.

§ 9191.362    Lot Depth.

§ 9191.364    Lot Frontage.

§ 9191.366    Lot, Interior.

§ 9191.370    Lot Line.

§ 9191.374    Lot Line, Front.

§ 9191.376    Lot Line, Interior.

§ 9191.378    Lot Line, Rear.

§ 9191.382    Lot Line, Side.

§ 9191.386    Lot, Through.

§ 9191.390    Lot Width.

§ 9191.391    Manufactured Home.

§ 9191.391.5    Medical Marijuana Dispensary.

§ 9191.392    Mini-Mart, Indoor.

§ 9191.393    Mixed-Use.

§ 9191.394    Mobile Home.

§ 9191.398    Mobile Home Park.

§ 9191.400    Mobile Home Site.

§ 9191.402    Motel.

§ 9191.406    Motor Vehicles.

§ 9191.410    Nonconformity.

§ 9191.411    Nude or Semi-Nude.

    Nursing Home.

§ 9191.414    Occupancy.

§ 9191.416    Off-Sale Business.

§ 9191.418    Open Space.

§ 9191.421    Open Space, Private.

§ 9191.422    Open Space, Usable.

§ 9191.424    Organic Refuse Landfill Site.

§ 9191.426    Outdoor Festival.

§ 9191.430    Park or Playground, Public.

§ 9191.434    Parking Area.

§ 9191.438    Parking Building or Structure.

§ 9191.439    Parking Area, Employee.

§ 9191.442    Parking Lot.

§ 9191.443    Parking – Preferential.

§ 9191.446    Parking Space.

§ 9191.450    Parkway.

§ 9191.454    Passageway.

§ 9191.456    Payday Loan.

§ 9191.458    Person.

§ 9191.460    Physical Training School.

§ 9191.462    Planned Development.

§ 9191.466    Planning Division.

§ 9191.470    Plot Plan.

§ 9191.474    Premises.

§ 9191.478    Project Area.

§ 9191.482    Project Grading.

§ 9191.486    Property Line.

§ 9191.490    Public Use.

§ 9191.492    Public Works Director.

§ 9191.494    Quasi-Public Use.

§ 9191.506    Recreational Vehicle.

§ 9191.508    Recycling Facilities – Terms Defined.

    Religious Worship, Place of.

    Repairs and Services, Major Automobile.

    Repairs and Services, Minor Automobile.

§ 9191.510    Residence or Residential.

§ 9191.514    Retail.

    Retail Petroleum Outlet.

§ 9191.518    Retirement Home.

§ 9191.522    Rooming House.

§ 9191.526    Rooming Unit.

§ 9191.530    Scenic Highway.

§ 9191.534    School, Private.

§ 9191.538    School, Public.

§ 9191.542    School, Trade.

§ 9191.546    Secondhand Store.

§ 9191.550    Service Yard, Public Utility or Public Service.

§ 9191.554    Setback.

§ 9191.556    Sidewalk.

§ 9191.558    Sign.

§ 9191.566    Sign, Business.

§ 9191.567    Sign, Electronic Message Center.

§ 9191.568    Sign Face.

§ 9191.570    Sign Face Area.

§ 9191.574    Sign, Flashing or Scintillating.

§ 9191.578    Sign, Free-Standing.

§ 9191.582    Sign, Illuminated.

§ 9191.584    Sign, Off-Site.

§ 9191.585    Sign, On-Site.

§ 9191.585.1    Sign, Open House.

§ 9191.586    Sign, Outdoor Advertising.

§ 9191.587    Sign, Temporary.

§ 9191.590    Sign, Real Estate Advertising.

§ 9191.594    Sign, Revolving.

§ 9191.598    Sign Structure.

§ 9191.602    Sign, Subdivision Directional.

§ 9191.606    Sign, Wall.

§ 9191.608    Single-Room Occupancy (SRO) Housing.

§ 9191.610    Site.

§ 9191.614    Site Plan.

§ 9191.618    Special Use Permit.

§ 9191.620    Specified Anatomical Areas.

§ 9191.621    Specified Sexual Activities.

§ 9191.622    Stable.

§ 9191.626    Storage.

§ 9191.630    Storage, Outdoor.

§ 9191.634    Story.

§ 9191.638    Street.

§ 9191.642    Street, Arterial.

    Street Centerline.

§ 9191.646    Street, Collector.

    Street Frontage.

§ 9191.650    Street, Private.

§ 9191.654    Street, Public.

§ 9191.658    Structure.

    Structure, Accessory.

§ 9191.662    Structure Height.

§ 9191.666    Structure, Unoccupiable.

§ 9191.668    Supermarket.

§ 9191.669    Supportive Housing.

§ 9191.670    Swap Meet (Including Flea Markets).

§ 9191.674    Tandem.

    Temple.

§ 9191.678    Tradefair.

§ 9191.679    Trailer.

§ 9191.680    Trailer Park.

§ 9191.682    Transfer Station for Refuse.

§ 9191.686    Transportation Demand Management (TDM).

§ 9191.690    Transient.

§ 9191.692    Transitional Housing.

§ 9191.694    Transmission Line, Major.

§ 9191.696    Trip Reduction.

§ 9191.698    Truck Terminal.

§ 9191.699    Truck Yard.

§ 9191.702    Use.

    Use, Accessory.

§ 9191.704    Use, Minor.

§ 9191.710    Use, Primary.

§ 9191.714    Use, Principal.

§ 9191.716    Vanpool.

§ 9191.718    Variance.

§ 9191.720    Vehicle.

§ 9191.722    Vehicle Dismantling Yard.

§ 9191.726    Vehicle Impounding Yard.

§ 9191.730    Veterinary Clinic.

§ 9191.734    Walkway.

§ 9191.738    Walkway, Public.

§ 9191.742    Wall, Solid.

§ 9191.746    Warehouse.

§ 9191.750    Waste Disposal Facility.

§ 9191.754    Wholesale.

§ 9191.758    Yard.

§ 9191.762    Yard, Front.

§ 9191.766    Yard, Rear.

§ 9191.770    Yard, Required.

§ 9191.774    Yard Sale.

§ 9191.778    Yard, Side.

§ 9191.782    Zone.

§ 9191.786    Zoning Map.

9190 Definitions.
For the purpose of this Chapter, the words, terms and phrases set forth in the following Sections shall have the meaning and construction given therein, except where used in a context which clearly indicates a different meaning or construction.

9191.002 Abut or Abutting.
Shall mean two (2) or more lots or areas of land or two (2) or more objects which touch one another.

9191.006 Access.
Shall mean a place or way by which pedestrians or vehicles are physically and legally permitted to have ingress to and/or egress from a property or use.

9191.010 Accessory.
Shall mean a use, building or facility incidental, related, and clearly subordinate to a principal use, building or facility established on the same lot.

9191.014 Action.
Shall mean a deliberative or authoritative decision of an officer or official body, including, but not limited to, a denial, approval, hearing or continuance of a matter under consideration.

9191.016 Adult Business.
Shall mean any one (1) of the following:

A. Any business wherein the preponderant business is the offering of services, materials, goods and/or products which are characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to “nude” or “semi-nude” persons or “specified sexual activities” between persons for observation by patrons therein. Such business shall include, but not be limited to, an adult bookstore, adult video store, adult arcade, adult theater or other similar business;

B. Any business which utilizes or encourages sexual arousal, sexual gratification and/or sexual stimulation of a customer or prospective customer in connection with the sale or offering for sale of service, goods or materials. Such business shall include, but not be limited to, Turkish bath, “nude” or “semi-nude” modeling studio, business using “nude” or “semi-nude” models in offering lingerie or intimate apparel for sale, sexual catharsis center, sexual encounter establishment, bondage or discipline parlor, escort bureau or other similar business; or

C. Any business, having as a portion of its goods for sale, products which replicate or are designed to simulate “specified anatomical areas,” as defined in CMC 9191.620, and which are designed to be placed on “specified anatomical areas” to cause sexual excitement thereof. Such business shall include, but not be limited to, a sexual novelty store or other similar business.

This definition of adult business does not apply, nor shall it be interpreted to apply, to any business conducted, operated by or employing licensed chiropractors, licensed physicians, licensed physical therapists, licensed psychologists, licensed social workers or licensed marriage family counselors when performing functions under or pursuant to their respective licenses. (Added by Ord. 94-1035U, § 8; Ord. 94-1037, § 9; Ord. 06-1349, § 7)

Massage Service. See CMC 9138.91(B).

Tattoo Service. See CMC 9138.92(B).

9191.018 Alley.
Shall mean a public or private right-of-way which affords a means of vehicular access to the side or rear of one (1) or more lots having frontage on a street.

9191.022 Alley, Public.
Shall mean an alley dedicated for public use.

9191.026 Alter or Alteration.
Shall mean reconstruction, remodeling, addition or expansion of facilities involving more than maintenance and repair of existing facilities.

9191.026.5  Alternative Transportation.
Shall mean the use of modes of transportation other than the single passenger motor vehicle, including but not limited to carpools, vanpools, buspools, public transit, walking and bicycling. (Ord. 93-1002, § 2)

9191.027 Amusement Machine.
Shall mean a device, apparatus, or game of skill or chance designed or constructed to operate by the depositing of any coin, plate, disc, slug, or key. (Ord. 83-637U, § 7; Ord. 84-685, § 7)

9191.028 Arcade.
Shall mean any place of business to which the public is permitted or invited wherein four (4) or more coin- or token-operated amusement machines, still or motion picture machines, projection machines or similar contrivances are maintained. If an arcade is located within another business establishment it shall be deemed to be a separate business requiring a separate business license. (Ord. 83-637U, § 8; Ord. 84-685, § 8)

Area. See Lot Area or Floor Area.

9191.030 Authorized Agent or Representative of Owner.
Shall mean anyone who has authority to make requests or applications, speak for or make presentations on behalf of the owner of any property. An authorized agent or representative shall be responsible for any information or data which he presents to the City. As used in this Chapter, any party who is or will be a plaintiff in an action in eminent domain or acquire property shall be considered an authorized agent or representative for said property.

Automobile Dismantling or Wrecking Yard. See Vehicle Dismantling Yard.

Automobile Impounding Yard. See Vehicle Impounding Yard. (Ord. 16-1602, § 13)

9191.034 Basement.
Shall mean that portion of a building between a floor and ceiling which is partly below and partly above grade and so located that the vertical distance from average finished grade to the finished floor level below is less than the vertical distance from the average finished grade to ceiling. A basement shall be considered to be a story. (See Figure 1 at the end of this Part.)

9191.038 Boarding House.
Shall mean the same as Rooming House.

9191.040 Bona Fide Restaurant.
Shall mean an establishment which, on a regular basis and manner, is open for the serving of meals to patrons for compensation and which has adequate kitchen facilities suitable for the preparation of a variety of complete cooked meals, over and beyond such foods as sandwiches or salads. (Ord. 82-621, § 6)

9191.042 Borrow Pit.
Shall mean any place or premises where dirt, soil, sand, gravel or other material is removed by excavation for any purpose other than that necessary and incidental to grading or construction for a specific project on the premises.

9191.046 Building.
Shall mean any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals, chattel or property of any kind.

Building or Structure, Accessory. See Accessory.

9191.054 Building Code.
Shall mean the City of Carson Building Laws.

9191.058 Building Height.
Shall mean any vertical distance from the average finished grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof.

9191.062 Building, Main.
Shall mean a building in which is conducted a principal use of the lot upon which it is situated.

9191.066 Building Official.
Shall mean the officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of the City of Carson Building Laws, or his duly authorized representative.

9191.066.5  Buspool.
Shall mean a vehicle carrying sixteen (16) or more passengers commuting on a regular basis to and from work with a fixed route, according to a fixed schedule. (Ord. 93-1002, § 2)

9191.067 Cargo Container Storage Facilities – Terms Defined.
A. Cargo Container. Shall mean any container sufficiently durable for repeated use which, by virtue of its own particular design, permits the temporary storage and protection of bulk commodities, goods and other cargo, and which may be transported in various modes without intermediate loading or unloading.

B. Cargo Container Parking. Shall mean the parking of a trailer, detached from the tractor unit, on which is loaded one (1) or more cargo containers.

C. Cargo Container Storage. Shall mean the storage or stacking of one (1) or more cargo containers. (Ord. 87-819, § 9; Ord. 87-822, § 4)

9191.070 Carport.
Shall mean a permanently roofed structure with not more than two (2) enclosed sides, used or intended to be used for automobile shelter or storage.

9191.072 Carpool.
Shall mean a vehicle carrying two (2) to six (6) persons commuting together to and from work on a regular basis. (Ord. 93-1002, § 2)

9191.073 Carson Civic Center.
Shall mean that area within the City of Carson bounded by 213th Street on the north, Avalon Boulevard on the west, Carson Street on the south, and having an eastern boundary delineated as one hundred (100) feet west of Garston Avenue between 213th Street on the north and Desford Street on the south, thence along Desford Street to the private street located between the Carson Community Center on the west and 1 and 2 Civic Plaza on the east, thence south along said private street to Carson Street. (Added by Ord. 94-1035U, § 9; Ord. 94-1037, § 10)

9191.074 Cellar.
Shall mean that portion of a building between a floor and ceiling which is wholly or partly below grade and so located that the vertical distance from average finished grade to the finished floor level below is equal to or greater than the vertical distance from average finished grade to the ceiling. A cellar shall not be considered a story. (See Figure 1 at the end of this Part.)

9191.078 Cemetery.
Shall mean land used or intended to be used for the burial or interment of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes. Cemetery includes columbaria, crematories and mausoleums, and may include mortuaries and chapels when operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of such cemetery.

9191.082 Centerline.
Shall mean the centerline of a street or other right-of-way as established by official surveys. If two (2) or more centerlines appear on official surveys, or in the absence of an official survey, the centerline shall be determined by the Director of Public Works.

9191.084 Check Cashing or Check Cashing Business.
Shall mean any business or type of service that is required to obtain a check casher permit from the Attorney General’s Department of Justice and/or provides services which include the acts of cashing checks, warrants, drafts, money orders, or other commercial paper serving the same purpose for compensation. Check cashing does not include any form of deferred deposit, payday loan, or short-term lending. (Ord. 09-1419, § 2)

9191.086 Child or Children.
Shall mean a person or persons under eighteen (18) years of age.

9191.090 Child Day Care.
Shall mean the part-time care of children who are not residents of the premises. Community Day Care Facilities are not included in this definition.

9191.094 Church.
Shall mean a building, including a temple or other place of religious worship, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, is maintained and controlled by an organized religious body. Rescue missions, tent revivals and other temporary assemblies are not included in this definition.

9191.098 Clinic, Dental or Medical.
Shall mean a health facility providing diagnosis, treatment or care to patients not confined to the facility as inpatients. Care may include, but is not limited to, the provision of medical, surgical, dental, mental health, rehabilitation, podiatric, optometric or chiropractic services (California Administrative Code, Title 17, Section 400).

9191.102 Club, Private.
Shall mean any building or premises used by an association of persons, whether incorporated or unincorporated, organized for some common purpose such as the promotion of literature, science, politics or good fellowship, but not including a group organized solely or primarily to render a service customarily carried on as a commercial enterprise.

9191.106 Commission.
Shall mean the Planning Commission of the City of Carson.

9191.110 Common Area.
Shall mean an entire project area excepting all lots or units granted to or reserved for individual owners or tenants.

9191.114 Community Care Facility.
Shall mean any facility, place, or building that is maintained and operated to provide nonmedical residential care, day treatment, adult day care, or foster family agency services for children, adults, or children and adults, including, but not limited to, the physically handicapped, mentally impaired, incompetent persons, and abused or neglected children, and includes the types of facilities listed in the California Health and Safety Code Sections 1500 through 1518 (California Community Care Facilities Act). Residential community care facilities and community day care facilities are included in this definition. (Ord. 13-1525, § 5)

9191.118 Community Care Facility, Residential.
Shall mean any family home, group care facility or similar facility for twenty-four (24) hour a day nonmedical care of persons in need of personal services, supervision or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual (California Health and Safety Code, Section 1502(a)). Small Family Home Community Care Facilities are included in this definition.

9191.122 Community Care Facility, Small-Family Home.
Shall mean a residential community care facility which is the family residence of the licensee in which care and supervision are provided for not more than six (6) persons, exclusive of members of the licensee’s family.

9191.126 Community Day Care Facility.
Shall mean any facility which provides nonmedical care to persons in need of personal services, supervision or assistance essential for sustaining activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual on less than a twenty-four (24) hour a day basis (California Health and Safety Code, Section 1502(b)).

9191.130 Compatible Use.
Shall mean a use that, because of its manner of operation and characteristics, is or would be in harmony with other existing, permitted or specified uses on the same site or adjacent property.

9191.134 Conditional Use Permit.
Shall mean an approval of a land use granted pursuant to CMC 9172.21. A Special Use Permit granted under previous regulations and continued in effect by the provisions of this Chapter is deemed to be a Conditional Use Permit.

9191.138 Condominium Common Area.
Shall mean the entire project excepting all units granted to or reserved for individual condominium owners.

9191.142 Condominium Documents.
Shall mean the Declaration of Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions (the Declaration), the description of the Project Elements, the Condominium Plan establishing a plan for residential condominium ownership, and the Articles of Incorporation and By-Laws of the Association of the owners.

9191.146 Condominium Owner.
Shall mean the owner of a condominium unit.

9191.150 Condominium Plan.
Shall mean a plan consisting of a description or survey map of the surface of the land in the project, a diagram showing the dimensions and locations of the units, and a certificate acknowledging the intent to create a condominium project and consenting to the recordation of such a plan pursuant to local ordinance and Title 6, Part 4, Division II (Section 1350, et seq.) of the California Civil Code by the record owner of the property and all record holders of security interests therein.

9191.154 Condominium Project.
Shall mean the entire parcel of real property divided or to be divided into condominiums and common area including all structures located or to be located on such real property.

9191.158 Condominium Project Elements.
Shall mean the condominium units which are to be conveyed, the areas and spaces which are to be assigned to such units, and the common areas which are to be shared by the owners of all units. Such elements constitute the totality of the condominium project and are enumerated in a formal declaration or statement within the condominium documents that includes the incidents of the condominium grant. Such enumerative description may contain irrevocable limitations on the use of the Project Elements which are not appropriate for the Declaration of Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions.

9191.162 Condominium, Residential.
Shall mean an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together with a separate interest in space in a complex devoted to residential purposes located on such real property. A residential condominium may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of such real property. Such estate may, with respect to the duration of its enjoyment, be either an estate of inheritance or perpetual estate, an estate for life, or an estate for years, such as a leasehold or subleasehold. A residential condominium is a unique land use which has many similarities to the ownership of a single-family dwelling, except that it is usually marked by higher urban densities, contiguity of living units and the aforementioned common interest in the parcel of real property on which it is situated. Residential stock cooperatives are included in this definition for the purpose of meeting the requirements of CMC 9128.11 through 9128.17. (Ord. 80-532, § 1; Ord. 84-700, § 4; Ord. 85-720, § 17)

9191.166 Condominium Unit.
Shall mean the elements of a condominium project which are not owned in common with the owners of other condominiums in the project.

Convalescent Home or Convalescent Hospital. See Long-Term Health Care Facility.

9191.168 Cooperative, Residential Stock.
Shall mean a corporation formed or availed of primarily for the purpose of holding title to, either in fee simple or for a term of years, improved real property, if all or substantially all of the shareholders of such corporation receive a right of exclusive occupancy in a portion of the real property, title to which is held by the corporation, which right of occupancy is transferable only concurrently with the transfer of the share or shares of stock in the corporation held by the person having such right of occupancy. (Ord. 80-532, § 11; Ord. 84-700, § 4)

9191.170 Council.
Shall mean the City Council of the City of Carson.

9191.174 Curb Return.
Shall mean that portion of a curb which is curved to meet intersecting streets. The curb return begins at a point which is tangent to the curb alignment and ends at a point tangent to the curb alignment of the intersecting street.

9191.176 Deferred Deposit or Deferred Deposit Originator.
Shall mean any business or type of service that is required to obtain a deferred deposit originator license from the California Department of Corporations and provides services such as a transaction whereby a person defers depositing a customer’s personal check until a specific date, pursuant to a written agreement for a fee or other charge. Also includes any type of short-term lending. (Ord. 09-1419, § 2)

9191.178 Department Store.
Shall mean a store having a minimum floor area of one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet that carries several lines of merchandise, including apparel, home furnishings and appliances, and housewares, and that is organized into separate departments for the purpose of service, promotion, accounting and control. (Ord. 82-621)

Day Care for Children. See Child Day Care.

9191.180 Developer.
Shall mean the builder who is responsible for the planning, design and construction of a development project. A developer may be responsible for implementing the provisions of the Municipal Zoning Code as determined by the property owner. (Ord. 93-1002, § 2)

9191.182 Development.
Shall mean the activity of preparing land and constructing facilities in order to establish a land use. A development shall also mean a lot or project area together with the completed facilities and improvements thereon.

9191.184 Development Plan.
Shall mean a delineation, map or rendition and/or other description which describes the arrangement, appearance, materials, and other features (including but not limited to architecture, landscaping, parking, access, signs and open spaces) which constitute the development or proposed development of a site or any portion thereof.

9191.185 Development Project.
Shall mean a project for which a building permit is required for a commercial, industrial, institutional, or residential building having five (5) or more living units, where solid waste is collected and loaded and any residential project where solid waste is collected and loaded in a location serving five (5) or more living units. A development project shall also mean any new public facility where solid waste is collected and loaded and any improvements for areas of a public facility used for collecting and loading solid waste. (Ord. 93-1013, § 6)

9191.186 Director.
Shall mean the Community Development Director of the City of Carson, or his duly authorized representative.

9191.190 Director of Public Works.
Shall mean the Public Works Director of the City of Carson or his duly authorized representative.

9191.194 Display.
Shall mean the placement of goods, merchandise, equipment or exhibits arranged for viewing at a location visible to or accessible to the public.

9191.198 Driveway.
Shall mean a private roadway, which provides vehicular access from a street to a structure or site on adjacent grounds for the purpose of vehicle parking or loading or unloading of passengers or material.

9191.200 Driving Skill Course.
Shall mean any commercial facility whose primary business involves customers driving motor vehicles around a closed track. Customers may race against an automatic timing device, but may not race another customer. Said motor vehicles may not include motorcycles, mini-bikes, go-karts or vehicles licensed for use on public streets and/or highways. (Ord. 78-431)

9191.202 Dwelling.
Shall mean a building containing one (1) or more dwelling units. A group quarters or other building or portion thereof devoted primarily to rooming units shall not be considered to be a dwelling. For purposes of this Chapter a mobile home shall be considered a dwelling if it is certified under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. Section 5401 et seq.) and is located on a permanent foundation system pursuant to Section 18551 of the California Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 81-566, § 1)

9191.206 Dwelling, Multiple.
Shall mean a dwelling containing two (2) or more dwelling units.

9191.208 Dwelling, Second Unit.
Shall mean any residential dwelling unit which provides complete independent living facilities on the same parcel as a legal, single-family residence and including, but not limited to, the permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. A second dwelling unit also includes efficiency units and manufactured homes. (Ord. 03-1290, § 4)

9191.210 Dwelling, Single-Family.
Shall mean a dwelling consisting of one (1) dwelling unit.

9191.214 Dwelling Unit.
Shall mean one (1) or more habitable rooms constituting a permanent, self-contained unit with a separate entrance and used or intended to be used continuously for living and sleeping purposes for not more than one (1) family and containing one, but not more than one, kitchen or kitchenette. A rooming unit is not a dwelling unit.

9191.218 Easement.
Shall mean an area on a lot, and so indicated on a subdivision map or in a deed restriction or other recorded document, reserved for or used for utilities, access or public purposes.

9191.219 Efficiency Unit.
Shall mean a separate living space with a minimum floor area of one hundred fifty (150) square feet intended for occupancy by no more than two (2) persons which contains partial kitchen and bathroom facilities. (Ord. 03-1290, § 5)

9191.222 Electric Distribution Substation.
Shall mean an assembly of equipment, which could include fuel cells and microwave, cable, radio and/or other communication facilities, as part of a system for distribution of electric power where electric energy is normally received at a subtransmission voltage and transformed to a lower voltage, and/or produced at this lower voltage in case a fuel cell is installed, for distribution to the customer.

9191.224 Emergency Shelter.
Shall mean a facility that provides immediate and short-term housing and supplemental services to homeless persons or families. Supplemental services may include food, counseling, and access to other social programs. (Ord. 13-1525, § 5)

9191.226 Exception.
Shall mean an approval granted and referred to as an Exception under previous zoning regulations. As provided in CMC 9183.3, certain Exceptions are continued in effect and are deemed to be Variances.

9191.230 Expansion.
Shall mean an enlargement or increase in floor area or an increase in the site area of a use, or an intensification of use. (Ord. 80-526, § 2)

9191.234 Family.
Shall mean any number of persons living together in a room or rooms comprising a single dwelling unit and related by blood, marriage, or adoption, or bearing the genetic character of a family unit as a relatively permanent single household, including servants and other live-in employees, who reside therein as though members of the family. Any group of persons not related by blood, marriage or adoption but inhabiting a dwelling unit, shall for the purpose of this Chapter be considered to constitute one (1) family if it is a bona fide single household, including servants and other live-in employees contained in such group. (Ord. 81-566, § 1)

9191.238 Finished Grade.
Shall mean the elevation of the ground surface at any point after completion of development.

9191.242 Finished Grade, Average.
Shall mean the average of the finished grades, at the midpoints of each wall of a building or side of a structure. In the event a building wall is parallel to and within five (5) feet of a sidewalk, the finished grade for that wall shall be measured at the sidewalk and opposite the midpoint of the wall. (See Figure 2 at the end of this Part.)

Flea Market. See Swap Meet.

9191.246 Floor Area, Gross.
Shall mean the sum of the horizontal areas of all floors within a building measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the centerline of party walls separating two (2) buildings. The floor area of any basement, cellar or attic with headroom of more than six and one-half (6-1/2) feet shall be included. A basement, cellar or attic floor space with six and one-half (6-1/2) feet of headroom or less, as well as the area of courtyards, shall be excluded. For the purpose of computing required parking area, floor area devoted to parking and maneuvering shall not be included.

9191.250 Floor Area, Net.
Shall mean the gross floor area minus the area of permanent walls, elevator shafts, stairwells, housings for mechanical equipment and vent shafts.

9191.252 Floor Area Ratio (FAR).
Shall mean the gross floor area of all buildings on a lot divided by the net lot area. (Added by Ord. 94-1039, § 18)

Foster Home. See Community Care Facility, Small Family Home.

9191.254 Freeway.
Shall mean a highway with respect to which the owners of adjoining lands have no right of easement of access to or from their adjoining lands, or with respect to which such owners have only limited or restricted right of easement of access and which is declared to be such in compliance, with the Streets and Highways Code of the State of California, including principal roadways, interchange roadways connecting one freeway with another, and ingress and egress ramps connecting the freeway with other streets or highways, but not including frontage roads.

9191.258 Frontage.
Shall mean the line along which a lot abuts a public street.

9191.262 Future Right-of-Way Area.
Shall mean the portion of a lot planned to be part of a street, alley or public right-of-way, as determined by the Director in accordance with plans, policies or standards adopted by the City.

9191.266 Future Right-of-Way Line.
Shall mean the outer boundary of a future right-of-way.

9191.270 Garage.
Shall mean a building, or portion of a building, enclosed on three (3) or more sides, designed or used for the shelter or storage of vehicles.

9191.271 Garage, Subterranean.
Shall mean a structure wholly underground, or partly underground where the finished floor of the first level above the garage is not more than two (2) feet above the average curb grade adjacent to the property, except for openings for ingress and egress. (Added by Ord. 94-1039, § 18)

9191.272 Garage, Partial Subterranean.
Shall mean a structure partly underground where the finished floor of the first level above the garage is not more than five (5) feet above the average curb grade adjacent to the property, except for openings for ingress and egress. (Added by Ord. 94-1039, § 18)

9191.274 General Plan.
Shall mean the long-range, comprehensive general plan adopted by the City of Carson in accordance with the provisions of the State Planning and Zoning Law.

9191.278 Group Quarters.
Shall mean a residential facility or portion thereof in which the residents occupy rooming units.

9191.280 Gymnasium.
Shall mean a large room or building equipped for a variety of indoor sports, games, and spectator seating. The room may be equipped with bars, weights, ropes, etc., used for work-outs or games. A health club/fitness club shall not be considered a gymnasium if spectator seating is not provided. (Ord. 12-1488, § 3)

9191.282 Hedge.
Shall mean a line of shrubs or trees in which the foliage provides a continuous barrier to view or passage.

9191.286 Heliport.
Shall mean any helicopter landing area used, designed or intended to be used for the receiving or discharging of passengers or cargo, including any appurtenant facilities for passengers, cargo or the servicing, minor repair, shelter or storage of helicopters, but not including major or regular repair activities.

9191.290 Helistop.
Shall mean any helicopter landing area used, designed or intended to be used for the receiving and discharging of passengers or cargo on an occasional or intermittent basis, but not including appurtenant facilities permitted at a heliport other than a shelter for passengers.

9191.294 Hospital.
Shall mean a facility having a duly constituted governing body with overall administrative and professional responsibility and an organized medical staff which provides twenty-four (24) hour, in-patient care. This definition includes General Acute Care Hospital and Acute Psychiatric Hospital. (California Health and Safety Code, Section 1250(a) and (b).)

9191.298 Hotel, Residential.
Shall mean a building containing rooming units and designed for or occupied as a permanent abiding place for persons, with common living facilities, with or without meals. This definition does not include institutions where persons are housed under legal restraint, nor does it include health care facilities or community care facilities.

9191.302 Hotel, Transient.
Shall mean a building containing rooming units and designed for or occupied as an abiding place for transients. This definition does not include institutions where persons are housed under legal restraint, nor does it include health care facilities or community care facilities.

9191.303 Indoor Team Training Facility.
Shall mean an indoor private “training” facility that is subject to enrollment, does not provide spectator seating, does not operate as a pay-to-play format, and is not categorized as a public assembly use, physical training school, gymnasium, athletic club/health club, recreational play facility, or similar type of uses. No activities shall be conducted outdoors. The indoor sport shall require at least one (1) student and one (1) professional teacher/trainer. The facility shall only be used for the private training for team related sports/activities and only provide “training” for professional or amateur status athletes. “Training” does not include practice sessions for novice athletes or recreational play. (Ord. 12-1488, § 3)

9191.304 Intensification.
Shall mean either (1) an increase in site coverage or (2) an increase in production of goods or services as a result of a proposed increase in facilities, equipment, or utility installation. (Ord. 80-526, § 3)

9191.307 Intermodal Container Transfer Facility.
Shall mean a facility for the transfer or interchange of cargo containers (as defined in CMC 9191.067(A)) among the various transportation modes, including, without limitation, all buildings, structures, foundations, footing, pavement, rails, ties, pipes, switches, machinery, equipment, fences, wells and tanks relating thereto. (Ord. 87-822, § 5)

9191.310 Junk and Salvage.
Shall mean the recycling of old, secondhand or scrap ferrous and nonferrous metals, pipe, paper and paper products, including roofing and tar paper, manufactured plastic products, paint, manufactured clay and porcelain products, trash and similar materials, and may also include the baling of cardboard boxes, paper and paper cartons.

9191.314 Junk and Salvage Yard.
Shall mean any premises, establishment or place of business which is maintained, operated or used for storing, keeping, buying, selling, dismantling or processing of junk and salvage.

9191.318 Kennel.
Shall mean a place where four (4) or more dogs or cats, aged four (4) months or more, are kept, boarded or trained, whether by the owners of the dogs and cats or by persons providing facilities and care, with or without compensation.

9191.322 Kitchen.
Shall mean any space within a building used, designed or intended to be used for the cooking or preparation of food.

9191.326 Laboratory.
Shall mean a building or portion thereof devoted to the testing and analysis of any material, animal or person, but where no manufacturing is conducted on the premises except for experimental or testing purposes, including but not limited to prosthodontics.

9191.330 Landscaping.
Shall mean a designed or natural arrangement of growing plant material such as trees, shrubs, vines, ground cover, flowers or lawn. In addition, features such as rocks, fountains, pools and benches may be included.

9191.334 Livestock.
Shall mean any large, live domestic animals, including but not limited to horses, cows, sheep, goats, pigs, hogs and live fowl such as chickens, turkeys, peacocks, guineas, geese or ducks.

9191.338 Loading Area.
Shall mean an off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building, or group of buildings, designed or used for temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials.

9191.342 Long-Term Health Care Facility.
Shall mean a facility which maintains and operates twenty-four (24) hour skilled nursing services for the care and treatment of chronically ill or convalescent patients, or provides supportive, restorative and preventive health services in conjunction with a socially oriented program for its residents and which maintains and operates twenty-four (24) hour services including board, room, personal care and intermittent nursing care. (California Health and Safety Code, Section 148(a).)

9191.346 Lot.
Shall mean a parcel of real property that has been legally separated from other parcels of real property and has a distinct number or other designation as shown on a plat map, subdivision map, parcel map, record of survey map or as defined by a metes and bounds description in a deed, in each case recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Los Angeles County. The legal status of a lot is governed by the Subdivision Map Act of the State of California (Government Code 66410 et seq.). (Ord. 89-897, § 1)

9191.350 Lot Area.
Shall mean the total extent of surface, measured in a horizontal plane, within the lot lines of a lot, and shall mean net lot area unless otherwise indicated.

9191.354 Lot Area, Net.
Shall mean that area of a lot exclusive of:

1. Public streets, alleys, walkways and other existing public rights-of-way.

2. Proposed public rights-of-way such as alleys and streets and other necessary public sites, when approved for inclusion within a proposed development project.

3. Other public or private easements where the owner of the servient tenement does not have the right to use the entire surface of land in any manner.

9191.358 Lot, Corner.
Shall mean a lot situated at the intersection of two (2) or more streets having an angle of intersection of not more than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. (See Figure 3 at the end of this Part.)

9191.362 Lot Depth.
Shall mean the horizontal distance measured from the midpoint of the front lot line to the midpoint of the rear lot line.

9191.364 Lot Frontage.
See Frontage.

9191.366 Lot, Interior.
Shall mean a lot other than a corner lot. (See Figure 3 at the end of this Part.)

9191.370 Lot Line.
Shall mean any line bounding a lot as herein defined.

9191.374 Lot Line, Front.
In the case of a lot having frontage on only one (1) street, said frontage is the front lot line.

In the case of corner lot, the Director shall determine the front lot line based upon the orientation of existing or proposed development on the subject lot and/or adjacent lots.

In the case of a lot at the intersection of two (2) streets which have an angle of intersection of more than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees, both frontages shall be considered to be front lot lines.

In case of a through lot, both street frontages shall be considered to be front lot lines, except if access across any such frontage is prohibited, it shall not be considered a front lot line.

In the case of a lot having frontage on three (3) or more streets, the Director shall determine which frontage or frontages shall be considered front lot lines based upon the orientation of existing or proposed development on the subject lot and/or adjacent lots.

9191.376 Lot Line, Interior.
Shall mean a lot line which is common to two (2) abutting lots.

9191.378 Lot Line, Rear.
Shall mean a lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. In the case of an irregular, triangular or gore-shaped lot, the rear lot line shall be an assumed line parallel to and passing through the point of the lot which is at the greatest distance from the front lot line.

In the case of a through lot with two (2) front lines, there is no rear lot line.

In the case of a lot where the front lot line is determined by the Director, the Director shall also determine which, if any, lot lines shall be considered the rear lot line.

9191.382 Lot Line, Side.
Shall mean any lot line which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.

9191.386 Lot, Through.
Shall mean a lot having frontage on two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets. (See Figure 3 at the end of this Part.)

9191.390 Lot Width.
Shall mean the horizontal distance measured from the midpoints of the side lot lines. (Ord. 80-532, § 11)

9191.391 Manufactured Home.
Shall mean a transportable structure which in the traveling mode is eight (8) feet or more in width and forty (40) feet or more in length and is a minimum of three hundred twenty (320) square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used as a dwelling with a permanent foundation. (Ord. 03-1290, § 6)

9191.391.5 Medical Marijuana Dispensary.
“Medical marijuana dispensary” means any establishment, business, enterprise, or location where marijuana is distributed, transmitted, given, or otherwise provided to qualified patients or primary caregivers in accordance with California Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.5 through 11362.83, inclusive, commonly referred to as “The Compassionate Use Act of 1996” and Senate Bill 420. A “medical marijuana dispensary” shall not include the following uses, as long as the location of such uses is otherwise regulated by this Code or applicable law: a clinic licensed pursuant to Health and Safety Code Division 2, Chapter 1; a health care facility licensed pursuant to Health and Safety Code, Division 2, Chapter 2; a residential care facility for persons with chronic life-threatening illness licensed pursuant to Health and Safety Code, Division 2, Chapter 3.01; a residential care facility for the elderly licensed pursuant to Health and Safety Code, Division 2, Chapter 3.2; a residential hospice or a home health agency licensed pursuant to Health and Safety Code, Division 2, Chapter 8; as long as any such use complies strictly with applicable law including, but not limited to, Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 et seq. Medical marijuana dispensaries are prohibited in the City of Carson. (Ord. 08-1410, § 10)

9191.392 Mini-Mart, Indoor.
Shall mean an indoor retail sales establishment for the purpose of selling new merchandise where two (2) or more individual sellers rent, lease or otherwise purchase the right to sell their products. Indoor mini-mart includes businesses conducted in a common room or rooms of a building but does not include businesses conducted in a single tenant commercial building, a multiple tenant commercial building that has separate primary exterior entrances for each tenant, or in a mall as defined by Sections 711 through 715 of Chapter 7 of Title 26 of the Los Angeles County Unified Building Code and further, accessory uses such as separate concessionaires, lessees, vendors, and kiosks provided such accessory uses are not the primary use of the building. (Ord. 87-813, § 6)

9191.393 Mixed-Use.
Shall mean the type of development which allows a combination of land uses within a single development (e.g., residential, commercial and recreational uses). (Added by Ord. 94-1039, § 18)

9191.394 Mobile Home.
Shall mean a structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, designed or used for human habitation by one (1) family. (Ord. 80-532, § 11; Ord. 81-566, § 1)

9191.398 Mobile Home Park.
Shall mean any area or tract of land intended, maintained or designed for the purpose of supplying a location or accommodation for two (2) or more mobile homes including all buildings used or intended to be used as part of the equipment of such facility regardless of whether a charge is made for such use. Not included in this definition are trailer camp, trailer court, trailer park and similar terms. (Ord. 81-550, § 3)

9191.400 Mobile Home Site.
Shall mean that portion of a mobile park designated for use or occupancy of one (1) mobile home, including all appurtenant facilities thereon for the exclusive use of the occupants of said mobile home.

9191.402 Motel.
Shall mean a building or group of buildings containing rooming units or dwelling units with automobile parking space provided in connection therewith, and designed, intended to be used or used primarily for the accommodation of transient automobile travelers. This definition shall include auto cabins, tourist courts, motor courts, motor lodges and similar type uses. An establishment shall be considered a motel if it is required by the Health and Safety Code of the State of California to obtain the names and addresses of the guests and the make, year and license number of the vehicle and the State in which the vehicle is registered.

9191.406 Motor Vehicles.
Shall mean a self-propelled device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a street or highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.

9191.410 Nonconformity.
Shall mean any use or characteristic of land or property, or portion thereof, or activity or circumstance, which does not conform to the regulations of this Chapter, but which was lawfully established under the regulations which prevailed at the time of such establishment.

9191.411 Nude or Semi-Nude.
The term “nude” shall mean a person completely without clothing or covering. The term “semi-nude” shall mean a person whose “specified anatomical areas,” as defined in CMC 9191.620, are less than completely and opaquely covered or who appears to have human male genitals which are in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. (Added by Ord. 94-1035U, § 10; Ord. 94-1037, § 11)

Nursing Home. See Long-term Health Care Facility

9191.414 Occupancy.
Shall mean the purpose for which land or a structure is used or intended to be used. Change of occupancy does not include a mere change of owners, tenants or proprietors.

9191.416 Off-Sale Business.
Shall mean an off-sale business (incidental) or off-sale business (primary), other than a department store or supermarket, as defined below.

“Off-sale business (incidental)” means an establishment required to obtain a State Alcoholic Beverage Control License (type 20 or 21) and in which less than or equal to twenty (20) percent of the gross floor area is utilized for the sale, display or storage of beer, wine, distilled spirits for consumption off-site.

“Off-sale business (primary)” means an establishment required to obtain a State Alcoholic Beverage Control License (type 20 or 21) and in which more than twenty (20) percent of the gross floor area i s utilized for the sale, display or storage of beer, wine, or distilled spirits for consumption off-site. “Off-site business (primary)” may include, but is not limited to, such uses as liquor stores, wine shops, etc. (Ord. 01-1231, § 4)

9191.418 Open Space.
Shall mean ground areas other than the following:

1. Public rights-of-way.

2. Driveways.

3. Trash areas.

4. Parking areas.

5. Loading areas.

6. Vehicle maneuvering areas.

7. Ground area covered by building or structures other than permitted encroachments.

9191.421 Open Space, Private.
Shall mean open space which has an average gradient of not more than five (5) percent. Private open space may include but is not limited to balconies, patios, terraces, and roof gardens and, in all cases, shall be contiguous to individual dwelling units. Front, side, and rear yard setbacks shall not be credited toward private open space. (Added by Ord. 85-720, § 13)

9191.422 Open Space, Usable.
Shall mean open space which has an average gradient of not more than five (5) percent. Usable open space may include, but is not limited to, balconies, terraces, and roof gardens. Children’s playgrounds, private open space and/or side and rear yard setbacks may be credited toward usable open space. (Ord. 85-720, § 14)

9191.424 Organic Refuse Landfill Site.
Shall mean a disposal site in which organic waste matter has been deposited and which is characterized by decomposition of the organic waste matter through an anaerobic microbial process. (Ord. 79-449)

9191.426 Outdoor Festival.
Shall mean any music festival, dance festival, “rock” festival or similar musical activity to which both of the following apply:

1. Attendance by more than five hundred (500) persons is desired or may reasonably be expected; and

2. The festival will be held at any place other than in a permanent building or permanent installation which has been constructed for the purpose of or is so constructed that it can be used for conducting such activities.

9191.430 Park or Playground, Public.
Shall mean a publicly owned and supervised recreation area and appurtenant facilities.

9191.434 Parking Area.
Shall mean an area, other than a street or alley, available for temporary storage of vehicles in active use regardless of whether such vehicle storage is for remuneration. Areas for display, long-term storage, impounding or dismantling of vehicles or for truck loading and maneuvering are not included in this definition.

9191.438 Parking Building or Structure.
Shall mean a building or structure, or portion thereof, within or upon which a parking area is located.

9191.439 Parking Area, Employee.
Shall mean the portion of total required parking at a development used by onsite employees. (Ord. 93-1002, § 2)

9191.442 Parking Lot.
Shall mean a parking area not located within or upon a parking building of structure.

9191.443 Parking – Preferential.
Shall mean parking spaces designated or assigned, through use of a sign or painted space markings for carpool or vanpool vehicles carrying commute passengers on a regular basis that are provided in a location more convenient to a place of employment than parking spaces provided for single occupant vehicles. (Ord. 93-1002, § 2)

9191.446 Parking Space.
Shall mean a readily accessible off-street area, not including aisles, driveways, walkways, ramps, loading, maneuvering or work areas, maintained exclusively for the parking of one (1) motor vehicle.

9191.450 Parkway.
Shall mean that portion of a street located between the property line and the face of the curb, or between the property line and edge of the pavement if no curb exists.

9191.454 Passageway.
Shall mean a way by which pedestrians have a safe, adequate and usable access to and between buildings.

9191.456 Payday Loan.
See Deferred Deposit. (Ord. 09-1419, § 2)

9191.458 Person.
Shall mean an individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, syndicate, the Federal, State, City or County Government, or Special District, or any other group or combination acting as an entity.

9191.460 Physical Training School.
Shall mean a business that provides non-team-related training, lessons, or classes that are subject to enrollment and does not provide spectator seating. The physical class shall include at least one (1) student and (1) one instructor. Physical training schools include classes/lessons/training for dance, ballet, tap, martial arts, and other non-team-related type of uses. (Ord. 12-1488, § 3)

9191.462 Planned Development.
Shall mean the planning, construction or implementation and operation of any use or structure, or combination of uses and structures, based upon a comprehensive and complete design or plan treating the entire complex of land, structures and uses as a single project.

9191.466 Planning Division.
Shall mean the Planning Division of the Community Development Department of the City of Carson.

9191.470 Plot Plan.
Shall mean the same as Site Plan.

9191.474 Premises.
Shall mean the same as Site.

9191.478 Project Area.
Shall mean a lot or combination of contiguous lots, whether or not held in the same ownership, which are used or intended to be used for a planned development.

9191.482 Project Grading.
Shall mean any excavation or fill, or combination thereof, necessary and incidental to building construction or other lawful development of the premises.

9191.486 Property Line.
Shall mean the same as Lot Line.

9191.490 Public Use.
Shall mean a use operated exclusively by a public body, said use having the purpose of serving the public health, safety or general welfare, and including uses such as public schools, parks, playgrounds, hospitals, administrative and service facilities.

9191.492 Public Works Director.
See Director of Public Works.

9191.494 Quasi-Public Use.
Shall mean a use operated by a private nonprofit educational, religious, recreational, charitable or medical institution, said use having the purpose primarily of serving the general public, and including uses such as churches, private schools, universities, private hospitals and youth centers.

9191.506 Recreational Vehicle.
Shall mean a camp car, camper, motor home, travel trailer or similar vehicle, with or without motive power, but not a mobile home.

9191.508 Recycling Facilities – Terms Defined.*
A. Collection Recycling Facility, Large. Shall mean a center, occupying an area greater than five hundred (500) square feet, for the acceptance of recyclable materials from the public by means of a bulk or single-feed reverse vending machine, a mobile recycling unit, a kiosk unit or a permanent building. A large collection recycling facility shall be the primary use on the site.

B. Collection Recycling Facility, Small. Shall mean a center, occupying an area less than five hundred (500) square feet, for the acceptance of recyclable materials from the public by means of a bulk or single-feed reverse vending machine, a mobile recycling unit, or a kiosk unit. A small collection recycling facility shall be incidental to an existing primary commercial use, and shall not include any type of power-driven processing equipment other than that required to operate a reverse vending machine.

C. Convenience District. Shall mean an area within a one-half mile radius of a supermarket that is designated by the California Department of Conservation, Division of Recycling, as a “convenience zone.” “Convenience district” shall have the same meaning as “convenience zone” as said term is used in the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act of 1986. At least one (1) certified recycling facility shall be permitted within a convenience district unless exempted by the California Department of Conservation.

D. Mobile Recycling Unit. Shall mean an automobile, truck, trailer or van, licensed by the Department of Motor Vehicles, which is used for the collection of recyclable materials. A mobile recycling unit also means the bins, boxes or containers transported by trucks, vans, or trailers, and used for the collection of recyclable materials. A mobile recycling unit shall not occupy an area of more than five hundred (500) square feet.

E. Processing Facility for Recyclables. Shall mean a building or enclosed space used for the collection and processing of recyclable materials. Processing means the preparation of material for efficient shipment, or to an end-user’s specifications, by such means as baling, briquetting, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical sorting, shredding, cleaning and remanufacturing.

F. Processing Facility for Recyclables, Heavy. Shall mean any processing facility for recyclables other than a light processing facility for recyclables.

G. Processing Facility for Recyclables, Light. Shall mean a processing facility for recyclables that occupies an area of under forty-five thousand (45,000) square feet of gross collection, processing and storage area and has up to an average of two (2) outbound truck shipments per day. Light processing facilities for recyclables are limited to baling, briquetting, crushing, compacting, grinding, shredding and sorting of source-separated recyclable materials and repairing of reusable materials. A light processing facility for recyclables shall not shred, compact or bale ferrous metals other than food and beverage containers.

H. Recyclable Materials. Shall mean reusable material including, but not limited to, metals, glass, plastic and paper, which is intended for reuse, remanufacture, or reconstitution for the purpose of using the altered form. Recyclable material does not include refuse, hazardous materials or waste. Recyclable material may include used motor oil collected and transported in accordance with Sections 25250.11 and 25143.2(b)(4) of the California Health and Safety Code.

I. Recycling Areas (Areas for Recycling). Shall mean any space allocated for collecting and loading of recyclable materials. Such areas shall have the ability to accommodate receptacles for recyclable materials. Recycling areas shall be accessible and convenient for those who deposit as well as those who collect and load any recyclable materials placed therein.

J. Recycling Facility. Shall mean a center for the collection or processing of recyclable materials. Recycling facilities include small collection recycling facilities, large collection recycling facilities, light processing facilities for recyclables and heavy processing facilities for recyclables. A recycling facility does not include storage containers or processing activity located on the premises of a residential, commercial, or manufacturing use and is used solely for the recycling of material generated by that residential property, business or manufacturer.

K. Recycling Facility, Certified. Shall mean a recycling facility certified by the California Department of Conservation as meeting the requirements of the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act of 1986.

L. Reverse Vending Machine, Bulk. Shall mean a reverse vending machine which is designed to accept more than one (1) empty recyclable beverage container at a time and will pay by weight rather than by individual container.

M. Reverse Vending Machine, Single-Feed. Shall mean an automated mechanical device, similar in size and appearance to a soda vending machine, which accepts empty recyclable beverage containers one (1) at a time and issues to the consumer, based upon the number of containers deposited, a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip with a value not less than the container’s redemption value as determined by the State. (Ord. 87-819, § 10; Ord. 93-1002, § 7)

* Editor’s Note: See the Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act passed in 1986 for provisions regarding compliance and penalties.

Religious Worship, Place of. See Church.

Repairs and Services, Major Automobile. See CMC 9138.11(A)(5).

Repairs and Services, Minor Automobile. See CMC 9138.11(A)(4).

9191.510 Residence or Residential.
Shall mean a dwelling, group quarters, mobile home or other permanent living accommodations, or features pertaining thereto.

9191.514 Retail.
Shall mean the purchase, sale, distribution, delivery or other transaction involving the handling or disposition of any article, substance, commodity or service, for profit or livelihood, direct to the ultimate consumer.

Retail Petroleum Outlet. See CMC 9138.11 (A)(2).

9191.518 Retirement Home.
Shall mean a facility which offers or provides lodging, with or without meals, primarily for aged persons, but does not include any facility defined as a Community Care Facility.

9191.522 Rooming House.
Shall mean either: A dwelling or portion thereof which is used to accommodate seven (7) or more roomers; or any other residential building containing rooming units, regardless of whether a common meal service is provided. Retirement homes, senior citizen homes and residential hotels are not included in this definition.

9191.526 Rooming Unit.
Shall mean one (1) or more habitable rooms with separate entrances and used or intended to be used for living and/or sleeping purposes. The basic distinction between a rooming house and a dwelling unit shall be that a rooming unit shall not have a kitchen or kitchenette. For the purpose of this definition, a sleeping room in a transient hotel, motel without kitchens, rooming house, fraternity house, sorority house or dormitory shall constitute a rooming unit. Where rooming units are not clearly delineated, each one hundred (100) square feet of common sleeping area shall be considered one (1) rooming unit.

9191.530 Scenic Highway.
Shall mean a roadway designated as a scenic highway in the Scenic Highway Element of the General Plan of the City of Carson or a roadway within the Scenic Highway System of the State of California.

9191.534 School, Private.
Shall mean a private institution of learning which is generally supported by tuition, fee, or donation and which offers instruction in areas of academic, vocational and avocational pursuits, but not including a trade school.

9191.538 School, Public.
Shall mean a publicly owned institution of learning supported primarily by public funds.

9191.542 School, Trade.
Shall mean a school primarily offering instruction in the technical and/or trade skills such as electronic schools, automotive and aircraft technician’s schools and similar establishments.

9191.546 Secondhand Store.
Shall mean any business offering merchandise for sale where the greater portion of the merchandise is secondhand or used.

9191.550 Service Yard, Public Utility or Public Service.
Shall mean any building or premises used primarily for the office, warehouse, storage yard or vehicle equipment maintenance of a public utility including microwave, radio, cable and/or other communication facilities.

9191.554 Setback.
Shall mean the shortest horizontal distance, measured at ground level and above, between a building or structure and a lot line or other specified line.

9191.556 Sidewalk.
Shall mean the paved portion of a parkway intended exclusively for pedestrian travel.

9191.558 Sign.
Shall mean any name, figure, painting, character, outline, spectacle, display, delineation, announcement, advertising, billboard, signboard, device, appliance or any other thing of similar nature to attract attention outdoors or on the face, wall or window of any building, and shall include all parts, portions, units and materials composing of the same, together with the frame, background, support and anchorage therefor.

9191.566 Sign, Business.
Shall mean a sign directing attention to the principal business, profession or industry located upon the premises where the sign is displayed, or to type of products sold, manufactured or assembled, or to services or entertainment offered on said premises.

9191.567 Sign, Electronic Message Center.
Shall mean any sign which is controlled by electronic process or remote control in such a manner that different copy changes are instantaneously displayed on the same lamp bank. (Ord. 80-513, § 5)

9191.568 Sign Face.
Shall mean a single sign display surface.

9191.570 Sign Face Area.
Shall mean the total surface area computed by drawing intersecting straight lines which form the boundary of the area within which words, letters, figures, symbols or pictures could be placed.

9191.574 Sign, Flashing or Scintillating.
Shall mean any sign which by any method or manner of illumination either flashes on or off, winks or blinks with varying light intensity; shows motion or creates the illusion of motion; or revolves in a manner to create the illusion of being on or off. Automatic changing signs such as public service time and temperature signs or electronic message center signs shall not be considered a flashing or scintillating sign. (Ord. 80-513, § 4)

9191.578 Sign, Free-Standing.
Shall mean any sign supported directly on the ground. This definition includes pole signs, ground signs and other signs detached from a building.

9191.582 Sign, Illuminated.
Shall mean any sign designed to emit or brightly reflect artificial light.

9191.584 Sign, Off-Site.
Signs that direct attention to a business, commodity, industry, or other commercial activity sold, offered, or conducted elsewhere than on the premises upon which such sign is located. (Ord. 15-1563, § 13)

9191.585 Sign, On-Site.
Signs that direct attention to a business, commodity, industry, or other commercial activity sold, offered, or conducted on the premises upon which such sign is located.

All signs on private property that display noncommercial messages or designs are considered on-premises signs, irrespective of where they are placed. (Ord. 15-1563, § 13)

9191.585.1 Sign, Open House.1
Temporary directional signs for real estate events. (Ord. 15-1563, § 13)

9191.586 Sign, Outdoor Advertising.
Shall mean any sign directing public attention to a business, profession, product or service that is not a principal business, profession, product or service which is sold, manufactured, conducted or offered on the premises where such a sign is erected or maintained. Billboards are included in this definition.

9191.587 Sign, Temporary.
Any sign subject to a time limitation or used for a limited time period or purpose; or, any sign with a useful life of one (1) year or less. (Ord. 15-1563, § 13)

9191.590 Sign, Real Estate Advertising.
Shall mean an on-site sign or sign structure offering property for sale, lease or rent, which may contain the name, address and/or telephone number of a real estate broker or property owner. (Ord. 15-1563, § 14)

9191.594 Sign, Revolving.
Shall mean a sign or portion thereof which rotates, moves or appears to move in some manner by mechanical, electrical, natural or other means.

9191.598 Sign Structure.
Shall mean a structure existing, erected or maintained to serve as a stand, frame or other background for the support or display of signs. This definition is limited to free-standing structures which have the primary purpose of supporting a sign, except that a building or other structure upon which a sign is mounted shall be counted as a sign structure for the purpose of regulating the number of sign structures permitted.

9191.602 Sign, Subdivision Directional.
Shall mean a temporary sign used for the purpose of providing travel directions to a subdivision development.

9191.606 Sign, Wall.
Shall mean any sign posted, painted on, suspended from or otherwise affixed to the wall of any building or structure in an essentially flat position or with the exposed face of the sign in a plane approximately parallel to the plane of such wall.

9191.608 Single-Room Occupancy (SRO) Housing.
Shall mean housing consisting of single-room dwelling units with no more than four hundred (400) square feet of habitable space that is the primary residence of its occupant or occupants. The unit must contain either food preparation or sanitary facilities (and may contain both). An accessory structure (i.e., garage) does not qualify as an SRO. Efficiency units are included in this definition. (Ord. 13-1525, § 5)

9191.610 Site.
Shall mean a project area or lot or portion thereof used or intended to be used for a land use or group of interrelated land uses. Site shall also mean an individually reserved, leased or owned unit of land within a planned development, condominium project or mobile home park.

9191.614 Site Plan.
Shall mean a rendition of a plan to scale, showing all of the uses, yard areas, parking, landscaping, structures and other features existing or proposed on a site.

9191.618 Special Use Permit.
Shall mean an approval of a land use granted and referred to as a Special Use Permit under previous zoning regulations. As provided in CMC 9183.3, certain Special Use Permits are continued in effect and are deemed to be Conditional Use Permits.

9191.620 Specified Anatomical Areas.
Shall mean any of the following:

A. The human genitals or the human pubic region;

B. The perineum or any portion of the crease of the human buttocks; or

C. The portion of the human female breasts that includes the nipple or that portion of the breast which has a different pigmentation than the main portion of the breast. (Added by Ord. 94-1035U, § 11; Ord. 94-1037, § 12)

9191.621 Specified Sexual Activities.
Shall mean any of the following:

A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;

B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; and

C. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts. (Added by Ord. 94-1035U, § 12; Ord. 94-1037, § 13)

9191.622 Stable.
Shall mean a structure or portion thereof used for the shelter or care of horses or similar animals.

9191.626 Storage.
Shall mean the use of land or structures for the accumulation or holding of goods, merchandise, equipment or material.

9191.630 Storage, Outdoor.
Shall mean the storage outside of an enclosed building for any purpose other than display.

9191.634 Story.
Shall mean that portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. Story includes a basement but not a cellar.

9191.638 Street.
Shall mean a right-of-way open to or intended to be opened to the public primarily for the movement of vehicles and access to adjacent property. This definition does not include an alley, walkway, freeway or frontage road. (Ord. 80-532, § 11)

9191.642 Street, Arterial.
Shall mean a street designated as a Major or Secondary Highway on the Master Plan of Highways of the General Plan of the City of Carson.

Street Centerline. See Centerline.

9191.646 Street, Collector.
Shall mean a street designated as a Collector Street on the Master Plan of Highways of the General Plan of the City of Carson.

Street Frontage. See Frontage.

9191.650 Street, Private.
Shall mean a street not dedicated for public use.

9191.654 Street, Public.
Shall mean a street dedicated for public use.

9191.658 Structure.
Shall mean anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or is attached to something having a location on the ground, except outdoor areas such as walks, paved areas, tennis courts, and similar open recreation areas. This definition includes buildings.

Structure, Accessory. See Accessory.

9191.662 Structure Height.
Shall mean the vertical distance from the average finished grade to the highest part of the structure.

9191.666 Structure, Unoccupiable.
Shall mean any structure which is not defined as a building.

9191.668 Supermarket.
Shall mean a departmentalized self-service chain or independent retail market, used primarily for the retailing of a variety of food, convenience goods, and household merchandise arranged in open mass display, with a minimum floor area of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. (Ord. 82-621)

9191.669 Supportive Housing.
Shall mean housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population, and that is linked to on-site or off-site services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community. This definition excludes housing for halfway houses intended for occupancy of parolees or convicted persons, group quarters for members of a religious order, boarding or rooming house, fraternity or sorority house, dormitory or similar group quarters. (Ord. 13-1525, § 5)

9191.670 Swap Meet (Including Flea Markets).
Shall mean a business conducted for the purpose of selling new or used merchandise in a parking lot, drive-in theater, or other outdoor facility where two (2) or more individuals rent, lease or otherwise purchase the right to sell their products at the location. Swap meets shall include flea markets. Swap meets shall not include fairs or bazaars when conducted by a church, school or other nonprofit public service organization; provided, that said events do not occur more than four (4) times in any one (1) year unless approved by the Director for additional events. Further, swap meets shall not include indoor mini-marts or auction houses or similar businesses conducted on a permanent basis. Any sales use which is advertised as a swap meet or variant shall be construed as a swap meet under this definition. (Ord. 86-763U, § 2; Ord. 87-813, § 2; Ord. 98-1135, § 3)

9191.674 Tandem.
Shall mean a group of two (2) or more objects arranged or following one behind the other.

Temple. See Church.

9191.678 Tradefair.
Shall mean an indoor or outdoor exhibit of new product by manufacturers or distributors. This definition specifically excludes swap meet and flea market.

9191.679 Trailer.
Shall mean a vehicle, with or without motive power, which is designed or used for human habitation. Included in this definition is camp car, camper, motor home, travel trailer, recreational vehicle or similar vehicle, but not a mobile home. (Ord. 81-550, § 4)

9191.680 Trailer Park.
Shall mean any area or tract of land intended, maintained or designed for the purpose of supplying a location or accommodation for two (2) or more trailers including all buildings used or intended to be used as part of the equipment of such facility regardless of whether a charge is made for such use. Included in this definition are trailer camp, trailer court and similar terms. (Ord. 81-550, § 5)

9191.682 Transfer Station for Refuse.
Shall mean an area, including any necessary buildings or structures, for the temporary storage and salvage of rubbish, garbage or industrial waste, but not including the processing of junk and salvage and not including a waste disposal facility.

9191.686 Transportation Demand Management (TDM).
Shall mean the alteration of travel behavior usually on the part of commuters through programs of incentives, services and policies. TDM addresses alternatives to single occupant vehicles such as carpooling and vanpooling, and changes in work schedules that move trips out of the peak period or eliminate them altogether (as is the case in telecommuting or compressed work weeks). (Ord. 93-1002, § 2)

9191.690 Transient.
Shall mean a person who receives lodging at a given location, with or without meals for a period of not more than one hundred eighty (180) days.

9191.692 Transitional Housing.
Shall mean a building or group of buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that call for the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less than six (6) months. This definition excludes housing for halfway houses intended for occupancy of parolees or convicted persons, group quarters for members of a religious order, boarding or rooming house, fraternity or sorority house, dormitory or similar group quarters. (Ord. 13-1525, § 5)

9191.694 Transmission Line, Major.
Shall mean a utility line for the transmission of electrical energy at voltages of thirty-three thousand (33,000) volts or above.

9191.696 Trip Reduction.
Shall mean reduction in the number of work-related trips made by single occupant vehicles. (Ord. 93-1002, § 2)

9191.698 Truck Terminal.
Shall mean a principal use of land for trucking operations where there are dock facilities, either partially enclosed or unenclosed, for the purposes of transferring goods or breaking down and assembling tractor-trailer transport. Not included in this definition are warehouse facilities, as defined in this Part, or similar facilities used primarily for freight forwarding and the deposit, storage or safekeeping of goods. (Ord. 04-1308, § 1)

9191.699 Truck Yard.
Shall mean a principal use of land for parking or storage of trucks in active use with or without servicing or repairing of trucks as an incidental use thereto. This definition does not include parking or storage of trucks if incidental to and located on the same lot, or contiguous lot, as a permitted use, servicing only said permitted use, and wholly owned or controlled by the owners of said permitted use. Not included in this definition are warehouse facilities, as defined in this Part, or similar facilities used primarily for freight forwarding and the deposit, storage or safekeeping of goods. (Ord. 04-1308, § 2)

9191.702 Use.
Shall mean the type of activity, occupancy or purpose for which land, buildings, or facilities are arranged, designed or intended to be occupied or maintained.

Use, Accessory. See Accessory.

9191.704 Use, Minor.
Shall mean a use which is incidental and subordinate to a principal use.

9191.710 Use, Primary.
Shall mean the predominant principal use of a lot or project area as determined by revenue, floor space, site area and/or any other criterion deemed appropriate by the Director.

9191.714 Use, Principal.
Shall mean a use which is not subordinate, incidental or accessory to some other use on the same lot or project area.

9191.716 Vanpool.
Shall mean a vehicle carrying seven (7) or more persons commuting together to and from work on a regular basis, usually in a vehicle with a seating arrangement designated to carry seven (7) to fifteen (15) adult passengers, and on a prepaid subscription basis. (Ord. 93-1002, § 2)

9191.718 Variance.
Shall mean a waiver or conditional waiver of specific regulations of this Chapter as applied to a specific case and granted by the City in accordance with the provisions set forth in this Chapter for Variances. (See CMC 9172.22.)

9191.720 Vehicle.
Shall mean any motorized form of transportation, including but not limited to automobiles, vans, buses and motorcycles. (Ord. 93-1002, § 2)

9191.722 Vehicle Dismantling Yard.
Shall mean any premises used for the dismantling or wrecking of motor vehicles and trailers required to be registered under the Vehicle Code of the State of California, including the buying, selling or dealing in such vehicles or integral parts or component materials thereof, and the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled, partially dismantled or wrecked, inoperative vehicles and trailers. Vehicle dismantling shall not include the incidental storage of inoperative or disabled vehicles in connection with the legal operation of a vehicle repair shop or body and fender repair shop.

9191.726 Vehicle Impounding Yard.
Shall mean any premises, establishment or place of business which is maintained, operated or used for storing, keeping or holding of motor vehicles and trailers, required to be registered under the Vehicle Code of the State of California, which have been legally removed or impounded by a peace officer from public or private property as prescribed by law.

9191.730 Veterinary Clinic.
Shall mean any facility providing medical or surgical treatment, clipping, bathing and similar services to dogs, cats and other small animals, but excluding a kennel, animal hospital or other overnight care on a regular basis.

9191.734 Walkway.
Shall mean a right-of-way intended exclusively for the movement of pedestrians.

9191.738 Walkway, Public.
Shall mean a walkway dedicated for public use.

9191.742 Wall, Solid.
Shall mean a wall with one hundred (100) percent of the vertical surface closed to the passage of light and air.

9191.746 Warehouse.
Shall mean a building or portion of a building used primarily for the deposit, storage or safekeeping of goods regardless of whether the goods are offered for sale.

9191.750 Waste Disposal Facility.
Shall mean any dump, land reclamation project, incinerator or other facility for burning or treating refuse, or other similar site or facility which is used or intended to be used for the disposal of rubbish, garbage or industrial waste.

9191.754 Wholesale.
Shall mean sale for resale and not for direct consumption.

9191.758 Yard.
Shall mean any open space on the same lot with a building or buildings; provided, that the open space is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except for encroachments permitted by this Chapter.

9191.762 Yard, Front.
Shall mean a yard extending across the full width of a lot between a building and the front lot line. (See Figure 3 at the end of this Part.)

9191.766 Yard, Rear.
Shall mean a yard extending the full width of the lot between a building and the rear lot line. (See Figure 3 at the end of this Part.)

9191.770 Yard, Required.
Shall mean that portion of a yard which meets the minimum requirements of the zone in which located, and is in compliance with all other provisions of this Chapter.

9191.774 Yard Sale.
Shall mean a yard, garage, patio or similar type sale for the purpose of disposing of personal property. (See CMC 4600 through 4606.) (Ord. 80-532, § 11)

9191.778 Yard, Side.
Shall mean a yard between a building and the nearest side lot line, extending from the rear of the required front yard to the front of the required rear yard. (See Figure 3 at the end of this Part.)

9191.782 Zone.
Shall mean a designation or classification of land as shown on the Zoning Map within which uniform regulations as provided in this Chapter shall apply to the use and development of land.

9191.786 Zoning Map.
Shall mean that map specifically referred to in this Chapter as the Zoning Map, City of Carson, which shows the locations of all zones.

Figure 1

Figure 2

Figure 3
1
Code reviser’s note: Ord. 15-1563 adds this section as 9191.586. It has been editorially renumbered to prevent duplication of numbering.


CHAPTER 2
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS*
Parts:

1    General Provisions

2    Definitions

3    Tentative Maps

4    Tract Maps – Parcel Maps

5    Design

6    Improvements

7    Fees – Deposits – Bonds

8    Vesting Tentative Maps

9    Mobilehome Park Residential Conversions

*This Chapter was originally adopted by Ord. 77-414, adopted October 17, 1977. This chapter has been re-adopted in entirety by Ord. 80-543, adopted October 27, 1980. All amendments to this Chapter are noted within the section changed.

PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

§ 9201.1    Authority.

§ 9201.2    Severability Clause.

§ 9201.3    Purpose.

§ 9201.4    Prohibition of Sale, Lien or Lease.

§ 9201.5    Short Title.

§ 9201.6    References to Other Laws.

§ 9201.7    Division of Land for Lease Only.

§ 9201.7.1    Division of Land for Mobile Home Purposes.

§ 9201.7.2    Mobile Home Relocation Impact Report.

§ 9201.7.3    Repealed.

§ 9201.8    Penalty for Noncompliance.

§ 9201.9    Transaction Voidable.

§ 9201.10    Other Remedies.

§ 9201.11    Falsifications.

§ 9201.12    Subdivision Committee.

§ 9201.13    Time of Performance.

§ 9201.14    Reserved.

§ 9201.15    Reserved.

§ 9201.16    Reserved.

§ 9201.17    Reserved.

§ 9201.18    Reserved.

§ 9201.19    Reserved.

§ 9201.20    Reserved.

9201.1 Authority.
Pursuant to the provisions of Division 2 of Title 7 of the Government Code of the State of California, referred to herein as the Subdivision Map Act, and pursuant to any other regulations provided by law, the regulations hereinafter set forth in this Chapter shall be known as the Subdivision Ordinance and shall apply to all divisions of land hereafter made of property wholly or partially within the City of Carson. Each such division of land and each part thereof lying within or partially within the City of Carson shall be made, and each map thereof shall be prepared and presented for approval, as hereinafter provided for and required.

9201.2 Severability Clause.
The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed this Chapter sentence by sentence, paragraph by paragraph, and section by section, and does hereby declare that the provisions of this Chapter are severable, and if, for any reason, any sentence, paragraph, or section of this Chapter shall be held invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining parts of this Chapter.

9201.3 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this Chapter to supplement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act concerning the design, improvement, and survey data of subdivisions; the form and content of Tract Maps and Parcel Maps; and the procedure to be followed in securing one (1) official approval of the City of Carson, regarding such maps. To accomplish this purpose, the regulations outlined in this Chapter are determined to be necessary for the preservation of public health, safety, and general welfare.

Any reference herein to the Subdivision Map Act, or a specific section thereof, shall refer to the Subdivision Map Act as most currently amended. In the event that a cited section has been renumbered or combined with another section, the reference shall be the most current equivalent of the cited section.

9201.4 Prohibition of Sale, Lien or Lease.
A person shall not sell, place a mortgage, deed of trust or other lien upon, transfer title to, or lease any subdivision or any part thereof until a map thereof in full compliance with the provisions of this Chapter, has been duly recorded or filed in the office of the Recorder of this County. However, a person may offer or contract to sell, lease or finance real property or to construct improvements thereon where such sale, lease or financing, or the commencement of such construction, is expressly conditioned upon the approval and filing of a final subdivision map or parcel map as required under this Chapter.

The aforementioned paragraph of this Section does not apply to any parcel or parcels of a subdivision offered for sale, lien or lease, or sold, mortgaged, liened or leased, in compliance with or exempt from any law regulating the design and improvement of subdivisions or minor land divisions in effect at the time the subdivision or minor land division was established.

Neither this Section nor any other portion of this Chapter applies to the leasing of apartments, offices, stores, or similar space within an apartment building, industrial building or commercial building, mobile home park, or trailer park, or to mineral, oil, or gas leases; or to the construction of removable commercial buildings having floor area of less than one hundred (100) square feet.

9201.5 Short Title.
This Chapter may be referred to as “The Subdivision Ordinance.”

9201.6 References to Other Laws.
Whenever reference is made to an Ordinance of this City or to a Statute of the State of California, such reference applies to the requirements of the Ordinance or Statute applicable on the date of final action on a tentative map and to the provisions of variances and permits granted pursuant to such Ordinances or Statutes.

9201.7 Division of Land for Lease Only.
The filing of a tract map or parcel map on which appears the words “DIVISION OF LAND FOR LEASE ONLY” authorizes the leasing of any lot shown on such map. A person shall not sell, finance, or transfer title to any lot shown on such maps, or offer to do so, or contract to do so, unless the transaction would be in full compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and the Subdivision Map Act had such tract map or parcel map not been filed.

9201.7.1 Division of Land for Mobile Home Purposes.
The filing of a tract map or parcel map on which appears the words “DIVISION OF LAND FOR MOBILE HOME PURPOSES ONLY” authorizes the sale, lien, or lease of any lot shown on such map to accommodate mobile homes used for human habitation. For the purpose of this Chapter, this type subdivision shall be considered a Planned Development.

9201.7.2 Mobile Home Relocation Impact Report.
At the time of filing a tentative tract map or parcel map for a subdivision to be created upon the closure of a mobile home park or a trailer park or any part thereof or to conversion to another use or to a vacant use, unless a written notice under Section 798.56 of the California Civil Code has previously been given and a Relocation Impact Report (RIR) has been filed and accepted as complete pursuant to CMC 9128.21, the subdivider shall file an RIR concurrently with the filing of the map. The RIR shall be processed as provided in CMC 9128.21, except that it shall be heard before the Commission and the Council on appeal in conjunction with the tentative tract map or parcel map, and recordation of the final map shall be conditioned upon performance of mitigation measures, if any, imposed in the resolution of approval of the RIR. (Ord. 82-589U, § 3; Ord. 82-618, § 3; Ord. 92-965, § 10)

9201.7.3 Mobilehome Park Conversions to Resident Ownership.
Repealed by Ord. 06-1358. (Ord. 03-1281U, § 1)

9201.8 Penalty for Noncompliance.
Violation of any provision of this Chapter, which is not also prohibited by the Subdivision Map Act or by any other State Statute, is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00, or by imprisonment in the City Jail or the County Jail for not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

9201.9 Transaction Voidable.
Any deed of conveyance, mortgage, deed of trust, or other lien or lease or sale or contract to sell, mortgage, lien, or lease made contrary to the provisions of this Chapter is voidable at the sole option of the grantee, buyer, tenant, mortgagee, beneficiary, or person contracting to purchase or to accept a lien or mortgage or to lease as a tenant, his heirs, personal representatives or trustee in insolvency or bankruptcy within one (1) year after the date of discovery of the violation of the provisions of the State Subdivision Map Act or this Chapter, but such deed of conveyance, sale, mortgage, deed of trust, lien, lease, or contract, is binding upon any assignee, or transferree of the grantee, mortgagee, beneficiary, tenant, buyer, or person contracting therefor, other than those above enumerated, and upon the grantor, vendor, mortgagor, trustor, landlord, or person so contracting, his assignee, heir, or devisee.

9201.10 Other Remedies.
The provisions of this Chapter are not intended to prohibit any legal, equitable, or summary remedy to which the City or other political subdivision, or any person may otherwise be entitled, and the City or other political subdivision or person may file suit in a court of competent jurisdiction, to restrain or enjoin any attempted or proposed division of land in violation of the Subdivision Map Act or of this Chapter.

9201.11 Falsifications.
Fraudulent misrepresentation of pertinent information shall be sufficient reason to invalidate an approval obtained pursuant to this Chapter.

9201.12 Subdivision Committee.
There is hereby created a Subdivision Committee, consisting of the following officers or their duly authorized representatives:

a. The Community Development Director.

b. The City Engineer.

c. The Director of Public Works.

d. The Fire Chief.

e. The Sheriff.

f. The Health Officer.

g. Chief Engineer and General Manager of Los Angeles County Sanitation Districts.

h. Such other City officers or representatives of other agencies which, in the opinion of the Community Development Director, have an interest in a proposed division of land.

The Community Development Director, or his designee, shall be the Chairman of the Subdivision Committee.

9201.13 Time of Performance.
Time of performance for each and every action under this Chapter shall be measured in calendar days.

9201.14 Reserved.
9201.15 Reserved.
9201.16 Reserved.
9201.17 Reserved.
9201.18 Reserved.
9201.19 Reserved.
9201.20 Reserved.
PART 2. DEFINITIONS
Sections:

§ 9202.1    Advisory Agency.

§ 9202.2    Alley.

§ 9202.3    City Council.

§ 9202.4    City Engineer.

§ 9202.5    Commission.

§ 9202.6    Dedication.

§ 9202.7    Design.

§ 9202.8    Director.

§ 9202.9    Director of Public Works.

§ 9202.10    Division of Land.

§ 9202.11    Drainage Facility.

§ 9202.12    Flood Hazard.

§ 9202.13    Frontage.

§ 9202.14    Future Street.

§ 9202.15    General Plan.

§ 9202.16    Geological Hazard.

§ 9202.17    Improvements.

§ 9202.18    Lease.

§ 9202.19    Local City Street.

§ 9202.20    Lot.

§ 9202.21    Major Highway.

§ 9202.22    Minor Land Division.

§ 9202.23    Parcel Map.

§ 9202.24    Person.

§ 9202.25    Planned Development.

§ 9202.26    Secondary Highway.

§ 9202.27    Section.

§ 9202.28    Shall – May.

§ 9202.29    State Highway.

§ 9202.30    Subdivider.

§ 9202.31    Subdivision.

§ 9202.32    Subdivision Map Act.

§ 9202.33    Tentative Map.

§ 9202.34    Tract Map.

§ 9202.35    Zoning Ordinance.

§ 9202.36    Reserved.

§ 9202.37    Reserved.

§ 9202.38    Reserved.

§ 9202.39    Reserved.

§ 9202.40    Reserved.

9202.1 Advisory Agency.
The City Planning Commission is hereby designated as the Advisory Agency for tentative tract maps and parcel maps as that term is used in the Subdivision Map Act. The City Council is hereby designated as the Advisory Agency for final tract maps and parcel maps. The Community Development Director is hereby designated as the Advisory Agency for Certificates of Compliance.

9202.2 Alley.
An unnamed public or private right-of-way which affords a means of vehicular access to the side or rear of one (1) or more lots having frontage on a street.

9202.3 City Council.
The City Council of the City of Carson.

9202.4 City Engineer.
The City Engineer shall be the County Engineer of the County of Los Angeles in respect to matters pertaining to this Chapter unless the City Council should, by resolution or otherwise, appoint any other person or agency to that function.

9202.5 Commission.
The City Planning Commission of the City of Carson.

9202.6 Dedication.
The grant of real property for public use or rights to the City of Carson.

9202.7 Design.
The minimum area, width, grading, and general layout of lots and the alignment, grades, and widths of alleys, streets, highways, easements, and rights-of-way for drainage facilities, water mains, sanitary sewers, and other public purposes.

9202.8 Director.
The Community Development Director.

9202.9 Director of Public Works.
The Director of Public Works shall be the City’s representative in respect to functions to be performed pursuant to this Chapter.

9202.10 Division of Land.
For the purposes of this Chapter, the term “Division of Land” shall refer to any parcel or contiguous parcels of land, improved or unimproved, or any portion thereof, which are divided for the purpose of transfer of title, sale, lease, or financing, whether immediate or future, into two (2) or more parcels, except that the term “Division of Land” shall not refer to:

a. Land dedicated for cemetery purposes under the Health and Safety Code of the State of California.

b. The leasing or financing of apartments, offices, stores, or similar space within an apartment building, industrial building, commercial building, mobile home park, or trailer park.

c. Division by mineral, oil, or gas leases.

d. Construction of removable commercial buildings having a floor area of less than one hundred (100) square feet.

e. A minor lot adjustment between two (2) or more existing adjacent parcels, where the land taken from one (1) parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not thereby created, provided the lot line adjustment is approved by the Director.

f. The financing or leasing of any parcel of land, or any portion thereof, in conjunction with the construction of commercial or industrial buildings on a single parcel, unless the project is not subject to review under of the City of Carson ordinances regulating design and improvement.

g. The financing or leasing of existing separate commercial or industrial buildings on a single parcel.

The term “Division of Land” shall also refer to a condominium project, as defined in California Civil Code Section 1350, and a community apartment project, as defined in California Business and Professions Code Section 11004, containing two (2) or more parcels; and to the conversion of five (5) or more existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative, as defined in California Business and Professions Code Section 11003.2. (Ord. 82-601, § 2; Ord. 85-714, § 1)

9202.11 Drainage Facility.
Any drainage device or structure which may be used to control or direct the flow of water and/or alleviate flood hazard, including, but not limited to, berms, channels, culverts, curbs, ditches, gutters, pavement, and pipes.

9202.12 Flood Hazard.
A potential danger to life, land, or improvements due to inundation or storm water runoff having sufficient velocity to transport or deposit debris, scour the surface soil, dislodge, or damage buildings, or erode the banks of water courses.

9202.13 Frontage.
The lot line abutting a street.

9202.14 Future Street.
Any real property which the owner thereof has offered for dedication for street purposes and the offer has been rejected by the City Council, subject to the right of said Council to rescind its act and accept by resolution at any later date and without further action by the owner, all or any part of said property as a public street.

9202.15 General Plan.
A Master Plan, or any element thereof, adopted by the City of Carson pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 3, Title 7, Government Code, State of California.

9202.16 Geological Hazard.
A hazard inherent in the earth or artificially created, which is dangerous or potentially dangerous to life, property, or improvements due to the movement, failure, or shifting of earth.

9202.17 Improvements.
Such structures or facilities to be installed or agreed to be installed by a subdivider on land to be used for public or private alleys, streets, highways, or other easements as a condition precedent to the approval and/or acceptance of a tract map or parcel map, including, but not limited to, street surfacing, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street trees, street lights, street signs, sanitary sewers, water mains, and drainage facilities.

9202.18 Lease.
An oral or written agreement or contract, tenancy at will, month-to-month or similar tenancy.

9202.19 Local City Street.
A dedicated street serving as the principal means of access to property, which street is not shown in the General Plan as a major or secondary highway or through collector street or through industrial street or which has not been designated as a specific type street by action of the City Council.

9202.20 Lot.
A parcel of real property that has been legally separated from other parcels of real property and has a distinct number or other designation as shown on a plat map, subdivision map, parcel map, record of survey map or as defined by a metes and bounds description in a deed, in each case recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Los Angeles County. The legal status of a lot is governed by the Subdivision Map Act of the State of California (Government Code 66410 et seq.). (Ord. 89-897, § 2)

9202.21 Major Highway.
A highway designated as a Major Highway in the General Plan of the City of Carson.

9202.22 Minor Land Division.
Minor Land Division refers to a subdivision for which a final parcel map creating five (5) or more parcels or a final tract map is not required by the Subdivision Map Act or by this Chapter.

9202.23 Parcel Map.
A final map prepared in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and of the Subdivision Map Act, which is to be filed in the office of the County Recorder as a parcel map.

9202.24 Person.
An individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, syndicate, the Federal, State, City, or County Government, or Special District, or any other group or combination acting as an entity.

9202.25 Planned Development.
The planning, construction or implementation and operation of any use or structure, or combination of uses or structures, based upon a comprehensive and complete design or plan treating the entire complex of land, structures and uses as a single project.

9202.26 Secondary Highway.
A highway designated as a Secondary Highway in the General Plan of the City of Carson.

9202.27 Section.
A section of this Chapter unless otherwise specified.

9202.28 Shall – May.
“Shall” is mandatory; “May” is permissive.

9202.29 State Highway.
A street under the jurisdiction of the State of California.

9202.30 Subdivider.
A person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association who proposes to divide, divides, or causes land to be divided into a subdivision as defined in CMC 9202.31.

9202.31 Subdivision.
A division of land.

9202.32 Subdivision Map Act.
Division 2 of Title 7 of the California Government Code.

9202.33 Tentative Map.
A tentative map prepared in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and the Subdivision Map Act.

9202.34 Tract Map.
A final map prepared in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, which is to be filed in the office of the County Recorder as a tract map.

9202.35 Zoning Ordinance.
The Carson Zoning Ordinance.

9202.36 Reserved.
9202.37 Reserved.
9202.38 Reserved.
9202.39 Reserved.
9202.40 Reserved.
PART 3. TENTATIVE MAPS
Sections:

§ 9203.1    Tentative Maps – General.

§ 9203.2    Map Numbers.

§ 9203.3    Tentative Map Preparation.

§ 9203.4    Identity of Subdivider.

§ 9203.5    Tentative Map Contents.

§ 9203.6    Written Statements.

§ 9203.7    Reversion to Acreage.

§ 9203.8    Preliminary Processing.

§ 9203.9    Subdivision Committee Review.

§ 9203.10    Director’s Report.

§ 9203.11    Advisory Agency Action.

§ 9203.12    Modifications.

§ 9203.13    Time Limits.

§ 9203.14    Advisory Agency Findings.

§ 9203.15    Repealed.

§ 9203.16    Processing and Approval – Public Hearing.

§ 9203.17    Modification of Tentative Map.

§ 9203.18    Building and Occupancy Permits.

§ 9203.19    Effective Date and Appeal.

§ 9203.20    Eligibility for Waiver.

§ 9203.21    Certificate of Compliance.

§ 9203.22    Street Names.

§ 9203.23    Technical/Inadvertent Error.

§ 9203.24    Modification of Field Map.

9203.1 Tentative Maps – General.
Tentative maps shall be prepared and processed in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and with the provisions of this Chapter.

9203.2 Map Numbers.
The subdivider or his agent shall apply for a map number prior to submission of a tentative map. Map numbers shall be assigned by the County Engineer.

9203.3 Tentative Map Preparation.
Each tentative map shall be prepared in accordance with the following requirements:

a. Tentative maps shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered California civil engineer or a licensed California land surveyor.

b. Each tentative map shall be eight (8) inches by twelve (12) inches or any multiple thereof and shall be drawn to such scale as to clearly show the details of the plan thereon. Wherever practicable, such scale shall be a scale of one (1) inch to one hundred (100) feet.

c. The Director shall determine the number of copies of a tentative map which a subdivider shall submit. One (1) copy shall be reproducible print of a type approved by the City Engineer.

9203.4 Identity of Subdivider.
When a tentative map is submitted, the Advisory Agency may require the subdivider to show that he is the owner of the property shown on the map as proposed for subdivision; or that he has an option or contract to purchase the property or that portion of which he is not the owner; or that he is the authorized agent of one who can comply with these requirements.

9203.5 Tentative Map Contents.
Each tentative map shall show and contain the following information:

a. The assigned map number.

b. The date of preparation, a north point, and scale.

c. The boundary of the division of land shown to scale and tied to a known point.

d. A key map, indicating the location of the proposed division of land in relation to the surrounding area.

e. The approximate contours, showing existing topography.

f. The approximate location of all areas subject to inundation or storm water overflow and the location, width, and direction of flow of each water course.

g. The approximate location of all trees standing within the boundaries of proposed rights-of-way.

h. The location, width, approximate grade, and center line radius of existing and proposed streets, alleys, highways, ways, and easements which are within or adjacent to the proposed division of land.

i. The existing street improvements, including drainage structures.

j. Actual names for existing streets or highways and a proposed name for any new streets or highways.

k. A label or identifying note for existing or proposed easements other than streets or highways. Existing easements shall be delineated on the tentative map and shall show the name of the easement holder, the purpose of the easement, and the legal reference for the easement. If an easement is blanket or indeterminate in nature, a note to this effect shall be placed on the tentative map.

l. The approximate layout of lots, including approximate dimensions and lot numbers and, where pads are proposed for building sites, the approximate finish grade.

m. The approximate location of existing structures, shown to scale, within or immediately adjacent to the division of land. Show house numbers, and label each structure with the proposed disposition. Show the distance to any proposed parcel line of any structure to remain. The type of construction of the structure and the fire wall rating if any structure is within ten (10) feet of a proposed parcel line shall be stated.

n. The general location of all proposed buildings and structures which are to be divided into units of air space and the means of access thereto, where the division of land consists of a condominium, community apartment project, or stock cooperative.

o. If necessary, a generalized plan of proposed development adjacent to the division of land showing the compatibility of the development with existing and future development in the neighborhood.

p. The location of sewage disposal components including house laterals which are to remain.

9203.6 Written Statements.
Each tentative map shall be submitted with written statements containing the following information and acknowledgements:

a. The name and address of the subdivider.

b. The name, address, and license or registration number of the person who prepared the tentative map or who directed the preparation of the tentative map.

c. A statement by a person holding a proprietary interest in the parcel or parcels comprising the division of land, consenting to the submission of the tentative map.

d. The proposed use of parcels shown on the tentative map, together with the present and proposed zoning.

e. The legal description of the land in the proposed division of land.

f. A copy of conditions, covenants, and restrictions proposed by the subdivider, if any.

g. A statement detailing the arrangements which the subdivider proposes to make for the operation and maintenance of common parcels and easements, if any.

h. The source of water supply and the proposed method of sewage disposal.

i. The results of percolation tests, if required, performed in accordance with the standards of the Health Officer, where a private system of sewage disposal is proposed.

j. A geological and/or soils report, if required by the City Engineer, prepared by a licensed geologist and/or registered civil engineer, stating the effect of geological or soil conditions on the proposed development.

k. An environmental assessment statement and/or input for a draft Environmental Impact Report, as determined by the Director.

The written statements required by this Section shall become a part of the tentative map upon submission to the Director.

9203.7 Reversion to Acreage.
Prior to the submission of a final map for the purpose of reverting to acreage land previously subdivided, a tentative map shall be prepared and processed in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and with the provisions of this Chapter. A final parcel map may be approved for reverting to acreage land previously subdivided and consisting of four (4) or less contiguous parcels under the same ownership. A reversion to acreage map shall comply with the requirements imposed by this Chapter for a tract map or a parcel map.

9203.8 Preliminary Processing.
Tentative maps and required written statements shall be submitted to the Director. The Director shall distribute copies of tentative maps and, where appropriate, required written statements to each member of the Subdivision Committee, a City requesting extraterritorial review of tentative maps pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act, and to other agencies as necessary.

9203.9 Subdivision Committee Review.
The Subdivision Committee shall make recommendations on tentative maps within forty (40) days subsequent to the submission thereof.

9203.10 Director’s Report.
The Director shall prepare a written report, setting forth the recommendations of the Subdivision Committee and the contents of departmental reports submitted to the Director by City Officers or Departments or other interested agencies. The Director shall transmit his report, together with a copy of the tentative map, to the Advisory Agency.

The Director shall provide the subdivider with a copy of the Director’s report prior to final action on the tentative map by the Advisory Agency. If the subdivider or his authorized representative does not receive the report in person, this provision shall be deemed accomplished when the Director’s report is placed in the mail, bearing the proper postage, and directed to the subdivider at his designated address.

9203.11 Advisory Agency Action.
The Advisory Agency will review the report of the Director and shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove a tentative map within fifty (50) days after the tentative map has been filed.

9203.12 Modifications.
The City Council and/or Advisory Agency may grant modifications to the provisions of this Chapter which it determines are warranted because of the size or shape of the division of land, unusual physical conditions, title restrictions, the proposed use of one (1) or more parcels, or the nature of the interest to be conveyed in parcels created by the proposed division of land. The City Council and/or Advisory Agency shall declare its decision on all modifications stating the grounds for each modification. The modifications and/or conditions shall be included in the report on the tentative map and shall become a part thereof. No modification shall be granted which has the effect of negating the provisions of an Ordinance of this City other than this Chapter or which is inconsistent with the provisions of State law.

9203.13 Time Limits.
The time limits for acting and reporting on tentative maps and appeals, as specified in this Chapter and by the Subdivision Map Act, may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the Advisory Agency or the City Council, as the case may be. In the event that the Director determines that a tentative map is subject to the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act, no application for tentative map approval shall be deemed received for filing until such time as all environmental documentation required under CEQA has been completed as follows:

a. In the case where a Categorical Exemption is to be filed, a tentative map shall be deemed received for filing on the date the Categorical Exemption is submitted to the County Clerk.

b. In the case where a Negative Declaration is to be filed, a tentative map shall be deemed received for filing on the date of public notification of the Negative Declaration.

c. In the case where an Environmental Impact Report is to be filed, a tentative map shall be deemed received for filing on the date the Environmental Commission takes final action of the Draft Environmental Impact Report.

9203.14 Advisory Agency Findings.
The Advisory Agency shall make the findings required by Section 66427.1, 66473.5, 66474, 66474.1, and 66474.6 of the California Government Code and Section 21100 of the California Public Resources Code prior to approval of the tentative or final tract map or parcel map.

9203.15 Repealed.
9203.16 Processing and Approval – Public Hearing.
The tentative map shall be processed and approved in accordance with the terms and provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this Chapter. The Advisory Agency shall hold a public hearing on every application for a tentative map other than minor lot line adjustments not significantly affecting the property rights of persons other than the applicant. Notice of the hearing shall be given pursuant to CMC 9173.22 (Notification of Hearing) by posting and by notice through the United States mails to the applicant, to the owners of property within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of the property to be divided, and to any person who has filed a written request therefor, and pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 19-1904, § 11)

9203.17 Modification of Tentative Map.
No final map shall be filed with the City Council for approval unless the final map conforms with the tentative map and any conditions imposed in respect thereto by the Advisory Agency.

9203.18 Building and Occupancy Permits.
A building may be constructed, a permit for the construction of a building may be issued, and a portion of a parcel may be used when conforming to the provisions of this Chapter and prior to the recordation of the approved tract map or parcel map; provided, however, that any reliance on such permit shall not result in any vested right to complete improvements authorized by such permit; and provided further, that the permit holder shall be required to execute an acknowledgment and acceptance of the terms of this Section. No occupancy permit shall be issued, however, prior to the recordation of the approved tract map or parcel map.

9203.19 Effective Date and Appeal.
The decision of the Planning Commission shall become effective and final fifteen (15) days after the date of its action unless an appeal is filed in accordance with CMC 9173.4. An appeal shall be considered by the Council as provided in CMC 9173.4. (Ord. 82-618, § 4)

9203.20 Eligibility for Waiver.
A division of land which is a property line adjustment between two (2) adjacent legally created lots or parcels and divisions of land for which parcel maps are required by the Subdivision Map Act shall be eligible for waiver of the requirements that a final parcel map be filed pursuant to Section 66428 of the Subdivision Map Act except where the tentative conditions of approval thereof require any dedications or improvements. A Certificate of Compliance shall be recorded where the waiver of a final map is approved.

9203.21 Certificate of Compliance.
A request for a certificate of compliance shall be made in writing on a standardized form provided by the City Engineer. It shall be signed and acknowledged by all owners of record of the land comprising the division of land. If requested, a plat map showing sufficient mathematical and survey information to adequately establish the boundaries of the division of land and each parcel thereof shall be provided by the subdivider. The plat map shall show the information required by CMC 9203.5(m) and (p) and such other information as may be required by the Advisory Agency.

9203.22 Street Names.
Street names shall be recommended by the City Engineer and reviewed by the Subdivision Committee. The Advisory Agency and the City Council shall review the recommended street names during the approval process of the tentative map and final map. The approval of the final map by the City Council shall also constitute approval of the street names shown on the final map.

9203.23 Technical/Inadvertent Error.
The Advisory Agency shall waive the provisions of this Chapter and of Section 66473 of the Subdivision Map Act requiring disapproval of final maps for failure to meet or perform State or local requirements or conditions, when the failure of a map submitted for approval is the result of a technical and/or inadvertent error which in the determination of the Advisory Agency does not materially affect the validity of the map. Such waivers shall not result in the invalidation or negation of any substantive requirement of this Chapter, the Subdivision Map Act, or any other ordinance, statute, or regulation.

9203.24 Modification of Field Map.
A recorded tract map or parcel map may be modified by a certificate of correction or an amending map, if the City finds that there are changes in circumstances which make any or all of the conditions of such a map no longer appropriate or necessary and that the modifications do not impose any additional burden on the present fee owner of the property, and if the modifications do not alter any right, title, or interest in the real property reflected on the recorded map, and the City finds that the map as modified conforms to the provisions of Section 66474 of the Subdivision Map Act. Any such modification shall be set for public hearing as provided for in CMC 9203.16. (Ord. 82-601, § 3)

PART 4. TRACT MAPS – PARCEL MAPS
Sections:

§ 9204.1    Time Limits on Tract Maps.

§ 9204.2    Time Limit on Parcel Maps.

§ 9204.3    Conformity to the Tentative Map.

§ 9204.4    Submission.

§ 9204.5    Reports.

§ 9204.6    Dedications – Final Parcel Maps.

§ 9204.7    Dedications – Reversion to Acreage.

§ 9204.8    Dedications – Streets, Highways, Alleys and Other Vehicular and Pedestrian Rights-of-Way.

§ 9204.9    Future Streets and Alleys.

§ 9204.10    Access Rights.

§ 9204.11    Restricted Use Areas.

§ 9204.12    Sewers and Drains.

§ 9204.13    Natural Watercourses.

§ 9204.14    Tract Maps and Parcel Maps – General Requirements.

§ 9204.15    Title Sheet.

§ 9204.16    Map Sheets – Format.

§ 9204.17    Repealed.

§ 9204.18    Lot Numbers and Area Designation.

§ 9204.19    Lot, Block, and Boundary Lines.

§ 9204.20    Widths and Centerlines of Streets, Highways, Alleys, and Other Ways.

§ 9204.21    Private and Future Streets and Alleys.

§ 9204.22    Street and Highway Names.

§ 9204.23    Railroad, Transmission Line, and Flood Control Rights-of-Way.

§ 9204.24    Easements Required – Tract Maps and Parcel Maps.

§ 9204.25    Easements – How Shown.

§ 9204.26    City Boundary Lines.

§ 9204.27    Lots Subject to Flood Hazard, Inundation, or Geological Hazard.

§ 9204.28    Natural Watercourse Designation.

§ 9204.29    Parcel Maps – Compiled from Record Data.

§ 9204.30    Evidence Determining Boundary.

§ 9204.31    Survey Procedure and Practice.

§ 9204.32    Monuments.

§ 9204.33    Evidence of Title – Tract Maps and Parcel Maps.

§ 9204.35    Easement Certificate – Tract Maps and Parcel – Maps.

§ 9204.36    Separate Instruments – Preparation and Evidence of Title.

§ 9204.37    Record Title Interests on Parcel Maps.

§ 9204.38    Evidence of Title for Parcel Maps.

§ 9204.39    Repealed.

§ 9204.40    Repealed.

§ 9204.41    Reserved.

§ 9204.42    Reserved.

§ 9204.43    Reserved.

§ 9204.44    Reserved.

§ 9204.45    Reserved.

§ 9204.46    Reserved.

§ 9204.47    Reserved.

§ 9204.48    Reserved.

§ 9204.49    Reserved.

§ 9204.50    Reserved.

9204.1 Time Limits on Tract Maps.
Within twenty-four (24) months after the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map, a subdivider may cause the proposed division of land to be accurately surveyed and a final map prepared and filed in the office of the County Recorder. The time limit for such filing may be extended by the Advisory Agency for periods not to exceed a total of three (3) additional years. (Ord. 82-601, § 4; Ord. 83-647, § 1)

9204.2 Time Limit on Parcel Maps.
Within twenty-four (24) months after the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map, a subdivider may cause the proposed division of land to be accurately surveyed, if necessary, and a final parcel map prepared and filed in the office of the County Recorder. The time limit for such filing may be extended by the Advisory Agency for periods not to exceed a total of three (3) additional years. (Ord. 83-601, § 5; Ord. 83-647, § 2)

9204.3 Conformity to the Tentative Map.
The tract map, parcel map, or waiver of a final map shall conform to the approved tentative map and to the requirements and conditions contained on the report approving the tentative map. No final tract map, final parcel map, or waiver of a final map shall be accepted by the City Engineer unless a tentative map or plat map has been approved by the City Council or Advisory Agency.

9204.4 Submission.
Final tract maps, final parcel maps, or Certificates of Compliance shall be submitted to the City Engineer. A subdivider shall submit sufficient copies of the final tract map, final parcel map, or Certificate of Compliance to permit the City Engineer to furnish copies to City Officers and Departments and to other public agencies which, in the opinion of the City Engineer, may have an interest in the map or certificate.

9204.5 Reports.
Each Officer or Department, within fifteen (15) days after receipt of a print of a final tract map, final parcel map, or waiver of a final map, shall report, in writing, to the City Engineer as to the compliance or noncompliance of the map or waiver with the approved or conditionally approved tentative map.

9204.6 Dedications – Final Parcel Maps.
Dedications or grants of easements required as a condition precedent to filing a parcel map may be made either by certificate on the final parcel map or by separate instrument, accepted and recorded prior to or concurrently with the filing of the parcel map.

9204.7 Dedications – Reversion to Acreage.
The Advisory Agency may require dedications as a condition precedent to filing a map for the purpose of reverting to acreage land previously subdivided.

9204.8 Dedications – Streets, Highways, Alleys and Other Vehicular and Pedestrian Rights-of-Way.
Except as otherwise provided by this Section, streets, highways, alleys, and other vehicular and pedestrian rights-of-way, or portions thereof, which are required as a condition precedent to filing a tract map or parcel map, shall be offered for public use.

With the approval of the City Council, a street or alley which is intended to be kept physically closed to public travel or posted as a private right-of-way may be shown as a private street or alley. Private streets and alleys shall be conditionally dedicated, which offer may be accepted by the City Council, if the street or alley ceases to remain physically closed or posted and is open to public travel for a period of three (3) months or more.

9204.9 Future Streets and Alleys.
Future streets and alleys shall be offered for public use, which offer shall remain open for an indeterminate period of time until the City Council determines that the opening of the street or alley is warranted. The owners of the underlying fee to any portion of a future street or alley shall retain the right to any and all ordinary uses of such land, except the erection or construction thereon of any structure not ordinarily placed in public streets or alleys, until such time as the City Council opens the street or alley for public use.

9204.10 Access Rights.
Access to major and secondary highways and to local City streets shall be regulated by the Director of Public Works.

9204.11 Restricted Use Areas.
The right to restrict the erection of buildings or other structures within those portions of lots which are shown as being subject to flood hazard, inundation, or geological hazard on a tract map or parcel map shall be dedicated.

9204.12 Sewers and Drains.
If sewers or drains or both are required for the general use of lot owners in a division of land and such sewers or drains are not to be installed within public highways, streets, or alleys, the necessary easements shall be granted.

9204.13 Natural Watercourses.
In the event that a division of land is traversed by a major watercourse, channel, stream, swale, or creek, the Advisory Agency may require that an adequate right-of-way be dedicated for storm drainage purposes.

9204.14 Tract Maps and Parcel Maps – General Requirements.
a. Tract maps and parcel maps shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and of this Chapter and shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor.

b. The division of parcels which are not abutting shall be shown on separate maps, unless such parcels are separated because of the interposition of a highway, street, alley or railroad, or public utility, or flood control right-of-way.

c. Driveways delineated on the final map shall be labeled as “Fire Lane” if they are also for emergency vehicle use.

9204.15 Title Sheet.
a. The title sheet of each map shall contain a title, consisting of the words “Tract No.” and the map number on a tract map, or the words “Parcel Map No.” and the map number on a parcel map.

The title shall also contain the words “In the City of Carson” or “partly in the City of Carson and partly in . . .” (here insert the name for the political division involved).

b. The title sheet shall also contain a subtitle consisting of a description of all of the property being divided by reference to maps previously filed or recorded in the office of the County Recorder or previously filed with the County Clerk pursuant to a final judgment in any action in partition or by reference to the plat of a United States survey. Upon the title sheet of each map filed for the purpose of reverting subdivided land to acreage, the subtitle shall consist of the words “Being a Reversion to Acreage of . . .” (insert a legal description of the land being reverted). Each reference in these subtitles must be spelled out and worded identically to the original record thereof. A complete reference to the book and page of the cited record must be included.

c. The title sheet for a parcel map shall contain the certificate of the surveyor or engineer referred to in Section 66449 of the California Government Code. A title sheet for a tract map shall contain the certificate of the surveyor or engineer referred to in Section 66441 of the California Government Code. The title sheet or at least one (1) map sheet shall contain a basis of bearings, making reference to a filed tract map, County Surveyor’s map, or other record acceptable to the City Engineer, when the map is based upon a field survey.

d. Required certificates, affidavits, and acknowledgments may be legibly stamped or printed on the title sheet of a tract map or parcel map with opaque ink. All required signatures shall be written with black opaque ink. All such entries shall be readily reproducible by any normal method of reproduction

e. If the Advisory Agency approves a division of land for lease purposes only, for stock cooperative purposes, for condominium purposes, or for mobile home purposes only, there shall appear on each sheet of a final tract map or final parcel map of the division in letters not less than one-fourth inch in height the words: “DIVISION OF LAND FOR PURPOSE OF LEASE ONLY,” “DIVISION OF LAND FOR STOCK COOPERATIVE PURPOSES,” “DIVISION OF LAND FOR CONDOMINIUM PURPOSES,” or “DIVISION OF LAND FOR MOBILE HOME PURPOSES ONLY” respectively.

9204.16 Map Sheets – Format.
On each sheet of a final tract map or final parcel map, the lettering shall be oriented so that, with the north point directed away from the reader, the map may be read most conveniently from the lower right hand corner of the sheet or to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. Each map sheet shall bear the main title of the map, the scale, north point, sheet number, and designation of the relation, if any, between the sheet and each other sheet comprising the final tract map or final parcel map.

9204.17 Repealed.
9204.18 Lot Numbers and Area Designation.
All lots shall be numbered. Lot numbers shall begin with the numeral “1” and continue consecutively without omission or duplication throughout the entire map. No prefix or suffix or combination of letter and number shall be used. Each lot shall be shown entirely on one (1) sheet. Upon each lot containing an area of three-fourths of an acre or more shall be designated the acreage of the lot to the nearest one-hundredth of an acre.

9204.19 Lot, Block, and Boundary Lines.
The bearing and length of each lot, block, and boundary line shall be shown on a tract map or parcel map, except that, when bearings and lengths of lot lines in a series of lots are the same, the bearings or lengths may be omitted from each interior, parallel lot line of the series. Each required bearing or length shall be shown in full, and no ditto mark or other designation of repetition shall be used. The length, radius, and total central angle or bearings of terminal radii of each curve and the bearing of each radial line to each lot corner on each curve, or the central angle of each segment within each lot, shall be shown.

9204.20 Widths and Centerlines of Streets, Highways, Alleys, and Other Ways.
Each tract map or parcel map shall show the centerline, the total width, and the width on each side of the centerline of each street, highway, alley, or other way appearing on the map. The bearing and length of each tangent and the radius, central angle, and length of each curve shall be shown on each centerline. The map shall also show the width of right-of-way to be dedicated on the map when only a portion of a street, highway, alley, or way is within the map boundary.

9204.21 Private and Future Streets and Alleys.
Tract maps and parcel maps shall show sufficient mathematical data to clearly indicate the portion of each lot which is within private and/or future streets or alleys, in addition to the width and centerline detail required by CMC 9204.20. Right-of-way lines for private and/or future streets or alleys shall be dashed. Each private or future street or alley shall be clearly identified as such.

9204.22 Street and Highway Names.
a. Tract maps and parcel maps shall show the name of each highway or street, other than a future street, appearing on the map. Street and highway names shall be shown in or arrowed to the right-of-way.

b. If only a portion of a street or highway is to be dedicated on a map, the street or highway name shall be shown or arrowed into both the portion to be dedicated and the existing portion of the street or highway.

c. The word “Avenue,” “Street,” “Place,” or other street or highway designation shall be spelled out in full.

9204.23 Railroad, Transmission Line, and Flood Control Rights-of-Way.
Tract maps and parcel maps shall show the width and location of each railroad or transmission line right-of-way, flood control channel, or other similar rights-of-way appearing on the map. Rights-of-way which appear on a map as a lot or a series of lots shall be shown as provided in CMC 9204.18 and 9204.19.

9204.24 Easements Required – Tract Maps and Parcel Maps.
Tract maps and parcel maps shall show all easements or restrictions which are a burden upon lots in the division or reversion or which are required as a condition precedent to filing the map.

9204.25 Easements – How Shown.
The centerlines or sidelines of each easement shall be shown. Widths, centerline or sideline data, and ties shall be shown, as necessary, to definitely locate each easement. Easement sidelines shall be shown as fine dashed lines. Distances and bearings on the sidelines of lots which are cut by easements shall be arrowed or otherwise shown so as to clearly indicate the actual length of each lot line. Each easement shall be clearly labeled and identified and, if of record, the record reference shall be shown thereon. If an easement is to be granted by separate instrument, the record reference shall be shown on the map prior to the time of filing. Notes or figures pertaining to easements shall be subordinated in form and appearance to other notes or figures on the map. If an easement cannot be definitely located, a statement showing the existence of such easement shall be placed on the map.

9204.26 City Boundary Lines.
Tract maps and parcel maps shall show each City boundary line crossing or adjoining a division or reversion. Each such line shall be clearly designated and tied.

9204.27 Lots Subject to Flood Hazard, Inundation, or Geological Hazard.
If any portion of a lot shown on a tract map or parcel map is subject to flood hazard, inundation, or geological hazard, and the hazard is not to be removed as a condition precedent to filing the map, the hazard area and a prominent note identifying the hazard shall be shown on the map.

9204.28 Natural Watercourse Designation.
In the event that dedication of right-of-way for storm drainage purposes is not required, the Advisory Agency may require that a tract map or parcel map show the location of any natural watercourse, stream, channel, swale, or creek which traverses the map.

9204.29 Parcel Maps – Compiled from Record Data.
If a parcel map is compiled from record data, the source of information used shall be contained in a note on one (1) sheet of the map.

9204.30 Evidence Determining Boundary.
Each tract map and each parcel map for which a survey is required shall show evidence found on the ground of sufficient corners of prior surveys or such other evidence as may be suitable to precisely locate the boundaries of the division or reversion shown on the map. Each stake, monument, or other object found shall be fully described and referenced. The method used to establish each point or line shall be clearly shown and explained on the map.

9204.31 Survey Procedure and Practice.
The procedure and practice for all survey work done for preparation of a tract map or parcel map shall conform to the standards and details set forth in Chapter 15, Division 3, of the California Business and Professions Code, the Land Surveyor’s Act. The allowable error of closure on any portion of a tract map or parcel map shall be one-ten-thousandth (1/10,000).

In the event that the County Engineer, County Road Commissioner, the State Highway Engineer, or City Engineer shall have established the centerline of any highway, street, or alley shown on a tract map or parcel map, the map shall show such centerline, together with a reference to a field book or map showing such centerline and the monuments which determine its position. If determined by ties, that fact shall be stated upon the tract map or parcel map.

9204.32 Monuments.
a. Each tract map and each parcel map for which a survey is required shall show durable monuments found or set at or near each boundary corner and at intermediate points, approximately one thousand (1,000) feet apart, or at such lesser distances as may be made necessary by topography to ensure accuracy in the reestablishment of any point or line without unreasonable difficulty. The precise position and character of each such monument shall be shown on the map. Such durable monument shall be not less substantial than an iron pipe of a two (2) inch outside diameter, not less than two and one-half (2-1/2) feet in length, with plug and tack, and set at least two (2) feet into the ground or of such other character and stability as may be approved by the City Engineer. For the purposes of this Chapter, a lead and tack set in permanent concrete or masonry shall be considered as a durable monument. The approximate elevation of the top of each such monument with respect to the surface of the ground shall be shown on said map.

b. Whenever necessary, in the opinion of the City Engineer, centerline monuments shall be set to mark intersections of streets or intersections of streets with the map boundary or to mark either the beginning and end of curves or the points of intersections of tangents thereof or other intermediate points.

Each such monument shall be not less durable and substantial than a lead and tack in asphaltic concrete or cement pavements; a two (2) inch iron pipe set not less than twelve (12) inches below the surface, or at such depth as may be approved by the City Engineer; or a spike not less than six (6) inches long in bituminous macadam pavements.

For each centerline monument set, the engineer or surveyor under whose supervision the survey has been made shall furnish to the City Engineer a set of notes, clearly showing the ties between the monument and a sufficient number (normally four (4)) of durable, distinctive reference points or monuments.

Such reference points or monuments may be leads and tacks in sidewalks, or two (2) inch by two (2) inch stakes setback of the curbline and below the surface of the ground, or a substitute therefor which appears to be not likely to be disturbed.

Each set of notes submitted shall conform in all respects to the standardized office records of the City Engineer. All such notes shall be indexed and filed by the City Engineer as a part of the permanent public records of his office.

c. All monuments found or set as required herein shall be permanently and visibly marked or tagged with the registration or license number of the engineer or surveyor under whose supervision the survey was made.

d. At least one (1) exterior boundary line of the land being subdivided shall be monumented prior to the filing of the final tract map or final parcel map. Interior street centerline monuments and the remainder of the boundary monuments may be set subsequent to filing the final tract map or final parcel map. The tract map or parcel map shall show which monuments are in place and which are to be set. Prior to certification of the tract map or parcel map by the City Engineer, the subdivider shall submit a written agreement in which he agrees that monuments deferred will be set within a specified time and that the notes required in CMC 9204.32(b) will be furnished within a specified time.

e. All monuments shall be subject to inspection and approval of the City Engineer.

9204.33 Evidence of Title – Tract Maps and Parcel Maps.
The evidence of title required for tract maps and parcel maps where signatures appear on the final map by the provisions of Section 66465 of the California Government Code shall be a certificate of title or a guarantee of title issued by a title insurance company authorized by the laws of the State of California to write the same, showing the names of all persons having any record title interest in the land to be subdivided, together with the nature of their respective interests therein. In the event that land in the City of Carson is to be dedicated, the certificate of title or guarantee of title shall be issued for the benefit and protection of the City of Carson. The certificate or guarantee shall be dated and delivered upon request of the City Engineer when the map is ready for filing.

9204.35 Easement Certificate – Tract Maps and Parcel – Maps.
Tract maps or parcel maps on which easements are offered for public use shall have written thereon, in addition to or as a part of any other certificate required, a certificate signed by any persons claiming an interest in the lands included within the division or reversion shown on the map, other than an interest which cannot ripen into a fee, in substantially the following form:

We hereby certify that, except as shown on a copy of this map on file in the office of the City Director of Public Works, we know of no easement or structure existing within the easements hereby offered for dedication to the public, other than publicly owned water lines, sewers, or storm drains; that we will grant no right or interest within the boundaries of said easements offered to the public except where such right or interest is expressly made subject to the said easements.

9204.36 Separate Instruments – Preparation and Evidence of Title.
Separate instruments shall be prepared by the City Engineer. When dedicating by separate instrument, the subdivider shall submit a title report, prepared in favor of the City, which indicates who is required to sign the separate instrument to pass clear title to the City. This title report shall be kept up-to-date and the City shall be notified of any change until such time as the separate instrument is recorded.

9204.37 Record Title Interests on Parcel Maps.
The signatures of all parties having any record title interest in the real property being subdivided shall not be required on any final parcel map unless dedications or offers of dedication are made by certificate on the parcel map.

9204.38 Evidence of Title for Parcel Maps.
Evidence of title shall be submitted with all final parcel maps. If no signatures appear on the final parcel map, the evidence of title may be a preliminary title report/guarantee. This shall show all fee interest holders, all interest holders whose interest could ripen into a fee, all trust deeds, together with the name of the trustee, and all easement holders.

9204.39 Repealed.
Repealed by Ord. 82-601.

9204.40 Repealed.
Repealed by Ord. 82-601.

9204.41 Reserved.
9204.42 Reserved.
9204.43 Reserved.
9204.44 Reserved.
9204.45 Reserved.
9204.46 Reserved.
9204.47 Reserved.
9204.48 Reserved.
9204.49 Reserved.
9204.50 Reserved.
PART 5. DESIGN
Sections:

§ 9205.1    Access.

§ 9205.2    Highways – Conformity with General Plan.

§ 9205.3    Major and Secondary Highways – Alignment.

§ 9205.4    Major and Secondary Highways – Widths.

§ 9205.5    Street Alignment and Grade.

§ 9205.6    Streets and Alleys – Right-of-Way and Roadway Widths.

§ 9205.7    Future Streets and Alleys.

§ 9205.8    Alleys/Service Roads.

§ 9205.9    Cul-de-Sac Streets and Dead-End Alleys.

§ 9205.10    Right-of-Way Corner.

§ 9205.11    Lot Design.

§ 9205.12    City Boundary.

§ 9205.13    Reserved.

§ 9205.14    Reserved.

§ 9205.15    Reserved.

§ 9205.16    Reserved.

§ 9205.17    Reserved.

§ 9205.18    Reserved.

§ 9205.19    Reserved.

§ 9205.20    Reserved.

9205.1 Access.
Access to a division of land shall be by means of an improved public street or highway having a minimum access width as required by the Zoning Ordinance.

9205.2 Highways – Conformity with General Plan.
If the General Plan shows a highway so located that any portion thereof lies within a division of land, that portion of the highway which is within the division shall be included in the design of the division unless the Advisory Agency determines that there is a reasonable probability that the General Plan will be amended to remove or relocate the highway so that it is no longer within the division of land.

9205.3 Major and Secondary Highways – Alignment.
If a centerline has been established for a highway, the alignment of the highway shall conform to the established centerline. If no centerline has been established, the alignment shall be substantially as shown in the General Plan. The centerline curve radius of a major highway shall be not less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet. The centerline curve radius of a secondary highway shall be not less than one thousand (1,000) feet. Highways shall intersect with streets and other highways as nearly at a right angle as is practical. No highway shall have a grade of more than six (6) percent nor less than four-tenths (0.4) of one (1) percent. If in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, topographical conditions do not permit in meeting the minimum grade requirements, this will necessitate the installation of additional catch basin inlets and/or extra width gutters, as determined by the Director of Public Works and his advisory agents.

9205.4 Major and Secondary Highways – Widths.
Major highways shall have a width of one hundred (100) feet and eighty-four (84) feet between curbs and secondary highways shall have a width of eighty (80) feet and sixty-four (64) feet between curbs, unless a different width is indicated in the General Plan, or where it is necessary to match existing highway widths which differ as determined by the Advisory Agency.

9205.5 Street Alignment and Grade.
The alignment of streets shall be such as to provide at least fifty (50) feet of frontage for each lot in the division of land, at least forty (40) feet of frontage for each lot abutting the cul-de-sac portion of a street, and, where necessary, to provide for the future development of adjacent properties.

Centerline jogs of one hundred fifty (150) feet or less for left hand vehicle turning configurations and centerline jogs of four hundred (400) feet or less for right hand vehicle turning configurations shall be avoided wherever practical.

On any street, no centerline curve radius of less than two hundred (200) feet shall be provided. A centerline having an arc length of less than one hundred (100) feet shall not be permitted unless the centerline radius is greater than three thousand (3,000) feet. Streets shall intersect with other streets and highways as nearly at a right angle as practicable. No street shall have a grade of less than four-tenths (0.4) of one (1) percent nor more than ten (10) percent. If in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, topographical conditions do not permit in meeting the minimum grade requirements, this will necessitate the installation of additional catch basin inlets and/or extra width gutters, as determined by the Director of Public Works and his advisory agents.

9205.6 Streets and Alleys – Right-of-Way and Roadway Widths.
Streets and alleys shall have the following minimum right-of-way and roadway widths:

a. Residential entrance streets from General Plan highways, through collector streets, streets adjacent to schools, and multiple residential use streets:

b. Interior collector and local streets, cul-de-sac streets, and loop streets:

c. Industrial and commercial streets – entrance or collector:

d. Industrial and commercial – cul-de-sac or loop:

e. Alley:

f. Industrial and commercial – existing street:

*Full width sidewalks may be required by the General Plan.

9205.7 Future Streets and Alleys.
The Advisory Agency may require that future streets and alleys be provided for the future division of lots shown on the tentative map and for the development of adjoining property.

9205.8 Alleys/Service Roads.
The Advisory Agency may require that an alley/service road be provided at the rear of lots which are intended for multiple residential (not including two-family use), commercial, or industrial use.

9205.9 Cul-de-Sac Streets and Dead-End Alleys.
An adequate turning area conforming to the specifications of the Director of Public Works shall be provided at the end of cul-de-sac streets and dead-end alleys.

9205.10 Right-of-Way Corner.
Intersections of road right-of-way lines, where one (1) or both streets are local residential, shall be rounded with a curve having a radius of thirteen (13) feet unless otherwise determined by the Director of Public Works.

Intersections of road right-of-way lines where both streets are highways or one (1) of the streets serves a commercial or industrial development, shall be rounded with a curve having a radius of twenty-seven (27) feet, unless otherwise determined by the Director of Public Works.

9205.11 Lot Design.
a. Each lot in a division of land shall have the required area and the required width as defined in the Zoning Ordinance. Where said Zoning Ordinance does not establish a required area and/or width in a particular zone, the required area shall be five thousand (5,000) square feet and the required width shall be fifty (50) feet. Strips of land intended for use as vehicular access shall not be included in calculating average width or required area.

b. If a lot is in more than one (1) zone, then the area and width thereof shall be not less than the area and width requirements, respectively, in that zone in which any part of the lot is located which has the largest area requirement and in that zone in which any part of the lot is located which has the greatest width requirement.

c. This Section does not apply to any lot which the subdivider offers to deed or dedicate to the public.

d. Where public sewers are not available and private sewage disposal is to be used, every lot or parcel or building site shall be of sufficient size to provide for satisfactory sewage disposal for land use intended.

e. In all cases where practical, the sidelines of lots shall be at an approximate right angle to the street upon which such lots front.

f. Wherever practical, divisions of property abutting rights-of-way for freeways, highways, railroads, transmission lines, and flood control channels shall be designed so as to create lots which back up to said right-of-way.

g. The Advisory Agency may determine that, by reason of circumstances peculiar to the proposed subdivision for the use proposed to be made of the property in the subdivision, the public peace, health, safety, and welfare will be protected adequately by lots of lesser frontage or area than that specified in this Section.

h. This Section applies only to future divisions of land within the City and shall not be deemed to limit the existing requirements imposed under the Zoning Ordinance as to lots already subdivided.

9205.12 City Boundary.
No lot shall be divided by a City boundary line. Each such boundary line shall be made a lot line.

9205.13 Reserved.
9205.14 Reserved.
9205.15 Reserved.
9205.16 Reserved.
9205.17 Reserved.
9205.18 Reserved.
9205.19 Reserved.
9205.20 Reserved.
PART 6. IMPROVEMENTS
Sections:

§ 9206.1    General Requirements.

§ 9206.2    Improvement and Site Development Plans.

§ 9206.3    Improvement Plans – Street and Highway.

§ 9206.4    Map Showing Structures.

§ 9206.5    Major and Secondary Highway Improvements.

§ 9206.6    Street Improvements.

§ 9206.7    Improvements to Existing Street or Highways Adjacent to the Division of Land.

§ 9206.8    Improvements to Existing Street or Highways within the Division of Land.

§ 9206.9    Improvements of Future Streets.

§ 9206.10    Temporary Improvements.

§ 9206.11    Protective Improvements.

§ 9206.12    Drainage Improvements.

§ 9206.13    Fences or Walls Adjacent to Highways.

§ 9206.14    Fencing of Watercourses or Drainage Facilities.

§ 9206.15    Underground Utilities.

§ 9206.16    Sanitary Sewers.

§ 9206.17    Sidewalks.

§ 9206.18    Waiving of Sidewalks.

§ 9206.19    Driveways.

§ 9206.20    Street Lighting System and Street Name Signs.

§ 9206.21    Street Trees and Landscaping.

§ 9206.22    Water Mains and Fire Hydrants.

§ 9206.23    Improvement Agreement.

§ 9206.24    Cost of Improvement.

§ 9206.25    Supplemental Sewer or Drainage Improvements.

9206.1 General Requirements.
Improvements required to be installed or agreed to be installed by a subdivider as a condition precedent to the filing of a tract map or parcel map shall comply with the requirements of this Chapter. Such improvements shall be provided and developed in accordance with the conditions imposed as a condition of approval of the tentative map, in accordance with any agreement or bond made or entered into by the subdivider for that purpose, and in accordance with the standards and specifications set by administrative regulations and ordinances of the City of Carson applicable at the time of approval of the tentative map and to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works.

9206.2 Improvement and Site Development Plans.
Plans, profiles, and specifications for improvements other than street and highway improvements shall be submitted to the City Engineer not later than the time a tract map or parcel map is submitted for checking and certification. Such plans shall show all details of the proposed improvements needed for approval of the plans by the City Engineer. Such details may include requirements of other governmental bodies whose jurisdiction some portion of the plan may encompass.

Final plans must be approved by the City Engineer before a tract map or parcel map is transmitted to the City Council for approval if the subdivider applies for a reimbursement agreement, or if another governmental agency, whose approval of plans is necessary, will not approve preliminary plans.

Preliminary plans may be approved by the City Engineer when sufficient engineering data are furnished by the subdivider to demonstrate that the preliminary design meets the City’s standards and specifications, is practicable from a maintenance standpoint, and is consistent with sound engineering practices, and that the final plans will conform to the preliminary plans with only minor changes.

9206.3 Improvement Plans – Street and Highway.
Plans, profiles, and specifications for all street and highway improvements shall be subject to the approval of the Director of Public Works and/or the Superintendent of Streets. Such plans shall be furnished to the Director of Public Works not later than the time of submitting the tract map or parcel map to the City Engineer for checking and shall be subject to the approval of the Director of Public Works before any such map shall be certified by the City Engineer. Such plans, profiles, and specifications shall show full details of the proposed improvements and shall be in accordance with the standards and specifications of the City of Carson as adopted by the City Council. Such plans shall also include the design grade for an existing highway or for a future street, provided the Director of Public Works determines that such grade is necessary to properly locate slope and drainage easements, if any.

9206.4 Map Showing Structures.
If streets, highways, or other public ways are to be dedicated on a tract map or parcel map or by separate instrument prior to filing a parcel map and the subdivider is required to grade, pave, or install curbs, gutters, or sidewalks within such easements, the subdivider shall provide a copy of the tract map or parcel map, as the case may be, which delineates all structures within such easements, except publicly owned storm drains, water lines, sewers, and other drainage or sanitary facilities. Such maps shall be submitted to the Director of Public Works when highway improvement plans are submitted for approval.

9206.5 Major and Secondary Highway Improvements.
Each highway shall be improved by the subdivider with full width, grading, Portland cement concrete curb and gutter, Portland cement concrete sidewalk and/or parkway landscaping, full width roadway paving, street lights, installation of drainage facilities incidental thereto, street name signs and such other improvements for traffic control and drainage needs as are required for the appropriate development of the division of land. Traffic control improvements shall include, but not be limited to, traffic signals, street warning and safety signs and street striping. Drainage improvements shall include, but not be limited to, parkway drains, catch basins and other drainage appurtenances.

9206.6 Street Improvements.
Each street, whether public or private, shall be improved by the subdivider with full width grading, Portland cement concrete curb and gutter, Portland cement concrete sidewalk and/or parkway landscaping, full width roadway paving, street lights, installation of drainage facilities incidental thereto, street name signs and such other improvements for traffic control and drainage needs as are required for the appropriate development of the division of land. Traffic control improvements shall include, but not be limited to, traffic signals, street warning and safety signs and street striping. Drainage improvements shall include, but not be limited to, parkway drains, catch basins and other drainage appurtenances.

9206.7 Improvements to Existing Street or Highways Adjacent to the Division of Land.
If a portion of an existing street or highway constitutes any portion of the boundary of the division of land and such street or highway is unimproved, and the Advisory Agency determines that the improvements are for the general use of the lot owners in the division of land and for local neighborhood traffic and drainage needs, the Advisory Agency may require the subdivider to improve or agree to improve such street or highway as specified in CMC 9206.5 and 9206.6.

9206.8 Improvements to Existing Street or Highways within the Division of Land.
The Advisory Agency may require the reconstruction of an existing street or highway. Such reconstruction shall be in accordance with the improvement requirements specified in CMC 9206.5 and 9206.6.

9206.9 Improvements of Future Streets.
Except for full width grading, the subdivider shall not be required to improve streets or highways shown on a tract map or a parcel map as future streets.

9206.10 Temporary Improvements.
Temporary improvements may be required prior to, or concurrent with, permanent improvements. In such instances, the temporary improvements shall be installed in a manner approved by the City Engineer or Director of Public Works, whichever is appropriate.

9206.11 Protective Improvements.
The Advisory Agency may require such structures to be installed as are necessary for the proper functioning and maintenance of the improvements required to remove a flood or geological hazard and as are necessary for the protection of property adjacent to the division of land.

9206.12 Drainage Improvements.
The subdivider shall provide such drainage facilities as are considered necessary by the Advisory Agency for the drainage requirements of the division of land and for local neighborhood needs. Such facilities shall be constructed in accordance with standards and specifications approved by the City Engineer or Director of Public Works, whichever is appropriate.

9206.13 Fences or Walls Adjacent to Highways.
If lots in a division of land abut a highway or street and the Director of Public Works requires the subdivider to relinquish complete access rights to such highway or street a masonry wall as specified by the City may be required along the property line of the lots contiguous to the highway.

9206.14 Fencing of Watercourses or Drainage Facilities.
The subdivider shall provide a chain link fence or equivalent, not less than six (6) feet high, along each side of any portion of a dedicated right-of-way for any watercourse or drainage facility within a proposed division of land if the Advisory Agency finds that the location, shape, slope, width, velocity of water therein, or other characteristics of the watercourse or drainage facility makes the fencing of the right-of-way necessary for the protection of the general public. Such fencing shall have an adequate number of gates to facilitate cleaning and maintenance and shall not contain apertures below the fence in excess of four (4) inches vertical.

9206.15 Underground Utilities.
All new utility lines including, but not limited to, electrical power (other than major transmission lines), communications, street lighting, and cable television shall be placed underground in those zoning districts specified by the Zoning Ordinance. The subdivider shall be responsible for complying with the requirements of this Section and shall make the necessary arrangements with utility companies for the installation of such facilities. For the purpose of this Section, appurtenances and associated equipment such as, but not limited to, surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts in an underground system may be placed aboveground if properly screened pursuant to the Zoning Ordinance. The Advisory Agency may waive the requirements of this Section if topographical, soil, or other conditions make such underground installations unreasonable or impractical.

9206.16 Sanitary Sewers.
The Advisory Agency may require the subdivider to install sanitary sewers to serve each lot in a division of land. Such sewers shall be designed in accordance with the requirements of the City Engineer and the outlet to be used for the sewers shall be designated by the City Engineer.

9206.17 Sidewalks.
Concrete sidewalks shall not be less than five (5) feet wide for residential developments along all frontage where residential lots are adjacent to street right-of-way. Concrete sidewalks shall be full width walks for major and secondary highways and all industrial and commercial property adjacent to public right-of-way unless otherwise specified by the Advisory Agency. Tree well locations shall be as specified by the Director of Public Works and the Director of Parks and Recreation and shall be required when street trees are to be installed and sidewalks are adjacent to the curb.

Wheelchair ramps shall be provided at every new corner where curbs and gutter are to be constructed where the construction of sidewalk is proposed around said corner.

9206.18 Waiving of Sidewalks.
The construction of sidewalks may be waived where any one (1) or more of the following conditions exist and the Advisory Agency so finds:

a. The construction of sidewalks would be impractical because of topographic conditions or because of other physical obstacles.

b. Sidewalks will not be in keeping with neighborhood pattern.

c. The sidewalks will not be used by children in the general neighborhood as a route to or from schools or school bus stops.

d. Sidewalks are not needed in and will not benefit the area.

e. In the event that sidewalks are waived by the Advisory Agency, the property owner shall be required to turf or landscape and maintain said parkway to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works.

9206.19 Driveways.
The Director of Public Works shall approve all driveway locations. Driveways shall be of a type and construction required by the Director of Public Works. Driveway widths shall meet the minimum requirements specified by the Zoning Ordinance.

9206.20 Street Lighting System and Street Name Signs.
The subdivider shall provide a street lighting system and street name signs in each division of land to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works. Marbelite street light standards shall be specified for the street lighting system unless waived by the Advisory Agency if it would not be in keeping with the neighborhood pattern or if it would be impractical to underground existing overhead utilities and existing wood poles.

9206.21 Street Trees and Landscaping.
The subdivider of improved or unimproved land shall plant and install trees and/or landscaping and irrigation systems along all streets and highways in each division of land as per the General Plan. The type of species of such trees or landscaping shall be approved by the Parks and Recreation Director. A soils test may be required and recommendations from the Soils Testing Laboratory may be incorporated into the requirements for the subdivision. The locations of such trees and/or a landscaping shall be approved by the Parks and Recreation Director and the Director of Public Works. The requirements of this Section may be waived if the Advisory Agency finds that topographical, soil or other conditions make the planting of trees or landscaping unreasonable or impractical.

9206.22 Water Mains and Fire Hydrants.
The subdivider shall install or agree to install mains and fire hydrants in the division of land for the general use of the lot owners and for fire protection. The installation of such water mains and fire hydrants shall comply in all respects with all statutes, ordinances, rules, and regulations applicable to water mains and fire hydrants.

In the absence of such statutes, ordinances, rules, and regulations, required domestic water flows shall be determined by the City Engineer and required fire flows, duration of required fire flows, and fire hydrant type and location shall be determined by the Fire Chief.

Water mains and fire hydrants may be required on existing streets or highways adjacent to or within the division of land, provided the existing improvements are insufficient for the general use and/or fire protection of the lot owners.

9206.23 Improvement Agreement.
If a required improvement is not completed before a tract map or parcel map is filed, the subdivider shall enter, as contractor, into an agreement with the City to complete the improvement within the time specified in the agreement.

9206.24 Cost of Improvement.
Improvements required by this Chapter shall be installed and constructed by the subdivider at his expense, and shall not be paid for by any special assessment lien, tax, bonded indebtedness, or other charge against the land or real property within the division, except:

A. The cost of installing pipes and other facilities for the transmission of water may be paid for in whole or in part from revenues collected from the customers served at regular established water rates for the water company, pursuant to regulations of the Public Utilities Commission, where applicable, (or by a Public Agency defined in Section 4401 of the California Government Code) from the net operating income only, as payment of the sale of water thereto.

B. As provided in Sections 66483, 66485, and 66488 (Sewer and Drainage Reimbursement Contracts) of the California Government Code or other reimbursement enabling acts.

All outstanding or remaining assessments on the land of the division established for improvements constructed under special assessment district proceedings shall be paid by the subdivider.

Notwithstanding the foregoing, this Section shall not apply to property which is zoned MH-Manufacturing, Heavy in connection with division by parcel map. (Ord. 90-918, § 1)

9206.25 Supplemental Sewer or Drainage Improvements.
Sanitary sewer or drainage improvements installed by the subdivider for the benefit of the division of land may be required to contain supplemental size, capacity, length, depth, or number, or to be altered in location, for the benefit of property not within the division of land in order to facilitate the orderly development of the surrounding area in a manner consistent with the policies of the General Plan. Such improvements shall be dedicated to the public. The City Council shall enter into an agreement to provide for the payment of reimbursement to the subdivider and the collection of charges from the property benefited by the supplemental improvements, in conformance with applicable State laws.

PART 7. FEES – DEPOSITS – BONDS
Sections:

§ 9207.1    Environmental Assessment Review Fee.

§ 9207.2    Tentative Tract Map and Parcel Map Fee.

§ 9207.2.1    Relocation Impact Report.

§ 9207.3    Tract Maps, Parcel Maps, and Certificates of Compliance – Filing, Fee.

§ 9207.4    Tract Map – Processing Fee.

§ 9207.5    Parcel Map – Processing Fee.

§ 9207.6    Certificate of Compliance Processing Fee.

§ 9207.7    Plan Checking Fees.

§ 9207.8    Inspection Deposits.

§ 9207.9    Inspection Deposits – Insufficient.

§ 9207.10    Inspection Deposits – Refunds.

§ 9207.11    Improvement Securities.

§ 9207.12    Improvement Security – Water Mains.

§ 9207.13    Improvement Securities – Amount and Purpose.

§ 9207.14    Improvement Security – Types Permitted.

§ 9207.15    Improvement Securities – Approval and Acceptance.

§ 9207.16    Improvement Securities – Reduction.

§ 9207.17    Improvement Securities – Forfeiture on Failure to Complete.

§ 9207.18    Faithful Performance Security – Monuments.

§ 9207.19    Repealed.

§ 9207.20    Repealed.

§ 9207.21    Repealed.

§ 9207.22    Repealed.

§ 9207.23    Repealed.

§ 9207.24    Repealed.

§ 9207.25    Repealed.

§ 9207.26    Minor Lot Line Adjustments.

§ 9207.27    Merger of Contiguous Parcels.

§ 9207.28    Merger of Parcels Requested by Subdivider.

§ 9207.29    Reserved.

§ 9207.30    Reserved.

9207.1 Environmental Assessment Review Fee.
An Environmental Assessment Form shall be completed by the applicant and filed with a fee in an amount established by a resolution of the City Council to the Department of Community Development. (Ord. 91-954, § 1)

9207.2 Tentative Tract Map and Parcel Map Fee.
Upon submission of a tentative map, the subdivider shall pay a fee in an amount established by a resolution of the City Council to the Department of Community Development.

If a subdivider submits a reviewed tentative map subsequent to the approval of a tentative map as a substitute for the approved tentative map, he shall pay a revised map fee equal to the original filing fee. This fee shall be in addition to the fees previously paid. (Ord. 82-626; Ord. 91-954, § 2)

9207.2.1 Relocation Impact Report.
Upon submission of an application for a relocation impact report, or modification or extension of time, the applicant shall pay a fee in an amount established by a resolution of the City Council to the Department of Community Development. (Ord. 82-618, § 5; Ord. 91-954, § 3)

9207.3 Tract Maps, Parcel Maps, and Certificates of Compliance – Filing, Fee.
Upon submission of a tract map, parcel map or Certificate of Compliance, the subdivider shall deposit with the County Engineer a sum of money equal to the amount required by law for filing the map or recording the Certificate, which money shall be deposited in a trust fund for that purpose until the map is filed or the certificate is recorded. If the subdivider abandons his intention to cause the map to be filed or the certificate to be recorded, and so notifies the County Engineer in writing, the deposit may be returned to the subdivider.

9207.4 Tract Map – Processing Fee.
Upon submission of a tract map for checking, the subdivider shall pay a map processing fee to the City Engineer in addition to all other fees and charges required by law. This fee shall be equal to the fee established by the County of Los Angeles for processing final tract maps.

9207.5 Parcel Map – Processing Fee.
Upon submission of a parcel map for checking, the subdivider shall pay a map processing fee to the City Engineer in addition to all other fees and charges required by law. This fee shall be equal to the fee established by the County of Los Angeles for processing final parcel maps.

9207.6 Certificate of Compliance Processing Fee.
Upon submission of a Certificate of Compliance for processing, the subdivider shall pay a processing fee in an amount established by a resolution of the City Council to the Department of Community Development, in addition to all other fees and charges required by law for each Certificate of Compliance. (Ord. 91-954, § 4)

9207.7 Plan Checking Fees.
A subdivider shall pay to the City a fee equal to the cost of checking the improvement plans. Upon submission of plans to the City, the subdivider shall deposit an amount estimated by the appropriate City Officer to be adequate to cover the cost of checking the plans. If, at any time, subsequent to making the deposit, the actual funds expended exceed the amount of the deposit, the subdivider shall make an additional payment equal to the deficiency. Excess deposits if any, shall be returned to the subdivider after completion of plan checking.

9207.8 Inspection Deposits.
Before commencing construction or installation of a required improvement, the subdivider shall deposit with the City, for the inspection of such improvements, a sum estimated by the appropriate City Officer to be adequate to cover the actual cost of inspection.

9207.9 Inspection Deposits – Insufficient.
If a deposit made pursuant to CMC 9207.8 is insufficient to pay all of the costs of inspection, the subdivider, upon demand of the City, shall pay to the City an amount equal to the deficiency. Until such deficiency is paid in full, the improvements for which the insufficient deposit was made shall be considered incomplete.

9207.10 Inspection Deposits – Refunds.
If the actual cost of inspection is less than the amount deposited, the City shall refund to the applicant any amount still remaining.

9207.11 Improvement Securities.
Except as provided in CMC 9207.12, the improvement agreement required by CMC 9206.24 shall be secured by an improvement security.

9207.12 Improvement Security – Water Mains.
If a subdivider shows that, to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, he has entered into a contract with a water utility to construct water mains, which contract makes the City of Carson a party thereto and provides that the contract may not be modified or rescinded without the consent of the City, except as required by the Public Utilities Commission, and has deposited with the water utility security for the payment of the water utility which the City Engineer finds adequate, the subdivider need not accompany an agreement to install water mains with an improvement security.

9207.13 Improvement Securities – Amount and Purpose.
An improvement security shall be for the following amounts:

a. An amount estimated by the inspecting officer to be equal to the cost of improvements covered by the security, guaranteeing the faithful performance of the improvement work plus an amount estimated by the inspecting officer to be necessary for the guarantee and warranty of the work for a period of one (1) year following the completion and acceptance thereof against any defective work or labor done, or defective materials furnished.

b. An amount estimated by the inspecting officer to be equal to fifty (50) percent of the cost of the improvements covered by the security, securing payment to contractors and subcontractors and to all persons renting equipment or furnishing labor or materials to them.

9207.14 Improvement Security – Types Permitted.
The following shall govern the types of improvement security that may be submitted:

a. When the amount of the improvement security is equal to or less than $10,000 a deposit with the City of cash or cashier’s check, passbook accounts, or certificate of deposit shall be submitted.

b. When the amount of the improvement security is equal to or less than $20,000 but more than $10,000, the improvement security shall be either of the following:

1. An improvement security of a type listed in (a) above in the exact amount of improvement security needed for the improvement, or

2. A bond or bonds issued by a surety company authorized to write the same in the State of California and the County of Los Angeles in an amount not less than $20,000.

c. When the amount of the improvement security is more than $20,000 a bond or bonds issued by a surety company authorized to write the same in the State of California and the County of Los Angeles may be submitted or an improvement security of a type listed in (a) above may be submitted.

d. When a bond is required in connection with a tract map or parcel map, a promissory note or agreement secured by a deed of trust of which the City is the beneficiary may be accepted in lieu of a surety bond, subject to the prior approval of the City Attorney and City Council in every case. (Ord. 82-601, § 7; Ord. 93-1009, § 2)

9207.15 Improvement Securities – Approval and Acceptance.
Each improvement security shall be subject to approval of the City Attorney and acceptance by the City Council.

9207.16 Improvement Securities – Reduction.
When a portion of an improvement has been fully completed, the inspecting officer may, at his discretion, recommend to the City Council a reduction in an improvement security given for faithful performance equal to the estimated cost of the completed portion of the improvement.

9207.17 Improvement Securities – Forfeiture on Failure to Complete.
Upon the failure of a subdivider to complete an improvement within the time specified in an agreement, the City Council may, upon notice in writing of not less than ten (10) days served upon the person, firm, or corporation signing the contract or upon notice in writing of not less than twenty (20) days served by certified mail, addressed to the last known address of the person, firm, or corporation signing the contract, determine that the improvement work or any part thereof is incomplete and may cause to be forfeited to the City the portion of the sum of money or bonds given for the faithful performance of the work or may cash savings and loan certificates or shares deposited and assigned to assure the faithful performance of the work to complete the improvement work.

9207.18 Faithful Performance Security – Monuments.
The agreement referred to in CMC 9204.32 shall be accompanied by an improvement security of a type listed in CMC 9207.14(a) guaranteeing the faithful performance of the agreement in an amount estimated by the City Engineer to be not less than the cost of setting monuments and furnishing notes.

9207.19 Repealed.
Repealed by Ord. 19-1927. (Ord. 83-647, § 3; Ord. 94-1048U, § 1; Ord. 94-1048, § 1)

9207.20 Repealed.
Repealed by Ord. 94-1048. (Ord. 83-647, §§ 4 – 8)

9207.21 Repealed.
Repealed by Ord. 94-1048. (Ord. 83-647, §§ 4 – 8)

9207.22 Repealed.
Repealed by Ord. 94-1048. (Ord. 83-647, §§ 4 – 8)

9207.23 Repealed.
Repealed by Ord. 94-1048. (Ord. 83-647, §§ 4 – 8)

9207.24 Repealed.
Repealed by Ord. 94-1048. (Ord. 83-647, §§ 4 – 8)

9207.25 Repealed.
Repealed by Ord. 94-1048. (Ord. 83-647, §§ 4 – 8)

9207.26 Minor Lot Line Adjustments.
Minor lot line adjustments shall be processed and approved in accordance with the terms and provisions of this Section. Applications for minor lot line adjustments shall be submitted to the Community Development Department on such forms and attachments as may reasonably be required by the Department. The Director shall approve lot line adjustments between two (2) or more existing adjacent parcels where:

a. Land taken from one (1) parcel is added to an adjacent parcel or parcels;

b. A greater number of parcels than originally existed is not thereby created; and

c. The lot line adjustments complies to all applicable codes of the City.

The decision of the Director shall become effective and final fifteen (15) days after the date of the notice of decision unless an appeal is filed in accordance with CMC 9173.4. (Ord. 85-714, § 2)

9207.27 Merger of Contiguous Parcels.
(a) Pursuant to Section 66451.11 of the Subdivision Map Act, the City may merge a parcel with a contiguous parcel held by the same owner if the City causes to be recorded with the County Recorder a notice of merger, if any one (1) of the contiguous parcels held by the same owner does not conform to standards for minimum parcel size, and if the following requirements are satisfied:

(1) At least one (1) of the affected parcels is undeveloped by any structure for which a building permit was issued or for which a building permit was not required at the time of construction, or is developed only with an accessory structure or accessory structures, or is developed with a single structure, other than an accessory structure, that is also partially located on a contiguous parcel or unit;

(2) With respect to any affected parcel, at least one (1) of the following conditions exists:

a. The parcel comprises less than five thousand (5,000) square feet in area at the time of the determination of merger.

b. The parcel was not created in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances in effect at the time of its creation.

c. The parcel does not meet current standards for sewage disposal and domestic water supply.

d. The parcel does not meet slope stability standards.

e. The parcel has no legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety equipment access and maneuverability.

f. The parcel’s development if not merged with another parcel would create health or safety hazards.

g. The parcel is inconsistent with the applicable general plan and any applicable specific plan, other than minimum lot size or density standards.

(b) Prior to recording a notice of merger, the property owner shall be mailed by certified mail a notice of intention to determine status. The notice of intention shall be recorded with the County Recorder on the same date. The notice of intention shall state that the affected parcels may be merged and advise the owner that he has thirty (30) days within which to request a hearing on determination of status and that at such hearing he will be given the opportunity to present evidence that the property does not meet the criteria for merger. Upon receiving a request for a hearing, the Director shall set a time, date and place for a hearing to be conducted by the Commission and shall notify the property owner by certified mail. Unless otherwise agreed to by the Director and the property owner, the hearing shall be conducted within sixty (60) days following receipt by the City of such request. The property owner shall be given the opportunity to present any evidence that the affected property does not meet the standards for merger.

(c) At the conclusion of the hearing, the Commission shall make a determination that the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged and shall so notify the property owner. A determination of nonmerger may be made whether or not the affected parcels meet the standards of this Section.

(d) The decision of the Commission shall become effective and final fifteen (15) days after the date of its action unless an appeal is filed in accordance with CMC 9173.4. An appeal shall be considered by the Council as provided in CMC 9173.4.

(e) If the owner does not request a hearing within thirty (30) days as provided in this Section, the City may then make a determination that the parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged.

(f) A determination of merger shall be recorded with the county recorder within ninety (90) days of such determination if there is no hearing, or if a hearing is held, within thirty (30) days after the City’s decision becomes final. (Ord. 87-788, § 1)

9207.28 Merger of Parcels Requested by Subdivider.
(a) Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 9207.27, four (4) or fewer contiguous parcels may be merged without reverting to acreage upon request by the property owner. Such merger shall be authorized if the following conditions are met:

(1) The applicant is the owner of the contiguous parcels which are sought to be merged;

(2) The applicant submits a plat map showing sufficient mathematical and survey information to adequately establish the boundaries of the division of land and each parcel thereof to the satisfaction of the Director; and

(3) An application is submitted to the Community Development Department on such forms and attachments as may reasonably be required by the Director.

(b) The Director shall approve such merger of parcels if the conditions set forth in this Section are met and the merger complies with all provisions of the Carson Municipal Code. Conditions related to the merger may be imposed as deemed necessary to carry out the intent of this Chapter and to protect the public health, safety and general welfare. A Certificate of Compliance shall be recorded if the merger of parcels is approved pursuant to this Section. (Ord. 87-788, § 2)

9207.29 Reserved.
9207.30 Reserved.
PART 8. VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS
Sections:

§ 9208.1    Purpose and Intent.

§ 9208.2    Consistency Requirement.

§ 9208.3    Definition of Vesting Tentative Map.

§ 9208.4    Application.

§ 9208.5    Filing and Processing.

§ 9208.6    Fees.

§ 9208.7    Condition Precedent to Approval.

§ 9208.8    Expiration.

§ 9208.9    Vested Rights Created by Approval of Vesting Tentative Map.

§ 9208.9.1    Amendment to Vesting Tentative Map.

§ 9208.10    Applications Inconsistent with Established Policies.

§ 9208.11    Subsequent Permits, Licenses, and Other Entitlements for Use.

9208.1 Purpose and Intent.
The purpose of this Part is to establish procedures for the implementation of Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 66498.1) of Division 2 of Title 7 of the Government Code of the State of California which provides for the approval of vesting tentative maps. Except as otherwise specifically provided by this Part, the provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the filing, processing and review of vesting tentative maps as said term is defined by Section 66424.5 of the Government Code and CMC 9208.3. (Ord. 85-730U, § 1)

9208.2 Consistency Requirement.
The approval of a vesting tentative map shall be consistent with the General Plan, any applicable specific plan, the Zoning Ordinance, and any other applicable provision of this Code in effect at the time provided by CMC 9208.9(a). (Ord. 85-730U, § 1)

9208.3 Definition of Vesting Tentative Map.
A “vesting tentative map” shall mean a tentative map for a subdivision, as defined in this Chapter, that shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words “Vesting Tentative Map” at the time it is filed in accordance with CMC 9208.4, and is thereafter processed in accordance with the provisions of this Part and the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 85-730U, § 1; Ord. 90-910, § 1)

9208.4 Application.
(a) Whenever a provision of the Subdivision Map Act or this Title requires the filing of a tentative map or tentative parcel map for a subdivision, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed, in accordance with the provisions of this Part.

(b) If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by Chapter 4.5 of Division 2 of Title 7 of the Government Code and this Part, the filing of a vesting tentative map shall not be a prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision, permit for construction, or work preparatory to construction. (Ord. 85-730U, § 1; Ord. 90-910, § 1)

9208.5 Filing and Processing.
A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form, have the same contents, and provide the same information and shall be processed in the same manner as set forth in this Chapter for a tentative map except as hereinafter provided:

(a) At the time a vesting tentative map is filed it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words “Vesting Tentative Map.”

(b) The application for a vesting tentative map shall describe the manner in which the subdivision is proposed to be developed, including but not limited to the height, size and location of all buildings and other improvements.

(c) A vesting tentative map shall not be accepted for filing unless all other discretionary land use approvals required for the proposed development, except for site plan and design review, have been obtained or applications therefor are filed concurrently with such map.

(d) Whenever a subdivider files a vesting tentative map for a subdivision whose intended development is inconsistent with the Zoning Ordinance in existence at the time of filing, such inconsistency shall be noted on the map. (Ord. 85-730U, § 1)

9208.6 Fees.
Upon filing a vesting tentative map, the subdivider shall pay the fees required for the filing and processing of a tentative map. (Ord. 85-730U, § 1)

9208.7 Condition Precedent to Approval.
A vesting tentative map shall not be approved unless all other discretionary land use approvals required for the proposed development have been obtained except for site plan and design review. (Ord. 85-730U, § 1)

9208.8 Expiration.
The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall expire at the end of the same time period and shall be subject to the same extensions established by this Chapter for the expiration of the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map. (Ord. 85-730U, § 1)

9208.9 Vested Rights Created by Approval of Vesting Tentative Map.
(a) Subject to the time limits established by subsection (c) of this Section, the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies, and standards described in Government Code Section 66474.2. If Section 66474.2 of the Government Code is repealed, however, the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies, and standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative map is approved or conditionally approved subject to the time limits established by subsection (c) of this Section.

(b) Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this Section, a permit, approval, extension, or entitlement may be made conditional or denied even though such action may be contrary to the ordinances, policies, and standards described in subsection (a) if any of the following are determined:

(1) A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both.

(2) The condition or denial is required in order to comply with State or Federal law.

(c) The rights referred to in subsection (a) of this Section shall expire if a final map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map as provided in CMC 9208.8. If the final map is timely approved, such rights shall exist for the following periods of time:

(1) An initial time period of one (1) year after the recording of the final map. Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, this initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded.

(2) The initial time period set forth in subsection (c)(1) of this Section shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for site plan and design review, if such processing exceeds thirty (30) days from the date a complete application is filed.

(3) The subdivider may apply to the Planning Commission for a one (1) year extension at any time before the expiration of the initial time period set forth in subsection (c)(1) of this Section. If the extension is denied, the subdivider may appeal that denial to the City Council within fifteen (15) days thereafter.

(4) If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time specified in subsections (c)(1) through (c)(3) of this Section, the rights referred to herein shall continue to exist until the expiration of such permit, or any extension thereof. (Ord. 85-730U, § 1)

9208.9.1 Amendment to Vesting Tentative Map.
Any time prior to the expiration of a vesting tentative map, the subdivider, or his or her assignee, may apply for an amendment to such map. A public hearing shall be held by the Planning Commission on any amendment involving a substantial modification to the subject subdivision or development related thereto. The Planning Commission may approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the proposed amendment. The decision by the Planning Commission on the requested amendment shall be appealable to the City Council in the manner provided by CMC 9173.4. (Ord. 85-730U, § 1)

9208.10 Applications Inconsistent with Established Policies.
Notwithstanding any provision of this Part, a property owner or his or her designee may seek approvals or permits for development which depart from the ordinances, policies, and standards described in CMC 9208.9(a), and the City may grant such approvals or issue such permits to the extent that the departures are authorized under applicable law. (Ord. 85-730U, § 1)

9208.11 Subsequent Permits, Licenses, and Other Entitlements for Use.
The provisions of this Part shall not be construed to prevent the City from conditionally approving or denying any permit, license, or other entitlement for use which is applied for by the subdivider after the approval of a vesting tentative map provided such conditional approval or denial is made in accordance with the ordinances, policies and standards described in CMC 9208.9(a). (Ord. 85-730U, § 1)

PART 9. MOBILEHOME PARK RESIDENTIAL CONVERSIONS
Sections:

§ 9209.1    Purpose.

§ 9209.2    Applicability.

§ 9209.3    Application Requirements.

§ 9209.4    Tenant Notification.

§ 9209.5    Tentative Map and Preliminary Parcel Map Approval.

§ 9209.6    Effective Date of Decision and Appeals.

9209.1 Purpose.
The purpose of these provisions is to promote greater individual choice in type, quality, price and location of housing; to provide for the housing needs of all segments of the population; to provide increased homeownership opportunities for all segments of the population; to mitigate the hardship caused by displacement of tenants, particularly those in low to moderate cost housing and those who are elderly, families with minor dependent children, the handicapped and the disabled; to promote the safety of conversion projects and correction of Building Code violations in such projects; to provide adequate off-street parking; to encourage construction of new rental units to replace units lost due to conversions; to protect the existing rental housing stock by reducing conversions; to ensure that conversions of mobilehome parks to resident ownership are bona fide resident conversions in accordance with state law; and to generally regulate projects in accordance with applicable general and specific plans and with the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 06-1358, § 1; Ord. 08-1401, § 1)

9209.2 Applicability.
The provisions of this Part shall apply to all mobilehome park conversions and all tentative maps and preliminary parcel maps submitted for consideration subsequent to the date upon which the ordinance codified in this Part becomes effective. (Ord. 06-1358, § 1)

9209.3 Application Requirements.
A. Compliance with Law. A conversion project shall comply with the Division of Land regulations in Chapter 2 of Article IX of the Carson Municipal Code, the provisions of this Part, and local ordinances and other applicable State laws such as Government Code Sections 66427.5 and/or 66428.1.

B. Information Required. In addition to the information required by other applicable sections of this Code and other applicable law, the following information shall be submitted at the time of filing:

1. Building Plans. Building plans or other documents containing the following information pertaining to the project and certified as to its accuracy by a licensed engineer:

(a) A description of the features of the type of common area building and project, including age, type of construction, number of dwelling units, excluding manufactured housing units; and

(b) A site plan, including common area buildings, structures, open spaces, and accessory storage areas and buildings including trash storage areas, and the footprint of each manufactured housing unit and other dwelling unit (if applicable); and

(c) A parking plan, including the total number of spaces actually provided and the total number required at the time of the original entitlement of the mobilehome park if different from that actually provided; dimensions of stalls, aisles and driveways; locations of columns, walls and other obstructions; and total number of covered and uncovered parking spaces and location and number of guest parking spaces; and

(d) A phase I and, if indicated from the phase I report, a phase II environmental report; and

(e) A soils report, if that same is required by the County of Los Angeles or indicated from the phase I report; and

(f) A Department of Real Estate budget (Form No. 623, as the same may be modified from time to time), which includes, but is not limited to, information regarding: (i) the condition of park infrastructure and common facilities and the necessity for any replacements of infrastructure and common area facilities or major repairs estimated for the remaining useful life; (ii) building component reports indicating conditions and estimated remaining useful life of the roof, foundation, plumbing, electrical, heating, air conditioning, other mechanical and structural systems, prepared by a registered civil or structural engineer, licensed general building contractor, licensed general engineering contractor or architect; (iii) a reserve study estimating the cost of replacing all these facilities over their useful life and a plan that provides adequate funding for same; and (iv) an estimate of the cost of all overhead and operating costs of maintaining the park, including, but not limited to, maintaining the park’s open space areas over the next thirty (30) years; and

(g) Floor and elevation plans, including indications of common and private areas (excluding manufactured housing units) and required exits; and

(h) All existing building inspection reports (if any such report has already been submitted to the California Department of Real Estate, a copy of such report shall be furnished to the City); and

(i) A structural pest control report, prepared by a licensed pest control contractor for all common areas; and

(j) A utility report, if the spaces within a park are not individually metered, confirming (i) the existence of adequate utility services, and (ii) indicating the feasibility of individual or submetering, prepared by qualified engineers; and

(k) All legal documents confirming the legal status of the park, including, but not limited to, documents (i) prepared for and defining the powers and duties of the proposed homeowners’ association, including articles of incorporation, bylaws, and conditions, covenants and restrictions; and (ii) any notice(s) from the Department of Housing and Community Development of claimed violations; and (iii) a general title report.

2. Tenant Impact Report. The tenant impact report shall include all information required by State law or by the provisions of this Part, including the following:

(a) Identify the anticipated timetable for compliance with Government Code Section 66427.5(a); and

(b) Identify the method and anticipated timetable for making rent determinations required by Government Code Section 66427.5(f)(1); and

(c) Identify the number of tenants likely to be determined to be subject to Government Code Section 66427.5(f)(1); and

(d) Upon conversion, identify the number of tenants likely to be determined to be subject to Government Code Section 66427.5(f)(1) during the period within five (5) years following conversion; and

(e) Upon conversion, identify the number of tenants likely to be determined to be subject to Government Code Section 66427.5(f)(2); and

(f) Upon conversion, and during the period within five (5) years following conversion, identify the number of tenants likely to be determined to be subject to Government Code Section 66427.5(f)(2); and

(g) Include an analysis of the then-feasible mitigation measures to mitigate adverse impacts of the conversion on the ability of the mobilehome park residents, if such residents so choose, to find adequate comparable replacement space in a mobilehome park. The mitigation measures shall include all measures appropriate to assure that residents: (i) are not displaced by being given a reasonable opportunity to purchase in the park; or (ii) if displaced, through relocation assistance services, are substantially likely to be relocated to a comparable mobilehome park; and

(h) Include a survey of resident support meeting the requirements of Government Code Section 66427.5; provided, that the agreement between the subdivider and a resident homeowners’ association shall be subject to reasonable review by the City prior to approval by any resident homeowners’ association; and

(i) Include an analysis of how the subdivider will avoid the displacement of nonpurchasing tenants by providing the phased increase to market rent as outlined in Government Code Section 66427.5, and include the same in its tenant notice; and

(j) Include a showing that any assistance being provided to tenants to assist with housing purchase and the extent to which such assistance will be likely to permit purchase by eligible tenants, including, as applicable, assistance from private and public sources, including Federal and State. The subdivider shall meet with the City’s Redevelopment Agency staff and/or Housing Division staff to determine the resources in any public housing funding which may be set aside to assist in purchase, including the conditions of such assistance and which tenants can qualify and include this information in the report.

3. Resident Information. The following information shall be requested, but cannot be required, for all existing residents:

(a) Name and address of each resident; and

(b) Household size and total number of project occupants; and

(c) Consistent with Government Code Section 66427.5(f)(2), the subdivider shall provide a rent schedule for four (4) years preceding the application date and relocation assistance plan, if any, or if required by law; and

(d) Information concerning the number of residents in the park who are moderate-income, low-income, and very low-income persons as defined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development; and

(e) Information concerning the number of residents in the park who are disabled or handicapped; and

(f) Information concerning the number of the residents in the park who are senior citizens as defined by law.

4. Required Submittals and Notices. No application for tentative map or preliminary parcel map approval of a residential conversion project or a residential-to-other-use conversion project shall be accepted until the filing of the tenant impact report as required in subsection (B)(2)(g) of this Section and without adequate evidence from the subdivider that each resident of the project has received notice of the application as of the date of application and notice of the relocation assistance provisions of CMC 9209.4. Any person who becomes a resident of a residential rental unit proposed for conversion project after the date of such application shall be given written notice by the subdivider of the pendency of such application prior to entering into any written or oral rental agreement. (Ord. 06-1358, § 1; Ord. 08-1401, § 2; Ord. 11-1468, §§ 1, 2)

9209.4 Tenant Notification.
A. Notice of Tenant Impact Report. The subdivider shall give existing residents a copy of the tenant impact report within fifteen (15) days of the completion of such report, but not later than fifteen (15) days before the first public hearing pursuant to CMC 9209.5, and shall also provide a copy to new or prospective residents prior to acquiring their interest after the initial distribution of such report.

B. Notification of Exclusive Right to Purchase. In addition to all notification requirements by other provisions of State law, and by other applicable law, the subdivider shall give each resident of any proposed residential conversion project written notice of an exclusive right to contract for the purchase of the dwelling unit occupied by the tenant or purchase of a share in the corporation entitling the shareholder to enjoy exclusive occupancy of the unit upon the same or more favorable terms and conditions than those on which such unit or share will be initially offered to the general public. The right shall run for a period of not less than ninety (90) days from the issuance of the subdivision public report pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Section 11018.2, unless the subdivider receives prior written notice of the resident’s intention not to exercise such right.

C. Residential Conversion Project – Notification of Right to Continue Residency as a Resident. In addition to all notification requirements by other provisions of this Code and by other applicable law, the subdivider shall give each resident of any proposed residential conversion project written notice of the right to continue residency as a tenant in the park as required by Government Code Section 66427.5(a). (Ord. 06-1358, § 1)

9209.5 Tentative Map and Preliminary Parcel Map Approval.
A. Maps Subject to General and Specific Plans and City Ordinances and Applicable Law. All tentative maps and preliminary parcel maps filed in connection with residential conversion projects shall be subject to the Division of Land Regulations contained in Chapter 2 of Article IX of the Carson Municipal Code, except as herein otherwise provided, all City ordinances and other applicable law. All such maps shall be subject to the general plan and any applicable specific plan. Pursuant to Government Code Sections 66427.5(e) and 66474, the Planning Commission and/or City Council are authorized to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove a map. The Planning Commission and/or City Council may impose such other conditions in excess of those provided in this Part as are reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare.

B. Inconsistent with General or Specific Plans. The Planning Commission and/or City Council shall disapprove a tentative map or preliminary parcel map for a residential conversion project as required in the City’s Division of Land Regulations contained in Chapter 2 of Article IX of the Carson Municipal Code and Government Code Section 66474.

C. Inconsistent with Zoning and Land Pattern. The Planning Commission and/or City Council shall disapprove a tentative map or preliminary parcel map for a residential conversion project where the conversion would be inconsistent with either the existing zoning pattern or land use pattern, unless it finds that there are special circumstances which justify approval of the map. Such circumstances may exist only with respect to the following facts: (i) the prevailing pattern of residential and other land use in the vicinity of the project site; and (ii) the existing and anticipated need for other use development in the planning area in which the project is located.

D. Violations of Code. The Planning Commission and/or City Council shall disapprove a tentative map or preliminary parcel map for a residential conversion project if it finds that there are uncorrected violations of this Code, or that the conversion plan will not protect the health and safety and general welfare of residents, and that an adequate plan to correct such violations or to correct the factors adversely affecting health and safety has not been developed or accomplished.

E. Inadequate Tenant Impact Report. The Planning Commission and/or City Council shall disapprove a tentative map or preliminary parcel map for a residential conversion project if it finds that the tenant impact report is inadequate under the terms of Government Code Section 66427.5 or the provisions of this Part. (Ord. 06-1358, § 1)

9209.6 Effective Date of Decision and Appeals.
The decision of the Planning Commission shall become effective and final fifteen (15) days after the date of its decision unless an appeal is filed in accordance with CMC 9173.4. An appeal shall be considered by the Council as provided in CMC 9173.4. (Ord. 06-1358, § 1)

CHAPTER 3
STANDARDS AND CRITERIA FOR RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUMS
Sections:

§ 9300    Definitions.

§ 9301    Intent and Purpose of This Chapter.

§ 9302    Zoning and Conditional Use Permits Required.

§ 9303    Application for Conditional Use Permit.

§ 9304    Condominium Development Policy.

§ 9305    Condominium Development Standards.

§ 9306    Condominium Development Criteria.

§ 9307    Declaration of Covenants – Conditions and Restrictions.

§ 9308    Severability.

9300 Definitions.
a. “City” shall mean the City of Carson.

b. “Condominium Plan” shall mean a plan consisting of a description or survey map of the surface of the land in the Project, a diagram showing the dimensions and locations of the units and a certificate acknowledging the intent to create a condominium project and consenting to the recordation of such a plan pursuant to local ordinance and Title 6, Part 4, Division 11 (§ 1350 et seq.) of the California Civil Code by the record owner of the property and all record holders of security interests therein.

c. “Project Elements” shall mean the condominium units which are to be conveyed, the areas and spaces which are to be assigned to such units and the Common Areas which are to be shared by the owners of all units. Such elements constitute the totality of the condominium project and are enumerated in a formal declaration or statement within the condominium documents that includes the incidents of the condominium grant. Such enumerative description may contain irrevocable limitations on the use of the Project Elements which are not appropriate for the Declaration of Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions.

d. “Residential Condominium” shall mean an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together with a separate interest in space in a complex devoted to residential purposes located on such real property. A residential condominium may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of such real property. Such estate may, with respect to the duration of its enjoyment, be either (i) an estate of inheritance or perpetual estate, (ii) an estate for life, or (iii) an estate for years, such as a leasehold or a subleasehold. A residential condominium is a unique land use which has many similarities to the ownership of a single-family dwelling, except that it is usually marked by higher urban densities, contiguity of living units, and the aforementioned common interest in the parcel of real property on which it is situated.

e. “Residential Condominium Common Area” or “Common Area” shall mean the entire project excepting all units granted or reserved.

f. “Residential Condominium Documents” or “Condominium Documents” shall mean the Declaration of Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions (“The Declaration”), the description of Project Elements, the Condominiums Plan establishing a plan for residential condominium ownership and the Articles of Incorporation and By-Laws of the association of the owners.

g. “Residential Condominium Owner” or “Owners” shall mean the owner of a residential condominium.

h. “Residential Condominium Project” or “Project” shall mean the entire parcel of real property divided or to be divided into condominiums including all structures located or to be located on such real property.

i. “Residential Condominium Unit” or “Unit” shall mean the elements of a residential condominium which are not owned in common with the owners of other condominiums in the project.

j. “Condominium” whenever used in this Chapter shall refer to a residential condominium as defined in subsection d of this Section. (Ord. 74-306, § 1)

9301 Intent and Purpose of This Chapter.
Residential condominium projects may require that numbers of householders, with vested ownership in their respective dwelling units, live in close proximity to one another. Condominium projects also require that such owners be bound together in an association which is responsible for the maintenance, management and possible reconstruction of improvements within the common area of the Project. This mix of individual and common ownership is different from conventional and familiar patterns of housing in the City. The unique status of residential condominium projects tends to magnify the effects associated with higher urban densities to the point where they may lead to conditions of mismanagement, neglect and blight that impact upon the public health, safety, welfare and economic prosperity of the larger community. To ensure that such problems are avoided in both the short and long term, it is the express intent of the City to treat residential condominiums differently from apartments and other like structures. Pursuant to such intent and in order to provide guidance in the consideration of proposed condominium projects, the purposes of this Chapter are as follows:

a. To ensure that the significance of the fragmented pattern of condominium ownership with respect to long-range planning, unforeseen change, and maintenance of the City’s housing stock is not superficially discounted in favor of short-term and expedient financial considerations;

b. To establish reasonable procedures for the dissolution of the condominium and demolition of the structures at the end of their economic, functional or physical life and thus obviate conditions of residential obsoleteness and blight and their pernicious effects upon both immediate occupants and the larger community;

c. To ensure that the potentially deleterious effects resulting from a lack of continuous and centralized management do not impact upon the public health, safety and welfare and, at the same time, ensure that there is democratic and effective management of the project that does not allow, over time, a majority of the unit owners to effectively contravene the initial commitments made to the project at the time of its inception and thus undercut the good faith of any minority of unit owners;

d. To ensure that the project developer provides adequate private outdoor living space, storage space and parking space to meet the expectations and changing needs of property owners over a long period of time;

e. To ensure that the project developer is attentive to the performance characteristics of the structure and mitigates such problems as vibration and noise transmission which may not be apparent to the buyer without living in the unit but which, if not adequately attenuated, may nevertheless render the living environment within the project undesirable and the transfer of unit ownership difficult;

f. To ensure that the project developer uses contemporary and environmentally sensitive concepts of site planning and architectural design in the creation of the project and to ensure that the project, once completed, maintains its integrity over time not only to preserve the long-term financial commitment of the unit owner, but to optimize the utilitarian and aesthetic qualities that make the project a viable home for him in the future;

g. To ensure that when appropriate governmental entities have the right to enter into specified areas of the project to protect the public health, safety and welfare and preserve the public peace. Ord. 74-306, § 1)

9302 Zoning and Conditional Use Permits Required.
a. No residential condominium shall be permitted in any zone unless such zone permits such usage and unless and until a conditional use permit is obtained therefor.

b. Existing residential condominiums, which do not comply with the provisions of CMC 9304, 9305, 9306 and 9307, shall be nonconforming uses and shall be allowed to continue operation subject to the provisions of subsection c of this Section.

c. Except for strictly interior modifications to individual condominium units, no structural or architectural alterations, except incidental maintenance, shall be made to any existing residential condominium or its common areas within the City, unless and until a conditional use permit is obtained therefor. An applicant seeking a conditional use permit in order to make structural or architectural alterations to an existing condominium shall not arbitrarily or unreasonably be denied a conditional use permit where compliance with the provisions of CMC 9304, 9305, 9306 and 9307 would impose a cost or other hardship disproportionate to the proposed structural or architectural alteration; provided, that the applicant is making reasonable efforts to conform to those provisions and the purposes delineated in CMC 9301.

d. No conditional use permits shall be granted pursuant to this Chapter for a condominium development, unless the obligation for care, upkeep, and management of the common element is imposed on a nonprofit corporation. (Ord. 74-306, § 1)

9303 Application for Conditional Use Permit.
The application for a conditional use permit for a proposed condominium project shall include the following information in copies which the Community Development Department determines to be sufficient for its staff and the Planning Commission to evaluate the project:

a. A complete legal description of the property and a boundary map showing the existing topography of the site and the location of all existing easements, structures and other improvements, and trees over six (6) inches in diameter;

b. Dimensioned schematic development plans consisting of at least a site plan, garage plan, typical floor plan, building elevations showing natural grades, transverse and longitudinal sections showing natural grades, and a conceptual landscaping plan for the project as a whole. (In instances where the project involves the conversion of an existing structure to condominium usage, complete as-built drawings shall be provided.);

c. A tabular analysis showing how the project compares to the minimum standards for condominium projects in the zone in which it would be located;

d. Typical detailed sections of the types of wall and floor/ceiling construction that would be used in both common and interior partition walls within the condominium project, including either published data from a recognized testing laboratory or a statement from a licensed acoustical engineer of the City Building Official as to the STC (Sound Transmission Class) and IIC (Impact Insulation Class) of the proposed type of construction;

e. The proposed condominium documents including the Declaration of Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions, Description of Project Elements and tentative Condominium Plan that would apply to the conveyance of units, the assignment of parking and the management of common areas within the project;

f. Such other information which the Planning Commission or Planning Department determines is necessary to evaluate the proposed project. (Ord. 74-306, § 1)

9304 Condominium Development Policy.
a. The Planning Commission shall review all proposals for condominium usage in order to determine their degree of compliance with both the condominium development standards and development criteria delineated in CMC 9305 and 9306 below. A condominium proposal which does not comply with all of the precise development standards in this Chapter may be approved where the Commission finds that there are unusual circumstances regarding the development’s location, site, or configuration, that the project is in substantial compliance with both the development standards and development criteria, and that there are mitigating features incorporated in the project which tend to further the expressed intent and purposes of this Chapter.

b. Recognizing that the conversion of existing multiple residential structures to condominium usage presents unique problems with respect to the requirements of this Section, the Planning Commission is empowered to vary any and all requirements contained herein with regard to a particular conversion proposal upon a finding that the creation of the proposed condominium will not have the potential to contravene the intent and purpose of this Chapter. Project characteristics of critical importance in determining whether or not a proposed conversion has that potential include the age of the structure and the degree to which the proposal varies from the required standards for the following:

Parking

Unit Size

Sound transmission characteristics

Private open space

Storage space

c. The Planning Commission is also empowered to impose conditions on its approval of the conditional use permit which would require that specified modifications, designed to bring a structure more nearly into compliance with the condominium development standards contained herein, be made to the structure proposed for conversion. (Ord. 74-306, § 1)

9305 Condominium Development Standards.
To achieve the purpose of this Chapter the Planning Commission shall require, except as noted above, that all condominium projects conform to all ordinances of the City and all of the following condominium development standards.

a. Private Open Space. Notwithstanding the minimum total amount of usable open space required for a project and the required minimum dwelling unit size, in projects which include five (5) units or more, all of the units shall have an appurtenant private patio, deck, balcony, atrium, or solarium with a minimum area of one hundred fifty (150) square feet, except that one (1) bedroom units shall have a minimum area of one hundred thirty (130) square feet. Such space shall have a configuration that would allow a horizontal rectangle or square of one hundred (100) square feet in area and a minimum dimension of seven (7) feet to be placed in said space. The space shall be designed for the sole enjoyment of the unit owner and his guests, and shall have a least two (2) weather-proofed electrical convenience outlets. Additionally, such space shall be at the same level as and immediately accessible from either a kitchen, dining room, family room or living room within the unit. The Planning Commission may evaluate each project on its own merit with regard to the type, configuration and characteristics of the development including condominium unit mix pertaining to the number of bedrooms per unit and percentage thereof, and may allow variations from the above dimensional standards where it can be shown that the required private open space meets the intent and purpose of this Section.

b. Private Storage Space. Each unit within the Project shall have at least two hundred (200) cubic feet of enclosed, weather-proofed and lockable storage space for the sole use of the unit owner.

(i) Such space shall have a minimum horizontal interior dimension of three and one-half (3-1/2) feet. The space, if a reach-in type, shall have an opening of three and one-half (3-1/2) feet by six (6) feet, or if a walk-in type shall have a minimum clear access opening of two and one-half (2-1/2) feet by six and two-thirds (6-2/3) feet.

(ii) Such space may be provided within individual storage lockers, cabinets or closets in any location approved by the Planning Commission, but shall not be split among two (2) or more locations. Moreover, since it is the intention of this standard to require space over and above that normally associated with the day-to-day functioning of the unit, the Planning Commission shall exercise reasonable discretion in differentiating between such required private storage space and guest, linen or clothes closets or food pantries that are customarily within the unit. Thus, while providing such private storage space within the limits of the unit is not precluded, it shall be over and above that which would otherwise be provided within the unit.

(iii) If such space is located within a common area within the Project, the association shall be responsible for the care and maintenance of the exterior surface of the space in order to assure that the surface is maintained in a manner compatible with the architectural treatment of the Project. Regardless of the location, the precise architectural treatment of such space shall be approved by the Planning Department to ensure that such areas are safe, convenient and unobtrusive to the functional and aesthetic qualities of the Project.

c. Off-street Parking.

(i) Spaces Assigned to Units. There shall be at least two (2) garages assigned to each condominium unit within the project.

(ii) Spaces Designated for Visitors. In addition to the above requirements, there shall be at least one (1) visitor parking space for each ten (10) condominium units within the Project. A fractional requirement equal to, or greater than, one-half (1/2) of a visitor parking space shall be interpreted as a requirement for a total visitor parking space.

d. Treatment of Utilities.

(i) Plumbing Shut-Off Valves. Water supply lines to each unit within the Project shall be fitted with shut-off valves of either a hand valve or screw-stop type. If there are extenuating circumstances which make the installation of such valves impracticable, the Planning Commission may approve a system which provides individual shut-off valves ahead of each fixture within the unit. A shut-off valve shall also be provided ahead of each water-supplied appliance not contained within a unit.

(ii) Drip Pans. Clothes washers, dish washers, hot water heaters and any other appliance which the Building Official determines to be a potential source of water leakage or flooding shall be installed with built-in drip pans and appropriate drains subject to the approval of the Building and Safety Division of the Community Development Department.

(iii) Utility Meters. With the exception of water supply and central heating and/or air conditioning, each utility that is controlled and consumed within the individual unit shall be separately metered in such a way that the unit owner can be separately billed for its use.

(iv) Circuit Breakers. Each unit shall have its own circuit breaker panel for all electrical circuits and outlets which serve the unit. Such panel shall be accessible without leaving the unit.

e. Isolation of Vibration and Sources of Structure-Borne Noise in Condominium Projects Where Units have Common Walls and/or Floor and Ceilings.

(i) Shock Mounting of Mechanical Equipment. All permanent mechanical equipment such as motors, compressors, pumps and compactors which, because of their rotation, reciprocation, expansion and/or contraction, turbulence, oscillation, pulsation, impaction or detonation, is determined by the Building Official to be a source of structural vibration or structure-borne noise shall be shock mounted with inertia blocks or bases and/or vibration isolators in a manner approved by the Building Official. Domestic appliances which are cabinet installed or built into the individual units, such as clothes washers and dryers, or other appliances which are determined by the Building Official to be a source of structural vibration or structure-borne noise, shall be isolated from cabinets and the floor or ceiling by resilient gaskets and vibration mounts approved by the Building Official. The cabinets in which they are installed should be offset from the back wall with strip gasketing of felt, cork or similar material approved by the Building Official. Where such appliances utilize water, flexible connectors shall be installed on all water lines. If provision is made within the units for the installation of nonpermanent appliances such as clothes washers and dryers, then permanent rubber mounting bases and surface plates shall be installed in a manner approved by the Building Official.

(ii) Location of Plumbing Fixtures. No plumbing fixture shall be located on a common wall between two (2) separate units where it would back up to a living room, family room, dining room, den or bedroom of an adjoining unit.

(iii) Separation of Vents and Lines. No common water supply lines, vents, or drain lines shall be permitted for contiguous units unless there is at least eight and one-half (8-1/2) feet of pipe between the closest plumbing fixtures within the separate units. The Building Official may approve other methods of isolating sound transmission through plumbing lines where their effectiveness can be demonstrated.

(iv) Isolation and Insulation of Lines. All water supply lines within the Project shall be isolated from wood or metal framing with pipe isolators specifically manufactured for that purpose and approved by the Building Official. In multistory condominium projects all vertical drainage pipe shall be surrounded by three-quarter (3/4) inch thick dense insulation board or full thick fiberglass or wool blanket insulation for its entire length including the sections that pass through wood or metal framing.

f. Attenuation of Noise.

(i) General. Wall and floor/ceiling assemblies separating units from each other or from public or quasi-public spaces such as interior corridors, laundry rooms, recreation rooms, and garages shall provide airborne sound insulation for walls, and both airborne and impact sound insulation for floor/ceiling assemblies.

(ii) Airborne Sound Insulation. All wall assemblies enumerated or alluded to in the previous paragraph (i) shall be of a type of construction that has a minimum rating of 58 STC (Sound Transmission Class). All floor/ceiling assemblies enumerated or alluded to in the previous paragraph (i) shall be of a type of construction that has a minimum rating of 50 STC. Wood floor joists and subflooring shall not be continuous between separate condominium units. Penetrations or openings in the construction for piping, electrical outlets and devices, recess cabinets, bathtubs, soffits, heating, and ventilating and/or air conditioning intake and exhaust ducts, and the like, shall be sealed, lined, insulated or otherwise treated to maintain the required rating and such treatment shall be approved by the Building Official. Entrance doors to the unit shall be of solid construction and, together with perimeter seals, shall have a minimum rating of 30 STC. Such perimeter seals shall be maintained in effective operating condition.

(iii) Impact Sound Insulation. All separating floor/ceiling assemblies enumerated or alluded to above shall be of a type of construction that has a minimum rating of 69 IIC (Impact Insulation Class). Floor coverings may be included in the assembly to obtain the required ratings, but must be retained as a permanent part of the assembly and may only be replaced by another floor covering that provides the same or greater impact insulation.

(iv) Verification of Sound Class. STC and IIC ratings shall be based on the results of laboratory measurements and will not be subjected to field testing. The STC rating shall be based on the American Society for Testing and Materials system specified in ASTM B90-66t or equivalent. The IIC rating shall be based on the system in use at the National Bureau of Standards or equivalent. Ratings obtained from other testing procedures will require adjustment to the above rating systems. (Ord. 74-306, § 1)

9306 Condominium Development Criteria.
There are important considerations relative to each proposal for condominium usage and to each proposed site that do not lend themselves to specific development standards. The following criteria shall apply to proposals for condominium usage made pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter and shall serve as a basis for the evaluation of accepted and appropriate planning and architectural techniques necessary for the orderly development of the City, and concurrently, give substance to the policies necessary to achieve the purposes of this Chapter.

a. The Project should be a comprehensive and integrated design, providing its own open space, off-street parking and amenities for contemporary living. Insofar as the scale of the Project allows, open space, walkways and other areas for people should be separated from parking areas, driveways and other areas for automobiles.

b. Architectural unit and harmony should be achieved both within the Project and between the Project and the surrounding community so that the Project does not constitute a disruption to the established fabric of the community.

c. The layout of structures and other facilities should effect a conservation in street, driveway, curb cut, utility and other public or quasi-public improvements. Structures should be designed to minimize, within the context of accepted architectural practice, the consumption of natural resources either directly or indirectly (i.e., gas, water, electricity).

d. The Project should be designed to maintain as much of the natural topography, large trees, and environment as practicable.

e. The configuration and orientation of the Project should respect reasonable design limits imposed by the natural and man-made environment. Structures should be situated to take advantage of view, topography, sun and wind, while at the same time not destroying these advantages for adjacent properties. Structures should also be situated to minimize or buffer any undesirable characteristics of the site such as street noise and nearby obnoxious commercial or industrial uses.

f. The layout of units and open space within the project should establish, through the use of structure and landscape materials, a perceptible spatial transition from the public street through the semi-privacy of the common areas to the privacy of the unit. Most importantly, the environment of each condominium unit should be private and free from visual, audible and other intrusions.

9307 Declaration of Covenants – Conditions and Restrictions.
To achieve the purpose of this Chapter, the Declaration of Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions relating to the management of the Common Area and facilities shall accompany all proposals for condominium usage made pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. In addition to such Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions that may be required by the Department of Real Estate of the State of California or pursuant to Title 6 of Part IV of Division II of the Civil Code or other state laws or policies, such declaration shall provide for the following, none of which, after acceptance in final form by the City, shall be amended, modified or changed without first obtaining the written consent of the City:

a. Assignment or Conveyance of Private Open Space. The surface area and appurtenant airspace or private open space areas, including but not limited to the private patio, deck, balcony, solarium or atrium required by CMC 9306(a), and any integral portion of that space that may exceed the minimum area requirements shall be described and irrevocably assigned to its respective unit, except that where the private open space is totally within the boundary described by the interior surfaces of the unit, it shall be conveyed as an integral part of the unit.

b. Assignment or Conveyance of Private Storage Areas. The surfaces and appurtenant airspace of private storage areas, including but not limited to the private storage space required by CMC 9306(b) shall be described and irrevocably assigned to the Declaration or Condominium Plan to its respective unit, except that where the private storage space is totally within the boundary described by the interior surface of the unit, as it would be in a closet opening upon a unit’s room or hallway, it shall be conveyed as an integral part of the unit.

c. Assignment or Conveyance and Use of Required Off-street Parking Spaces. Required off-street, unclosed parking spaces, except guest parking spaces, shall be permanently and irrevocably assigned to particular units within the Project on the basis of two (2) spaces per unit, except that where two (2) parking spaces are totally within the boundary described by the interior surfaces of the unit, as they would be in a townhouse development with a private entrance from the parking garage to the unit, it shall be conveyed as an integral part of the unit. To the maximum practicable extent the two (2) spaces assigned to each unit shall be contiguous. In no case shall the private storage area of one (1) unit overhang or take its access from the required off-street parking space of another unit. All parking spaces shall be used solely by unit owners, members of their families, their guests or lessees of the owners’ unit, except that a unit occupant within the Project may rent one (1) space to another unit occupant or to the Association. All parking spaces shall be used solely for the purpose of parking motor vehicles as defined by the Vehicle Code of the State of California.

d. Maintenance of Impact Insulation Class. The Impact Insulation Class (IIC) rating of all separating floor/ceiling assemblies, as required by CMC 9306(f), shall be described in the Declaration. Where the minimum IIC rating is obtained through the use of floor covering(s), the Declaration should provide that said covering shall not be removed for any purpose except cleaning or replacement, and shall further provide that any replacement covering(s) shall furnish not less than the degree of impact insulation afforded by coverings originally installed.

e. Right of Public Entry to Common Area. The City of Carson, the County of Los Angeles, the State of California, and the Government of the United States, and any department, bureau or agency thereof, shall have the right of immediate access to all portions of common areas of the Project not assigned for the exclusive use of the owner of a particular unit at all times. Notice of such right of governmental agency access shall be prominently displayed in the common areas of the Project.

f. Television and Radio Antenna. Individual television and radio antennas shall be prohibited outside of any owner’s unit. The Declaration shall provide either for a central antenna with connections to each unit via underground or internal wall wiring, or each unit shall be served by a cable antenna service provided by a company licensed to provide such service within the City.

g. Voting. For the purpose of voting, including without limitation voting to set the amount of regular or special assessments and for the purposes of amending the Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions, one (1) vote shall be allocated for each unit within the Project. The amount of regular and special assessments may be made proportional to the gross square footage of each unit within the Project.

h. Partition and Sale of the Project. An action may be brought by one (1) or more owners of units within the Project for partition thereon by sale of the entire Project as if the owners of all of the condominiums in such Project were tenants in common in the entire Project in the same proportion as their interests in the common areas, provided, however, that a partition shall be made only upon a showing of the existence of one (1) or more of the conditions set forth in Section 752b of the California Code of Civil Procedure, or that:

(i) Two (2) years after damage or destruction to the Project which renders a material part thereof unfit for its use, the Project has not been rebuilt or repaired substantially to its state prior to its damage or destruction; or

(ii) One-half (1/2) or more of the Project has been destroyed or substantially damaged and condominium owners holding in aggregate more than fifty (50) percent interest in the common areas are opposed to repair or restoration of the Project; or

(iii) The structure has been in existence in excess of the number of years shown on the following table, is obsolete and uneconomic, and the percentage of condominium owners holding in aggregate a percentage interest in the common areas as set forth in the following table are opposed to repair or restoration of the Project.

Age of Structure

Percentage of Interest in Common Areas Held by Condominium Owners

30 years

70 percent

40 years

60 percent

50 years

50 percent

60 years

40 percent

70 years

30 percent

For the purposes of this Section, multiple owners of a single unit shall not be deemed possessed, in the aggregate, of any greater interest in the common areas than that possessed by a single owner of a unit.

i. Maintenance. The Declaration shall contain a provision establishing the obligation and duty of the governing body of the condominium to maintain the common areas in good condition.

j. Enforcement. The Declaration shall contain a provision insuring the right of any owner to enforce the terms of the Declaration.

k. Assessments for Maintenance of Common Areas and Facilities.

(i) General. In order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, provision shall be made both for annual assessments for maintenance and special assessments for capital improvements. The amount of the regular annual assessment and the procedure for its change shall be specified. The manner in which special assessments may be levied for the purpose of defraying in whole or in part the cost of any construction, reconstruction, repair or replacement of a capital improvement upon the common area shall be specified. The amount of regular and special assessments may be made proportional to the gross square footage of each unit within the Project. Both annual and special assessments may be collected on a monthly basis. The remedies which the Association may bring for the nonpayment of assessments shall be specified and may include penalties for late payment.

(ii) Veto Right and Authority of the City. In consideration for the City’s approval of a condominium project, including without limitation any approval of a conversion to condominium usage, the Declaration shall provide that the City at its option has the right and authority to veto any action of the Association which would tend to decrease the amount of the regular annual assessment upon a finding by the City that such a decrease could or would adversely affect the long-run maintenance of the condominium structure and/or its common areas. To enable the City to exercise said optional veto, the Declaration shall provide that Association actions to decrease the annual assessment do not become effective until sixty (60) days after written notice of such action is given to the City.

l. Utility Easements Over Private Streets and Other Areas. If the condominium project contains private streets, provision shall be made for public utility easements over the entire private street network. The Planning Commission may also require public utility easements adjacent to public streets or over other portions of the Project to accommodate fire hydrants, water meters, street furniture, storm drainage, sanitary sewers, water and gas mains, electrical lines and similar urban infrastructure. The Planning Commission may also require access routes necessary to assure that fire fighting equipment can reach and operate efficiently in all areas of the Project.

m. Amendment of the Declaration. Any amendment to the Declaration which would amend, modify, delete or otherwise affect any provision required by this CMC 9308 shall require the prior written approval of the City. To that end, no such amendment of the Declaration shall be effective unless (i) the text thereof shall have been submitted to the City thirty (30) days prior to its adoption by the owners; (ii) either the City has approved the amendment or failed to disapprove it within said thirty (30) day period; and (iii) the recorded instrument effecting such amendment shall recite that it was so submitted and approved or not disapproved. (Ord. 74-306, § 1)

9308 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Chapter is for any reason held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of any other portion of the Chapter, it being the intent hereof that each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase hereof would have been adopted irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase be declared invalid. (Ord. 74-306, § 1)

CHAPTER 4
DENSITY BONUS PROVISIONS FOR RESIDENTIAL UNITS
Sections:

§ 9400    Purpose.

§ 9401    Definitions.

§ 9402    Density Bonuses for Affordable and Senior Citizen Housing.

§ 9403    Additional Density Bonus for Donations of Land.

§ 9404    Density Bonus and Incentives for Condominium Conversions.

§ 9405    Density Bonus and Concessions/Incentive for Child Care Facilities.

§ 9406    General Provisions Governing Density Bonus Calculations.

§ 9407    Incentives and Concessions for Affordable Housing.

§ 9408    Waivers and Modifications of Development Standards.

§ 9409    Parking Incentives.

§ 9410    Standards for Density Bonus Housing Developments.

§ 9411    Application Requirements.

§ 9412    Application Review.

§ 9413    Developer Affordable Housing Agreement.

9400 Purpose.
This Chapter is being enacted: (1) to provide incentives for the production of housing for very low income, low income, moderate income and senior citizen households; (2) to provide incentives for the creation of rental housing serving lower and moderate income households; (3) to provide incentives for the construction of child care facilities serving very low, lower and moderate income households; and (4) to implement Sections 65915, 65915.5, and 65917 of the California Government Code as required by Section 65915(a). In enacting this Chapter, the City also intends to implement the goals, objectives, and policies of the City’s general plan housing element to encourage the construction of affordable housing in the City. It is also the City’s intent to encourage the development of rental housing to serve an economically diverse community. Accordingly, the City desires to provide a density bonus upon the request of an applicant when the applicant includes affordable or senior citizen restricted units in a project. This Chapter implements the laws for density bonuses and other incentive and concessions available to qualified applicants under Government Code Sections 65915 through 65918. In the event these Government Code sections are amended, those amended provisions shall be incorporated into this Chapter as if fully set forth herein. (Ord. 10-1456, § 1)

9401 Definitions.
For purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases shall be interpreted as to give this Chapter its most reasonable interpretation.

A. “Affordable ownership costs” means average annual housing costs, including mortgage payments, property taxes, homeowners’ insurance, and homeowners’ association dues, if any, which do not exceed the following:

Very low income households: fifty (50) percent of area median income, adjusted for assumed household size based on unit size, multiplied by thirty (30) percent.

Lower income households: seventy (70) percent of area median income, adjusted for assumed household size based on unit size, multiplied by thirty (30) percent.

Moderate income households: one hundred ten (110) percent of area median income, adjusted for assumed household size based on unit size, multiplied by thirty-five (35) percent.

B. “Affordable rent” means annual rent, including utilities and all fees for housing services, which does not exceed the following:

Very low income households: fifty (50) percent of area median income, adjusted for assumed household size based on unit size, multiplied by thirty (30) percent.

Lower income households: sixty (60) percent of area median income, adjusted for assumed household size based on unit size, multiplied by thirty (30) percent.

C. “Affordable units” are dwelling units which are affordable to very low, lower, or moderate income households as defined by this Chapter or by any federal or state housing program and are subject to rental, sale, or resale restrictions to maintain affordability.

D. “Applicant” means a developer or applicant for a density bonus who seeks and agrees to construct a qualified housing development on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter pursuant to Section 65915, subdivision (b), of the California Government Code.

E. “Area median income” means area median income for Los Angeles County as published by the State of California pursuant to California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Section 6932, or a successor provision.

F. “Assumed household size based on unit size” means a household of one (1) person in a studio apartment, two (2) persons in a one (1) bedroom unit, three (3) persons in a two (2) bedroom unit, and one (1) additional person for each additional bedroom thereafter.

G. “Child care facility” means a child day care facility other than a family day care home including, but not limited to, infant centers, preschools, extended day care facilities, and school age child care centers.

H. “Common interest development” bears the same meaning as defined in Section 1351 of the California Civil Code.

I. “Density bonus” means a density increase over the otherwise allowable zoning maximum residential density on a site as of the date of application by the applicant to the City, granted pursuant to this Chapter.

J. “Density bonus units” means residential units granted pursuant to this Chapter which exceed the otherwise allowable zoning maximum residential density for a housing development.

K. “Development standard” means any site or construction condition including, but not limited to, a height limitation, a setback requirement, a floor area ratio, an on-site open-space requirement, or a parking ratio that applies to a housing development pursuant to any ordinance, general plan element, specific plan, or other local condition, law, policy, or regulation. A “site and construction condition” is a development condition or law that provides a specification for the physical development of a site and buildings on the site in a housing development.

L. “First approval” means the first of the following approvals to occur with respect to a housing development: specific plan, development agreement, planned development permit, tentative map, minor land division, use permit, design permit, building permit, or any other similar permit or entitlement listed in this code.

M. “Household income” means the combined adjusted gross household income for all adult persons living in a residential unit as calculated for the purpose of the Section 8 program under the United States Housing Act of 1937, as amended, or its successor provision.

“Very low income household” shall have the same meaning as provided in California Health and Safety Code Section 50105.

“Lower income household” shall have the same meaning as provided in California Health and Safety Code Section 50079.5.

“Moderate income household” shall have the same meaning as provided in California Health and Safety Code Section 50093.

N. “Housing development” means one or more groups of projects for residential units in the planned development of the City. “Housing development” also includes a subdivision or common interest development, as defined in Section 1351 of the California Civil Code, approved by the City and consisting of residential units or unimproved residential lots and either a project to substantially rehabilitate and convert an existing commercial building to residential use or the substantial rehabilitation of an existing multifamily dwelling, as defined in subdivision (d) of Section 65863.4 of the California Government Code, where the result of the rehabilitation would be a net increase in available residential units. For the purpose of calculating a density bonus, the residential units shall be on contiguous sites that are the subject of one development application, but do not have to be based upon individual subdivision maps or parcels. For purposes of this Chapter, “housing development” does not include projects for less than five (5) dwelling units.

O. “Incentives and concessions” are regulatory concessions as listed in CMC 9407.

P. “Market-rate unit” means a dwelling unit which is not an affordable unit or an inclusionary unit.

Q. “Maximum residential density” means the maximum number of dwelling units permitted by the zoning ordinance and land use element of the general plan or, if a range of density is permitted, means the maximum allowable density for the specific zoning range and land use element of the general plan applicable to the project. Where the density allowed under the zoning ordinance is inconsistent with the density allowed under the land use element of the general plan, the general plan density shall prevail. The maximum allowable density is based on the date an application for a housing development is deemed complete. This definition is used to calculate a density bonus pursuant to this Chapter.

R. “Senior citizen housing development” means senior citizen housing as defined in Section 51.3 (a housing development developed, substantially rehabilitated, or substantially renovated for senior citizens that has at least thirty-five (35) dwelling units) and Section 51.12 of the California Civil Code, or a mobilehome park that limits residency based on age requirements for housing for older persons pursuant to Section 798.76 or 799.5 of the California Civil Code.

S. “Specific adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date that the application for the housing development was deemed complete. Mere inconsistency with the zoning ordinance or general plan land use designation shall not constitute a specific adverse impact upon the public health or safety. (Ord. 10-1456, § 1)

9402 Density Bonuses for Affordable and Senior Citizen Housing.
A. Very Low and Lower Income Housing and Senior Citizen Housing. Upon written request to the City, an applicant for a housing development is eligible for one (1) density bonus of twenty (20) percent over the maximum residential density (except in the case of senior citizen housing, as provided below); provided, that the applicant agrees to construct the housing development in accordance with one (1) of the following criteria:

1. Five (5) percent of the total dwelling units, excluding any units permitted by the density bonus, are provided at affordable rent or ownership costs to very low income households; or

2. Ten (10) percent of the total dwelling units, excluding any units permitted by the density bonus, are provided at affordable rent or ownership costs to lower income households; or

3. A senior citizen housing development. For senior citizen housing developments, the density bonus shall be twenty (20) percent of the number of senior housing units provided.

B. Moderate Income Housing. Upon written request to the City, an applicant for a housing development is eligible for one (1) density bonus of five (5) percent over the maximum residential density if the applicant agrees to construct the housing development in accordance with all of the following criteria:

1. At least ten (10) percent of the total dwelling units, excluding any units permitted by the density bonus, are provided at affordable ownership costs to moderate income households; and

2. The housing development is a common interest project as defined by Section 1351 of the California Civil Code; and

3. All of the dwelling units in the housing development are offered for sale to the public.

C. Higher Density Bonus for Greater Contribution of Affordable Units. Upon written request to the City, an applicant for a housing development that is eligible for a density bonus based upon the contribution of affordable units, may receive a higher amount of density bonus if the percentage of very low, lower, and moderate income housing units exceeds the base percentage established in subsection (A) or (B) of this Section, as follows:

1. Very low income units – For each one (1) percent increase above five (5) percent in affordable units for very low income households, the density bonus shall be increased by two and one-half (2.5) percent up to a maximum of thirty-five (35) percent, as follows:

Percentage Very Low Income Units

Percentage Density Bonus

5

20

6

22.5

7

25

8

27.5

9

30

10

32.5

11

35

2. Lower income units – For each one (1) percent increase above ten (10) percent in affordable units for lower income households, the density bonus shall be increased by one and one-half (1.5) percent up to a maximum of thirty-five (35) percent, as follows:

Percentage Low Income Units

Percentage Density Bonus

10

20

11

21.5

12

23

13

24.5

14

26

15

27.5

16

29

17

30.5

18

32

19

33.5

20

35

3. Moderate income ownership units – For each one (1) percent increase above ten (10) percent in affordable units offered for sale to moderate income households, the density bonus shall be increased by one (1) percent up to a maximum of thirty-five (35) percent, as follows:

Percentage Moderate Income Units

Percentage Density Bonus

10

5

11

6

12

7

13

8

14

9

15

10

16

11

17

12

18

13

19

14

20

15

21

16

22

17

23

18

24

19

25

20

26

21

27

22

28

23

29

24

30

25

31

26

32

27

33

28

34

29

35

30

36

31

37

32

38

33

39

34

40

35

D. Continued Affordability. Affordable units qualifying a housing development for a density bonus shall remain affordable as follows:

1. Very low income, low income and moderate household units shall remain affordable to the designated income group for a minimum of thirty (30) years, or for a longer period of time if required by any construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy program applicable to the dwelling units.

2. Each household unit shall remain affordable for the period set forth in subsection (D)(1) of this Section unless circumstances require the household to sell and they are unable to find qualified buyers in which event an equity sharing repayment to the City or the agency low and moderate income housing fund shall be required.

3. Notwithstanding the foregoing, very low-, low-, and moderate-income units in housing developments qualified for a density bonus that are located in or found by the redevelopment agency to benefit a redevelopment project area shall remain at an affordable level for a period of not less than forty-five (45) years for owner-occupied units, and not less than fifty-five (55) years for rental units, in accordance with applicable provisions of the California Community Redevelopment Law (Health and Safety Code Section 33000 et seq.).

4. Any contract, deed restriction, or other instrument used to implement the continued affordability pursuant to this Section, shall be signed by the applicant and by the City as parties. If the housing development is located in or found by the redevelopment agency to benefit a redevelopment project area, such contract, deed restriction, or other instrument shall be signed by the redevelopment agency as a party or, at the redevelopment agency’s election, the contract, deed restriction, or other instrument shall identify the redevelopment agency as an express third-party beneficiary with the right to enforce the terms of such contract, deed restriction, or other instrument.

E. Specification of Basis for Density Bonus. Each applicant who requests a density bonus pursuant to CMC 9403(A) shall elect whether the bonus will be awarded on the basis of subsection (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3) or subsection (B) of this Section. Each housing development is entitled to only one (1) density bonus, which may be selected based on the percentage of either very low income affordable housing units, lower-income affordable housing units or moderate-income affordable housing units, or the development’s status as a senior citizen housing development. Density bonuses from more than one (1) of these categories may not be combined. (Ord. 10-1456, § 1)

9403 Additional Density Bonus for Donations of Land.
A. Upon written request, when an applicant for a tentative map, subdivision map, parcel map, or other residential development approval qualified for a density bonus pursuant to CMC 9402 also donates land to the City in accordance with this Section, the applicant shall be entitled to an additional density bonus. Applicants donating land to the City shall be eligible for an additional fifteen (15) percent density bonus at the site of the housing development if the donated land is suitable for the construction of very low income units equaling at least ten (10) percent of the market-rate units being constructed for the project. The density bonus provided pursuant to this Section shall be in addition to any density bonus granted pursuant to CMC 9402, up to a maximum combined density bonus of thirty-five (35) percent.

B. To qualify for the additional density bonus described in subsection (A) of this Section, the donation of land must meet all of the following criteria:

1. The tentative map, subdivision map, parcel map, or other residential development must otherwise be subject to a density bonus pursuant to CMC 9402; and

2. The land must be transferred no later than the date of the approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or housing development application; and

3. The developable acreage and zoning classification of the land being transferred must be sufficient to permit construction of dwelling units affordable to very low income households in an amount not less than ten (10) percent of the total number of market rate dwelling units in the proposed development (i.e., the proposed development before the addition of any density bonus); and

4. The donated land is at least one (1) acre in size or is large enough to permit development of at least forty (40) units, has the appropriate general plan land use designation, has the appropriate zoning and development standards for affordable housing and, at the time of project approval is, or at the time of construction will be, served by adequate public facilities and infrastructure; and

5. No later than the date of approval of the final map, parcel map, or other development application for the housing development, the donated land must have all of the applicable permits and approvals (other than building permits) necessary for the development of the very low income housing units on the donated land, except that the City may subject the proposed housing development to subsequent design review to the extent authorized by California Government Code Section 65583.2, subsection (i), if the design is not reviewed by the City prior to the time of transfer; and

6. The donated land is subject to a deed restriction ensuring continued affordability of the very low income units consistent with CMC 9402(D), which deed restriction shall be recorded upon the donated property at the time of its transfer; and

7. The land will be transferred to the City, the redevelopment agency of the City, or to a housing developer approved by the City. The City reserves the right to require the applicant to identify a developer and to require that the land be transferred to that developer; and

8. The land is within the boundary of the proposed housing development or within one-quarter (0.25) mile of the boundary of the proposed housing development; and

9. No later than the date of approval of the final map, parcel map, or other development application for the housing development, a proposed source of funding for the construction of the very low income units shall be identified.

C. Additional Density Bonus Based on Greater Suitability of Land for Very Low Income Housing. For each one (1) percent increase above the minimum ten (10) percent in the number of very low income housing units that can be accommodated on the donated land, the maximum density bonus shall be increased by one (1) percent, up to a maximum of thirty-five (35) percent, as follows:

Percentage of Very Low Income Units That Can Be Accommodated on Donated Land

Percentage of Additional Density Bonus

10

15

11

16

12

17

13

18

14

19

15

20

16

21

17

22

18

23

19

24

20

25

21

26

22

27

23

28

24

29

25

30

26

31

27

32

28

33

29

34

30

35

(Ord. 10-1456, § 1)

9404 Density Bonus and Incentives for Condominium Conversions.
A. An applicant for a conversion of existing rental apartments to condominiums is eligible for either a density bonus or other incentives of equivalent financial value, at the option of the City, if the applicant agrees to provide: (1) at least thirty-three (33) percent of the total units of the proposed condominium project to persons and families of low or moderate income as defined in Section 50093 of the Health and Safety Code, or (2) at least fifteen (15) percent of the total units of the proposed condominium project to lower income households as defined in Section 50079.5 of the Health and Safety Code, and (3) the applicant agrees to pay for the reasonably necessary administrative costs incurred by the City pursuant to this Section.

B. Condominium conversions qualified under subsection (A) of this Section, above, may receive one (1) of the following, at the City’s option:

1. A flat density bonus of twenty-five (25) percent to be provided within the existing structure or structures proposed for conversion, excepting that a condominium conversion is ineligible for this bonus if the apartments to be converted originally received a density bonus or incentives pursuant to any other provisions of this Chapter 4 or pursuant to California Government Code Section 65915. An applicant may choose to implement a lower density bonus.

2. Incentives of equivalent financial value in the form of a reduction or waiver of requirements or fees which the City might otherwise apply as conditions of conversion approval. “Other incentives of equivalent financial value” shall not be construed to require the City to provide cash transfer payments or other monetary compensation to the condominium conversion project or its applicant.

C. The City reserves the right to place such reasonable conditions on the granting of a density bonus or other incentives of equivalent financial value pursuant to this Section as it finds appropriate, including, but not limited to, conditions which assure continued affordability of units to subsequent purchasers who are persons and families of low and moderate income or lower income households.

D. Condominium conversions are eligible only for the granting of a density bonus or incentive of equivalent value pursuant to this Section, which bonus or incentive may not be granted in addition to, or combined with, any other incentives, concessions, density bonuses or waivers and reductions of development standards pursuant to other sections of this Chapter 4. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to require the City to approve a proposal to convert rental apartments into condominiums. (Ord. 10-1456, § 1)

9405 Density Bonus and Concessions/Incentive for Child Care Facilities.
A. A housing development that is eligible for a density bonus pursuant to CMC 9402, above, and also includes a child care facility qualified under this Section is eligible for either of the following, at the option of the City, if requested in writing by the applicant:

1. An additional density bonus that is an amount of square feet of residential space that is equal to or greater than the amount of square feet in the child care facility; or

2. An additional concession or incentive that contributes significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction of the child care facility.

B. A child care facility will only qualify the housing development for an additional density bonus or incentive or concession if it is (1) located on the premises of, as part of, or adjacent to the housing development, and (2) the housing development is otherwise eligible for a density bonus pursuant to CMC 9402. As a condition of approving the additional density bonus for the housing development, the child care facility must meet all of the following criteria:

1. The child care facility may be used only for child care for a period of time that is as long as or longer than the period of time during which the affordable units are required to remain affordable as stated in deed restrictions and pursuant to CMC 9402(D); and

2. Of the children who attend the child care facility, the percentage of children of very low income households, lower income households, or moderate income households shall be equal to or greater than the percentage of dwelling units that are proposed to be affordable to very low income households, lower income households, or moderate income households pursuant to CMC 9402.

C. Notwithstanding any requirement of this Section, the City shall not be required to provide a density bonus or concession or incentive for a child care facility if it makes a written finding, based upon substantial evidence, that the community already has adequate child care facilities. (Ord. 10-1456, § 1)

9406 General Provisions Governing Density Bonus Calculations.
A. For the purposes of any provisions in this Chapter 4, an applicant may elect to accept a lesser percentage of density bonus than that to which the housing development is eligible.

B. When calculating the number of permitted density bonus units, any calculations resulting in fractional units shall be rounded up to the next larger whole number.

C. For the purpose of calculating a density bonus, the dwelling units shall be on contiguous sites that are the subject of one (1) development application, but do not have to be based upon individual subdivision maps or parcels. The density bonus shall be permitted in geographic areas of the housing development other than the areas where the affordable units are located.

D. For the purposes of this Chapter 4, the “total units” or “total dwelling units” in a housing development does not include those units added by any density bonus.

E. Regardless of the number or extent of affordable units, senior housing, land dedication, child care facilities or other qualifications for a density bonus provided in any single housing development, no housing development may be entitled to a total density bonus of more than thirty-five (35) percent.

 

TABLE 1: Density Bonus Summary

Types of Affordable Units Providing Eligibility for a Density Bonus

Minimum %

Bonus Granted

Additional Bonus for Each 1% Increase in Affordable Units

% Affordable Units Required for Maximum 35% Bonus

A density bonus may be selected from only one category, except that bonuses for land donation may be combined with others, up to a maximum of 35%, and an additional sq. ft. bonus may be granted for a child care facility.

Affordable Housing

 

 

 

 

- Very low income

5%

20%

2.5%

11%

- Lower income

10%

20%

1.5%

20%

- Moderate income (ownership units only)

10%

5%

1%

40%

Senior citizen housing

Qualified senior citizen housing development

20% of the senior citizen housing units

–

–

Land donation for very low income housing

Land donated can accommodate 10% of market rate units, plus housing development qualifies for density bonus as an affordable or senior project.

15%

1%

30% of market-rate units (assuming housing development provides 5% very low income units)

Condominium Conversion

 

 

 

 

- Lower income

15%

25%(1)

–

–

- Low/Moderate income

33%

25%(1)

–

–

Child care facility

Housing development qualifies for density bonus as an affordable or senior project.

Sq. ft. in child care facility(1)

–

–

Notes:

(1) Maximum of 25% bonus for condominium conversions, or an incentive of equal value, at the City’s option.

(Ord. 10-1456, § 1)

9407 Incentives and Concessions for Affordable Housing.
A. Definition of a Qualified Concession or Incentive. An applicant for a density bonus pursuant to CMC 9402 may also submit to the City a written proposal for specific incentives or concessions as provided in this Section. The applicant may also request a meeting with the Director to discuss such proposal. For purposes of this Chapter, concessions and incentives include any of the following:

1. Reductions in site development standards or modifications of zoning requirements or architectural design requirements that exceed the minimum building standards approved by the California Building Standards Commission as provided in Part 2.5 (commencing with Section 18901) of Division 13 of the California Health and Safety Code. These include, without limitation, a reduction in setback and square footage requirements and in the ratio of vehicular parking spaces that would otherwise be required. In order to qualify as a “concession or incentive,” the City must be able to find that the requested reductions in site development standards result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions.

2. Approval of mixed use zoning in conjunction with the housing development if commercial, office, industrial, or other land uses will reduce the cost of the housing development and if the commercial, office, industrial or other land uses are compatible with the housing development and the existing or planned development in the area where the proposed housing development will be located; or

3. Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the applicant or the City, so long as the City can find that such proposals result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions.

B. Findings to Deny Concession or Incentive. The City shall grant the concession or incentive requested by the applicant unless the City makes a written finding, based upon substantial evidence, of any of the following:

1. The concession or incentive is not required in order to provide for affordable housing costs or for affordable rents for the targeted units to be set as specified in CMC 9402; or

2. The concession or incentive would have a specific adverse impact; or

3. The concession or incentive would be contrary to State or Federal Law.

C. Number of Concessions or Incentives. If all other provisions of this Section are satisfied, an applicant will be eligible for the following number of incentives and concessions:

1. One (1) incentive or concession for housing developments where at least five (5) percent of the total units are for very low income households, at least ten (10) percent of the total units are for lower income households, or at least ten (10) percent of the total units in a common interest development are sold to moderate income households; or

2. Two (2) incentives or concessions for housing developments where at least ten (10) percent of the total units are for very low income households, at least twenty (20) percent of the total units are for lower income households, or at least twenty (20) percent of the total units in a common interest development are sold to moderate income households.

3. Three (3) incentives or concessions for housing developments where at least fifteen (15) percent of the total units are for very low income households, at least thirty (30) percent of the total units are for lower income households, or at least thirty (30) percent of the total units in a common interest development are sold to moderate income households.

 

TABLE 2: Incentives and Concessions Summary

Affordable Units or Category

% of Affordable Units

Pursuant to State Density Bonus

 

 

 

Affordable Housing

 

 

 

- Very low income

5%

10%

15%

- Lower income

10%

20%

30%

- Moderate income (ownership units only)

10%

20%

30%

Maximum Incentive(s)/Concession(s)(1)(2)(3)

1

2

3

Notes:

(1) An incentive or concession may be requested only if an application is also made for a density bonus.

(2) Incentives or concessions may be selected from only one category (very low, lower, or moderate).

(3) No incentives or concessions are available for land donation.

D. This Section does not limit or require the provision of direct financial incentives for the housing development, including the provision of publicly owned land, by the City or the waiver of fees or dedication requirements. Nor does any provision of this Section require the City to grant an incentive or concession found to have a specific adverse impact.

E. The granting of a concession or incentive shall not be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a general plan amendment, local coastal plan amendment, zoning change, or other discretionary approval. (Ord. 10-1456, § 1)

9408 Waivers and Modifications of Development Standards.
A. Applicants granted a density bonus pursuant to CMC 9402 may, by written proposal, seek a waiver, modification or reduction of development standards that would otherwise have the effect of physically precluding the construction of the housing development at the densities or with the concessions or incentives permitted pursuant to this Chapter. The applicant may also request a meeting with the City to discuss such request for waiver and modifications.

B. In order to obtain a waiver or modification of development standards, the applicant shall show that the development standards will have the effect of precluding the construction of a housing development meeting the criteria of CMC 9402(A) at the densities or with the concessions or incentives permitted by this Chapter.

C. A proposal for the waiver or reduction of development standards pursuant to this Section shall neither reduce nor increase the number of incentives or concessions to which the applicant is entitled pursuant to CMC 9407.

D. The City may deny a request for any waiver, modification or reduction of development standards if the waiver, modification or reduction would have a specific adverse impact. (Ord. 10-1456, § 1)

9409 Parking Incentives.
Upon the written request of the applicant for a housing development meeting the criteria for a density bonus under CMC 9402, the City shall not require a vehicular parking ratio that exceeds the following:

A. Zero (0) to one (1) bedroom units: one (1) on-site parking space.

B. Two (2) to three (3) bedroom units: two (2) on-site parking spaces.

C. Four (4) and more bedroom units: two and one-half (2.5) parking spaces.

Guest parking and handicapped parking shall be included within the maximum number of spaces that may be required. If the total number of parking spaces required for a housing development is other than a whole number, the number shall be rounded up to the next whole number. For purposes of this Section, a housing development may provide on-site parking through tandem parking or uncovered parking, but not through on-street parking. For purposes of this Chapter, the parking ratios set forth in this Section shall be deemed a concession or incentive available to the applicant under CMC 9407. (Ord. 10-1456, § 1)

9410 Standards for Density Bonus Housing Developments.
A. Affordable units qualifying a housing development for a density bonus shall be reasonably dispersed throughout the housing development and compatible with the design of market-rate units in terms of appearance, materials, and finished quality. The applicant may reduce the interior amenities and square footage of inclusionary units, provided all units conform to all other requirements of the Carson Municipal Code.

B. For developments with multiple market-rate units containing differing numbers of bedrooms, affordable units qualifying a housing development for a density bonus shall be representative of the market-rate unit mix.

C. All building permits for affordable units qualifying a housing development for a density bonus shall be issued concurrently with, or prior to, issuance of building permits for the market-rate units, and the affordable units shall be constructed concurrently with, or prior to, construction of the market-rate units. Occupancy permits and final inspections for affordable units qualifying a housing development for a density bonus shall be approved concurrently with, or prior to, approval of occupancy permits and final inspections for the market rate units. (Ord. 10-1456, § 1)

9411 Application Requirements.
A. An application for a density bonus, incentive, concession, waiver, modification, or revised parking standard pursuant to this Section shall be submitted with the first approval of the housing development and processed concurrently with all other applications required for the housing development in compliance with CMC 9173.1. Further, a qualified density bonus application providing affordable housing shall be exempt from CMC 9172.21, Conditional Use Permit, however, all density bonus applications for affordable housing shall be subject CMC 9172.23, Site Plan and Design Review.

B. For affordable units qualifying the housing development for a density bonus, the application shall include the following information:

1. A site plan identifying the base project without the density bonus, number and location of all inclusionary units, affordable units qualifying for the project for a density bonus, and proposed density bonus units; and

2. Proposed category(-ies) qualifying the housing development for a density bonus; and

3. Level of affordability of all affordable and inclusionary units and proposals for ensuring affordability, if applicable; and

4. A description of any requested incentives, concessions, waivers or modifications of development standards, or modified parking standards.

5. If a density bonus or concession is requested for a land donation, the application shall show the location of the land to be dedicated and provide evidence that each of the findings included in CMC 9403 can be made.

6. If the density bonus or incentives of equivalent financial value are based upon a condominium conversion with affordable units or senior citizen housing, the application shall demonstrate that the project meets the qualifications for a density bonus applicable to such projects under this Chapter.

7. If a density bonus or concession is requested for a child care facility, the application shall show the location and square footage of the child care facility and provide evidence that the findings included in CMC 9405 can be made.

C. Upon submission of the application to the City, the Director shall determine if the application is complete and conforms to the provisions of the requirements hereof and the requirements of CMC 9173.1. No application for a first approval for a housing development requesting a density bonus, incentives, concessions, or waivers may be deemed complete unless an affordable and or qualified senior housing plan is submitted conforming to the provisions of this Chapter.

D. A request for a minor modification of an approved application may be granted by the Director if the modification is substantially in compliance with the original application and the conditions of approval. Other modifications to the affordable housing plan shall be processed in the same manner as the original application. (Ord. 10-1456, § 1)

9412 Application Review.
A. An application for a density bonus, incentive, concession, waiver, modification, or revised parking standard pursuant to this Chapter shall be reviewed as part of the first approval of the housing development. Such application shall be submitted to the Director pursuant to CMC 9173.1. An applicant proposing a housing development pursuant to this Chapter, may submit a preliminary application prior to the submittal of any formal request for approval of a housing development.

B. Within ninety (90) days of receipt of the preliminary application the City shall provide to an applicant, a letter which identifies project issues of concern (the maximum financial assistance that the Director can support when making a recommendation to the City Council), and the procedures for compliance with this Chapter. The Director shall inform the applicant that the requested additional incentives shall be recommended for consideration with the proposed housing development, or that alternative or modified additional incentives shall be recommended for consideration in lieu of the requested incentives. If alternative or modified incentives are recommended by the Director, the recommendation shall establish how the alternative or modified incentives can be expected to have an equivalent affordability effect as the requested incentives.

C. Before approving an application for a density bonus, incentive, concession, waiver, or modification, the approval body shall make the following findings:

1. The housing development is (a) eligible for a density bonus, and/or (b) any concessions, incentives, waivers, modifications, or reduced parking standards requested conform to all requirements of this Chapter, and (c) supported by a financing mechanism for all implementation and monitoring costs.

2. If the density bonus is based all or in part on dedication of land, the application meets the qualifications and findings stated in CMC 9403.

3. If the density bonus or incentives of equivalent financial value are based upon a condominium conversion with affordable units or senior citizen housing, that the application meets the qualifications for a density bonus applicable to such projects under this Chapter.

4. If the density bonus, incentive, or concession is based all or in part on the inclusion of a child care facility, the application meets the qualifications and findings stated in CMC 9405.

5. If a waiver or modification is requested, the applicant has shown that the waiver, modification or reduction of development standards meets the qualifications and findings stated in CMC 9408.

D. If the findings stated in subsection (C) of this Section can be made, and a request for an incentive or concession is otherwise consistent with this Chapter, the approval body may deny a concession or incentive based upon written findings of any of the factors stated in CMC 9407(B) for the denial or disqualification of a concession or incentive.

E. If the required findings stated in subsection (C) of this Section can be made, and a request for a waiver or modification is otherwise consistent with this Chapter, the approval body may deny the requested waiver or modification based upon written findings of any of the factors stated in CMC 9408(D) for the denial or disqualification of a waiver or modification.

F. Nothing in this Section shall be interpreted to require the City to grant an incentive or concession or to waive or reduce development standards if that incentive, concession, waiver, or reduction has a specific adverse impact upon health, safety, or the physical environment, and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact.

G. Any decision regarding a density bonus, incentive, concession, waiver, modification, or revised parking standard may be appealed as provided in CMC 9173.4. In accordance with State law, neither the granting of a concession or incentive, nor the granting of a density bonus, shall be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a general plan amendment, zoning change, or other discretionary approval. (Ord. 10-1456, § 1)

9413 Developer Affordable Housing Agreement.
A. Applications requesting a density bonus shall agree to enter into a density bonus housing agreement with the City. The terms of the draft agreement shall be reviewed and revised as appropriate by the Director, who shall formulate a recommendation to the Planning Commission for final approval. A density bonus housing agreement shall be made a condition of the discretionary planning permits for all housing developments pursuant to this Chapter and shall be recorded as a restriction on any parcels on which the affordable units or density bonus units will be constructed.

B. The density bonus housing agreement shall be recorded prior to final or parcel map approval, or, where the housing development does not include a map, prior to issuance of a building permit for any structure in the housing development. The density bonus housing agreement shall run with the land and bind future owners and successors in interest. (Ord. 10-1456, § 1)

CHAPTER 5
OIL AND GAS CODE
Parts:

1    Administrative Procedures

2    Development Standards for Petroleum Operations

3    Development Standards for Site Abandonment and Redevelopment

PART 1. ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
Sections:

§ 9500    Purpose.

§ 9501    Ordinance Applicability.

§ 9502    Allowable Uses.

§ 9503    Definitions.

§ 9504    Consistency with Other Laws, Rules and Regulations.

§ 9505    Appeals and Consideration by the City Council.

§ 9506    Well Drilling Permit.

§ 9507    Required Procedures for Conditional Use Permits.

§ 9507.1    Conditional Use Permit (CUP) Filing Requirements.

§ 9507.2    Processing and Review.

§ 9507.3    Findings and Permitting Conditions.

§ 9507.4    Modifications and Extensions.

§ 9507.5    Change of Ownership/Operators Criteria.

§ 9508    Procedures for Development Agreements.

§ 9508.1    Filing Requirements.

§ 9508.2    Processing and Review.

§ 9508.3    Findings and Development Agreement Conditions.

§ 9508.4    Modifications and Extensions.

§ 9509    Periodic Review.

§ 9510    Facility Closure, Site Abandonment, and Site Restoration Procedures.

§ 9510.1    Purpose and Intent.

§ 9510.2    Applicability.

§ 9510.3    Application Process.

§ 9510.3.1    Requirement to File an Application.

§ 9510.3.2    Content of Application.

§ 9510.3.3    Permitting Specifications.

§ 9510.3.4    Findings Required for Approval.

§ 9511    Operational Noticing.

§ 9512    Complaints.

§ 9513    Injunctive Relief.

§ 9514    Notice of Violation and Administrative Fines.

§ 9515    Nuisance Procedures.

§ 9515.1    High Risk Operations.

§ 9516    Compliance Monitoring.

§ 9517    Financial Assurances Applicability.

§ 9518    Operator’s Financial Responsibilities.

§ 9519    Securities and Bond Requirements.

§ 9520    Operator Liability Insurance.

9500 Purpose.
A. This Chapter shall be known as the “Oil and Gas Ordinance of the City of Carson.”

B. It is the purpose of this Chapter, amongst other things, to protect the health, safety, environmental quality and general welfare of the City by the reasonable regulation of oil and gas facilities, equipment, and operations, including but not limited to: exploration; production; storage; processing; transportation; disposal; plugging abandonment and reabandonment of wells; operations and equipment accessory and incidental thereto and development and redevelopment of oil and gas sites. It is further the intent of the City that oil and gas operations shall be permitted within this City (except where expressly prohibited herein), subject to the application of this Chapter and all other applicable laws, regulations and requirements.

C. It is not the intent of this Chapter to regulate public utility operations for the storage or distribution of natural gas under the jurisdiction of the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC). Any well or site related operations, however, shall be subject to this Chapter. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9501 Ordinance Applicability.
A. The regulations in this Chapter shall apply, insofar as specifically provided herein, to oil and gas production and related sites and facilities, equipment, structures, or appurtenances including, but not limited to:

1. Drilling and abandonment operations of any new or existing well or reentry of a previously abandoned well for the production of oil and gas.

2. Sites, infrastructure, structures, equipment, and/or facilities necessary and incidental to processing of oil, produced water, gas, and condensate obtained from an oil and gas field, zone, subsurface lease or area.

3. Injection wells and incidental equipment necessary for enhanced oil recovery or disposal of produced water.

4. Equipment and facilities necessary for enhanced oil recovery including water flooding, steam flooding, air injection, carbon dioxide injection, or introduction of polymers, or other techniques.

5. Pipelines located within an oil and gas lease area that are necessary for oil and gas production operations.

6. Pipelines that transport oil or gas to another location for sale or transfer to a third party.

7. Storage tanks and equipment necessary or incidental to gathering, separation or treatment of oil, water, and gas, and/or temporary storage of separated fluids and gases, and transfer of the produced hydrocarbons to pipelines or tanker trucks.

8. Oil spill containment and recovery equipment, and facilities including offices, storage spaces, and vehicles for the storage of floating oil and water separators, pumps, generators, hosing, assorted absorbent materials, steam cleaners, storage tanks, and other land and wildlife cleanup and recovery equipment.

B. All portions of this Chapter are applicable to new or existing oil and gas sites and operators if they have or are required to obtain a CUP. For oil and gas sites lawfully existing at the time of adoption of this Chapter which do not have or are not required to obtain a new CUP, only the following sections are applicable:

CMC 9506, Well Drilling Permit.

CMC 9507.4(B), Modifications and Extensions.

CMC 9510, Facility Closure, Site Abandonment, and Site Restoration Procedures.

CMC 9521(C), Setback Requirements.

CMC 9522, Site Access and Operations.

CMC 9523, Lighting.

CMC 9526, Signage.

CMC 9527, Steaming.

CMC 9530, Safety Assurances and Emergency/Hazard Management (except CMC 9530.4).

CMC 9531, Environmental Resource Management (except CMC 9531.3 and 9531.5.1).

CMC 9532, Standards for Wells (except CMC 9532(G)).

CMC 9535, Operational Prohibitions.

CMC 9536, Prohibited Uses.

All decisions related to this subsection (B) are appealable as per CMC 9505. Violations of these sections shall also be subject to enforcement mechanisms contained in this Chapter and this Code.

To the extent this Chapter applies to existing oil and gas sites, it is not intended to apply in such manner as to interfere with any vested rights that have accrued to property owners.

C. The provisions of this Chapter which impose any limitation, prohibition, or requirement, or confer a right on the basis of the distance between a well or any other use or improvement and another zone classification, use or improvement, shall be applied solely with reference to zone classification uses and improvements within the City. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9502 Allowable Uses.
Table 1-1 below specifies what City zoning designations allow for oil and gas sites and, if allowable, what type of authorization is required for the use.

TABLE 1-1

* In addition to the zones listed in the table below, oil and gas sites shall be permitted in any specific plan area where such uses are specifically allowed in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter.

** CUP indicates a requirement for a Conditional Use Permit, while DA indicates a development agreement.

Zoning Designation

Oil and Gas Facility/Site Permit Required by Zone

Residential

RS Residential Single-Family

Prohibited

RM Residential Multi-Family

Prohibited

RA Residential Agricultural

Prohibited

Commercial

CN Commercial Neighborhood Center

Prohibited

CR Commercial Regional Center

CUP or DA1

CG Commercial General

CUP or DA1

CA Commercial Automotive

Prohibited

MU-CS Mixed-Use-Carson Street

Prohibited

MU-SB Mixed-Use-Sepulveda Blvd.

Prohibited

Industrial

ML Manufacturing, Light

CUP or DA1

MH Manufacturing, Heavy

CUP or DA1

Open Space and Special Uses

Open Space

Prohibited

Special Uses

Prohibited

1. Development agreement provisions apply as specified in CMC 9508.

(Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9503 Definitions.
Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions hereinafter set forth shall govern the construction of this Chapter.

“Abandoned well” means a nonproducing well DOGGR so designates after it has been demonstrated that all steps have been taken to protect underground or surface water suitable for irrigation or other domestic uses from the infiltration or addition of any detrimental substance, and to prevent the escape of all fluids to the surface.

“Acid fracturing” is an acid well stimulation treatment that, in whole or in part, includes the pressurized injection of acid into an underground geologic formation in order to fracture the formation, thereby causing or enhancing the production of oil or gas from a well.

“Acid matrix stimulation treatment” is an acid well stimulation treatment conducted at pressures lower than the applied pressure necessary to fracture the underground geologic formation.

“Acid volume threshold” means a volume per treated foot of well stimulation treatment, calculated as per DOGGR consistent with DOGGR Statutes and Regulations.

“Acid well stimulation treatment” or “acidizing” is defined in the DOGGR Statutes and Regulations and means a well stimulation treatment that uses, in whole or in part, the application of one (1) or more acids to the well or underground geologic formation. The acid well stimulation treatment may be at any applied pressure and may be used in combination with hydraulic fracturing treatments or other well stimulation treatments. Acid well stimulation treatments include acid matrix stimulation treatments and acid fracturing treatments.

“Air injection” is an enhanced oil recovery process utilizing compressed air that is injected into a reservoir. Oxygen in the gas reacts exothermically with some of the oil, producing highly mobile flue gas. The flue gas advances ahead of the reaction front and achieves an efficient displacement of the in situ oil.

“API” refers to the American Petroleum Institute.

“ASTM” shall mean the American Society of Testing and Materials.

“City Manager” is the City’s administrative official, and the City Manager’s designated assistants, inspectors and deputies having the responsibility for the enforcement of this Chapter. The City Manager is authorized to consult experts qualified in fields related to the subject matter of this Chapter and codes adopted by reference herein as necessary to assist in carrying out duties. The City Manager may also appoint such number of officers, inspectors, assistants and other employees and/or appoint a Petroleum Administrator to assist in carrying out duties. If the City Manager determines it is necessary based on public health, safety or welfare, he or she may require any information as deemed reasonably necessary for a CUP or an abandonment application.

“Cyclic steaming” or “steaming” shall mean a production method with alternating steam flooding and subsequent oil production from the same well. Consistent with Section 3157(b) of Division 3 of the California Public Resources Code, cyclic steaming is not considered to be a well stimulation treatment.

“DOGGR” is the Division of Oil, Gas and Geothermal Resources which is part of the Department of Conservation of the State of California. DOGGR oversees the drilling, operation, maintenance, and plugging and abandonment of oil, natural gas, and geothermal wells.

“DOGGR Statutes and Regulations” are the California statutes and regulations related to or governing DOGGR, at Division 3 of the California Public Resources Code, Oil and Gas, and the California Code of Regulations, Title 14, Division 2.

“Drill” or “drilling” is to bore a hole in the earth, usually to find and remove subsurface formation fluids such as oil and gas. Drilling, under this Chapter, includes redrilling and reworking of wells.

“Enforcement action” is any administrative, injunctive, or legal action (either civil or criminal), to enforce, cite or prosecute a violation or efforts to abate or correct a violation (or dangerous or hazardous situation caused by a violation), including investigation, research, legal action, physical abatement, law enforcement and other necessary acts.

“Enhanced oil recovery” is the injection of steam, gas, or other chemical compounds into hydrocarbon reservoirs to stimulate the production of usable oil beyond what is possible through natural pressure and pumping at the wellhead.

“EPA” refers to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.

“Existing,” as applied to oil and gas sites, wells or other facilities and operations, refers to and includes all that were lawfully in existence at the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter.

“Exploratory well” is defined in the DOGGR Statutes and Regulations and means any well drilled to extend a field or explore a new, potentially productive reservoir.

“Facilities” include tanks, compressors, pumps, vessels, and other equipment or structures pertinent to oil field operations located at an oil and gas site.

“Gas” means any natural hydrocarbon gas coming from the earth.

“Gas plant” means processing equipment for produced gas to separate, recover, and make useful natural gas liquids (condensate, natural gasoline (e.g., pentenes), and liquefied petroleum gas, etc.), to separate, remove, and dispose of other nonhydrocarbon substances, such as water, sulfur, carbon dioxide, ammonia, etc., and to produce utility-grade gas suitable for delivery and sale.

“High risk operation” means an oil or gas production, processing or storage facility which: (a) has been in violation of any applicable section of this Chapter for more than thirty (30) consecutive days and resulted in the issuance of a notice of determination of fines pursuant to CMC 9514 during the preceding twelve (12) months; or (b) has had three (3) separate unauthorized releases of oil, produced water and/or other hazardous materials of a quantity not less than fifteen (15) barrels (six hundred thirty (630) gallons) other than within secondary containment for each incident during the preceding twelve (12) months.

“Hydraulic fracturing” is defined in the DOGGR Statutes and Regulations and means a well stimulation treatment that, in whole or in part, includes the pressurized injection of hydraulic fracturing fluid into an underground geologic formation in order to fracture, or with the intent to fracture, the formation, thereby causing or enhancing, for the purposes of this Chapter, the production of oil or gas from a well.

“Idle well” is defined in the DOGGR Statutes and Regulations and is any well that has not produced oil or natural gas or has not been used for injection for six (6) consecutive months of continuous operation during the last five (5) or more years. An idle well does not include an active observation well.

“Natural gas liquids” (NGLs) include propane, butane, pentane, hexane and heptane, but not methane and ethane, since these hydrocarbons need refrigeration to be liquefied.

“New development” means any of the following: (1) development of new buildings, structures or wells for oil and gas operations on a site that has either not previously been used for such activities, or where the previous use was abandoned, or a CUP expired or was revoked; (2) the expansion by three (3) or more wells at an existing site used for oil and gas operations and which conforms to setback requirements; (3) the placement or erection of tanks for holding produced substances or substances intended for subsurface injection in connection with oil and gas operations exceeding by twenty-five (25) percent or more the capacity of existing tanks as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter. New development does not include the like-kind replacement of facilities required for legally operating oil and gas operations that are damaged, failed, are at risk of failure, or are at the end of their useful life at an existing site. New development does not include workovers or other maintenance for legally operating oil and gas operations, including replacement-in-kind, or redrills of existing active or idle wells. Redrills of abandoned wells are considered new wells under this Chapter.

“New well” is defined by the DOGGR Statutes and Regulations as the drilling of a well that requires the submission of the DOGGR Form OG105, Notice of Intention to Drill New Well – Oil and Gas, as may be updated or amended. For the purposes of this Chapter, the redrilling of an abandoned well is considered a new well.

“NFPA” refers to the National Fire Protection Agency.

“Oil” is a simple or complex liquid mixture of hydrocarbons that can be refined to yield gasoline, kerosene, diesel fuel, and various other products.

“Oil and gas operations” are all activities in connection with the exploration, drilling for and the production of oil and gas and other hydrocarbons, together with all incidental equipment and appurtenances thereto.

“Oil and gas site” or “site” is an oil drilling site and all associated operations and equipment attendant to oil and gas production or injection operations including, but not limited to, pipelines, tanks, exploratory facilities (including exploratory wells), flowlines, headers, gathering lines, wellheads, heater treaters, pumps, valves, compressors, injection equipment, drilling facilities, and production facilities.

“Operator” means the person, who by virtue of ownership or under the authority of a lease or any other agreement, has the right to drill, operate, maintain, or control a well or production facility.

“OSHA” refers to the California Occupational Safety and Health Administration.

“Person” encompasses any individual, firm, association, corporation, joint venture or any other group or combination acting as an entity.

“Petroleum” is a substance occurring naturally in the earth in a solid, liquid, or gaseous state and composed mainly of mixtures of chemical compounds of carbon and hydrogen, with or without other nonmetallic elements such as sulfur, oxygen, and nitrogen.

“Petroleum Administrator” (PA) is the City’s administrative official having the responsibility for the enforcement of this Chapter. To carry out duties, the Petroleum Administrator may use designated assistants, inspectors and deputies subject to approval of the City Manager. The Petroleum Administrator is authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this Chapter and the codes adopted by reference herein. The Petroleum Administrator shall operate under the direction of the City Manager.

The Petroleum Administrator shall have the primary responsibility for enforcing the provisions of this Chapter unless otherwise specified. The Petroleum Administrator is authorized to consult experts qualified in fields related to the subject matter of this Chapter and codes adopted by reference herein as necessary to assist the Petroleum Administrator in carrying out duties. The Petroleum Administrator may also appoint such number of officers, inspectors, assistants and other employees for the petroleum unit as shall be authorized by the City Manager.

The Petroleum Administrator must be a licensed engineer such as petroleum engineer, mechanical engineer, or civil engineer. This Petroleum Administrator must possess an understanding of oil and gas production, facilities, operations, and ideally development. Past work experience should include production engineering, project management, facility or operational experience with the oil and gas industry. In alternative, the Petroleum Administrator may possess equivalent licenses and qualifications in the areas of environmental and earth sciences, toxicology and human health risk assessment. The Petroleum Administrator must be able to demonstrate relevant and current knowledge of oil field and oil production technology and practices.

“Pipelines,” for the purposes of this Chapter, shall mean all flow lines associated with wells located within the City of Carson used for the transportation of petroleum or petroleum by-products or of materials used in the production of petroleum.

“Produced water” is a term used to describe the water that is produced along with crude oil and gas.

“PSM” refers to process safety management.

“Redevelopment,” for the purposes of this Chapter, is the development of all or a portion of a current or former oil or gas site to another authorized use other than petroleum operations.

“Redrilling” is defined in the DOGGR Statutes and Regulations and is the deepening of an existing well or the creation of a partial new well bore including plugging of the original bore and casings and requires the submission of DOGGR Form OG107, Notice of Intention to Rework/Redrill Well, as may be updated or amended.

“Reentry” is the process of cleaning a plugged and abandoned well by drilling, jetting, or other method.

“Refining” shall mean any industrial process facility where crude oil is processed and refined into more useful products and sold to others without further treatment or processing.

“Regional Water Quality Control Board” shall mean the Los Angeles Regional Water Quality Control Board.

“Rework” is defined in the DOGGR Statutes and Regulations and means any operation subsequent to initial drilling that involves redrilling, plugging, or permanently altering in any manner the casing of a well or its function and requires the filing of a notice of intent to rework/redrill a well with DOGGR. Altering a casing includes such actions as a change in well type, new or existing perforations in casing, running or removing of cement liners, placing or drilling out any plug (cement, sand, mechanical), running a wireline tool that has the ability to drill through a cased borehole, or any other operation which permanently alters the casing of a well. For the purposes of this Chapter, “rework” includes a well abandonment.

“Secondary containment” means containment which is external to and separate from the primary containment, typically constructed of masonry block or poured concrete walls, which incorporates an impervious barrier, including but not limited to dikes, berms, or retaining walls sufficiently impervious to contain oil.

“Secondary recovery” means an improved recovery method of any type applied to a reservoir to produce oil not recoverable by primary recovery methods and would include water flooding, steam flooding and gas injection.

“Shutdown” or “shutdown order” is an order by the Petroleum Administrator, California State Fire Marshal, or DOGGR official to restrict or prohibit certain (or all) functions or operations at a facility or by an operator pursuant to authority of this Chapter.

“SPCC” refers to spill prevention, control, and countermeasures.

“Steam flooding” is a thermal oil and gas recovery method in which steam is injected into a reservoir through injection wells and driven toward production wells. The steam reduces the viscosity of crude oil, causing it to flow more freely. The heat vaporizes lighter hydrocarbons; as they move ahead of the steam, they cool and condense into liquids that dissolve and displace crude oil. The steam provides additional gas drive. This method is also used to recover viscous oils. The technique is also called continuous steam injection or steam drive. Consistent with Section 3157(b) of Division 3 of the California Public Resources Code, steam flooding is not considered to be a well stimulation treatment.

“Structure” means anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or is attached to something having a location on the ground, except outdoor areas such as walks, paved areas, tennis courts, and similar open recreation areas. This definition includes buildings, but does not include wells.

“Supervisor” means the DOGGR Supervisor.

“Toxic air contaminants” means an air pollutant which may cause or contribute to an increase in mortality or in serious illness, or which may pose a present or potential hazard to human health as defined in Section 39655 of the California Health and Safety Code, as may be amended from time to time. California Code of Regulations, Title 17, Section 93000, lists substances defined as toxic air contaminants.

“USEPA” refers to the United States Environmental Protection Agency.

“Waterflooding” is a method of secondary recovery in which water is injected into the reservoir formation to displace residual oil. The water from injection wells physically sweeps the displaced oil to adjacent production wells. Consistent with Section 3157(b) of Division 3 of the California Public Resources Code, waterflooding is not considered to be a well stimulation treatment.

“Well” is defined in the DOGGR Statutes and Regulations and means any oil or gas well or well for the discovery of oil or gas; any well on lands producing or reasonably presumed to contain oil or gas; any well drilled for the purpose of injecting fluids or gas for stimulating oil or gas recovery, repressuring or pressure maintenance of oil or gas reservoirs, or disposing of waste fluids from an oil or gas field; any well used to inject or withdraw gas from an underground storage facility; or any well drilled within or adjacent to an oil or gas pool for the purpose of obtaining water to be used in production stimulation or repressuring operations.

“Well stimulation treatment” is defined in the DOGGR Statutes and Regulations and means a treatment of a well designed to enhance oil and gas production or recovery by increasing the permeability of the formation. Well stimulation is a short term and noncontinual process for the purposes of opening and stimulating channels for the flow of hydrocarbons. Examples of well stimulation treatments include hydraulic fracturing, acid fracturing and acid matrix stimulation. Except for operations that meet the definition of “underground injection project” under California Code of Regulations, Title 14, Section 1761(a)(2), a treatment at pressures exceeding the formation fracture gradient shall be presumed to be a well stimulation treatment unless it is demonstrated to DOGGR’s satisfaction that the treatment, as designed, does not enhance oil and gas production or recovery by increasing the permeability of the formation. Except for operations that meet the definition of “underground injection project” under California Code of Regulations, Title 14, Section 1761(a)(2), a treatment that involves emplacing acid in a well and that uses a volume of fluid equal to or greater than the acid volume threshold for the operation shall be presumed to be a well stimulation treatment unless it is demonstrated to DOGGR’s satisfaction that the treatment, as designed, does not enhance oil and gas production or recovery by increasing the permeability of the formation. Well stimulation treatment does not include steaming, waterflooding or cyclic steaming and does not include routine well cleanout work; routine well maintenance; routine treatment for the purpose of removal of formation damage due to drilling; bottom hole pressure surveys; routine activities that do not affect the integrity of the well or the formation; the removal of scale or precipitate from the perforations, casing, or tubing; a gravel pack treatment that does not exceed the formation fracture gradient; or a treatment that involves emplacing acid in a well and that uses a volume of fluid that is less than the acid volume threshold for the operation and is below the formation fracture gradient.

“Workover” is the process of major maintenance or remedial treatments on an oil or gas well without changing the physical design of the well. Workovers include all operations that do not involve the initial drilling or reworking of wells and is regulated by DOGGR but without requirements for notices of intent or permits. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9504 Consistency with Other Laws, Rules and Regulations.
This Chapter, insofar as it regulates oil and gas operations also regulated by the California Department of Conservation, Division of Oil, Gas, and Geothermal Resources (DOGGR), is intended to supplement such State regulations and to be in furtherance and support thereof. Some definitions in CMC 9503 are based on DOGGR Statutes and Regulations and the intent of this Chapter is to utilize those definitions, as they may be amended from time to time by the California Legislature or by DOGGR, as applicable. In all cases where there is conflict with State laws or regulations, such State laws or regulations shall prevail over any contradictory provisions, or contradictory prohibitions or requirements, made pursuant to this Chapter. Additionally, the approving body, whether the City Manager, Planning Commission or City Council, may grant an exception or modification to the requirements of this Chapter to the minimal extent necessary to prevent a compensable taking. Such exception or modification shall be as consistent with the intent and purpose of this Chapter as possible given the specific factual circumstances of the particular project. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9505 Appeals and Consideration by the City Council.
Unless otherwise specified in this Chapter, any interested person may appeal a discretionary decision of the Petroleum Administrator consistent with procedure set forth in CMC 9173.4, except that references to “Director” shall be replaced with “Petroleum Administrator,” and the Planning Commission’s decision is final with no right of appeal to the City Council, unless otherwise specified in this Section. Examples of appeals to the City Council that are discretionary, but allowed, include conditional use permits, CMC 9507 and 9537(H)(2); periodic review, CMC 9509; ordinance applicability to existing operations, CMC 9501(B); and facility closures (including wells and pipelines), CMC 9510. CMC 9173.5 shall govern the statute of limitations. Mandatory requirements of this Chapter are not subject to appeal.

Except as noted herein, CMC 9508.2 shall govern the process of recommendations by the Planning Commission to the City Council. Examples of matters that go to the Council for final decision after recommendation by the Planning Commission are development agreements (CMC 9508) and permits related to well stimulation (CMC 9536). The procedures for processing and review of development agreements is set forth in CMC 9508.2. All other types of decisions requiring review by the Planning Commission as to a recommendation shall follow the process set forth in CMC 9508.2(A) through (D), except that (i) references to “development agreement” or “agreement” shall be read as “permit,” “plan” or “application” as appropriate; and (ii) notice shall be provided consistent with CMC 9173.22, except that the City Manager, not the Director, shall be responsible for providing notice. In no event shall a hearing be required to set for the Planning Commission until a recommendation on environmental compliance may also be considered if required by the California Environmental Quality Act. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9506 Well Drilling Permit.
Prior to commencing drilling or reworking of any oil and gas well, the operator must receive a well drilling or rework permit from DOGGR. Well permits from DOGGR shall be provided to the Petroleum Administrator prior to commencement of drilling or reworking activities. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9507 Required Procedures for Conditional Use Permits.
A. New development to which this Chapter applies (see CMC 9501) shall be required to receive a conditional use permit (CUP) from the City Planning Commission in order to receive authorization for, and proceed with, the construction and operation of new development. No permits shall be considered or approved without such permits being consistent with provisions of the CUP.

B. All procedures for CUPs to which this Chapter applies shall be consistent with the Part 7 of Chapter 1 of Article IX as well as with the following additional requirements. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9507.1 Conditional Use Permit (CUP) Filing Requirements.
In addition to the filing requirements required by CMC 9173.1, Applications, for projects within the City to which this Chapter is applicable, the following materials are also required as part of a CUP application for the consideration of the Planning Commission, or the City Council on appeal:

A. A complete statement of the proposed project including, but not limited to, activities, facilities, and sites.

B. A new or updated emergency response plan to deal with potential consequences and actions to be taken in the event of floods, earthquakes, hydrocarbon leaks or fires for the site. The emergency response plan shall be approved by the City’s Public Safety and Community Services Manager and the Los Angeles County Fire Department.

C. A phasing plan for the staging of development that includes the estimated timetable for project construction, operation, completion, restoration, and, where applicable, the location and amount of land reserved for future expansion.

D. A site plan showing:

1. Surface property, easement, rights-of-way and pipeline right-of-way boundaries within the site.

2. Proposed access road constructions or modifications and connections with City streets and roads and any existing private roads.

3. Areas to be used for construction.

4. Areas to be used for access and maintenance during pipeline operation within and adjacent to the site.

5. Existing roads, and pipelines and pipeline rights-of-way, if any.

6. Location and type of existing and proposed structures within fifty (50) feet of pipeline right-of-way.

7. Location of existing and proposed wells and oil or gas containing equipment and their measured distance from nearby uses, including the closest residential or school property line.

8. Proposed alteration of surface drainages within the site.

9. A contour map showing existing and proposed contours.

10. A plan for parking on or off site.

11. A map of all known, historic, or suspected active, idle and abandoned oil and gas wells or wellheads within the site and within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of the surface location of any existing or proposed new well within the site.

E. Site operations plan containing process flow diagrams, piping and instrumentation diagrams, expected process flows (rates, pressures, composition), and shutdown/startup procedures, quarterly/annual production, disposition, injection, and disposal.

F. Plans with measures to be used to prevent or reduce nuisance effects (e.g., dust, fumes, glare, noise, odor, air pollutants, and vibration) and to prevent danger to life, environmental quality, and property, consistent with the development standards in this Chapter.

G. Estimates of the amount of cut and fill required by the proposed project.

H. If the site is within one thousand (1,000) feet of any prohibited zoning as listed in Table 1-1, a plan for a community alert system (including new or utilizing existing systems, including, but not limited to, those operated by the Police, Sheriff or Fire Department) to automatically notify area residences and businesses in the event of an emergency at an oil or gas site that would require residents to take shelter or take other protective actions.

I. If any grading is proposed that results in the loss of vegetated, sandy, permeable ground areas, which could alter surface runoff at the site, a site-specific hydrologic analysis to evaluate anticipated changes in drainage patterns and associated increased runoff at the site.

J. If the site is within one thousand (1,000) feet of any prohibited zoning as listed in Table 1-1, a quiet mode operation plan which includes, but is not limited to, the following noise reduction measures:

1. Using signalers for all backup operations instead of backup alarms and turning off backup alarms;

2. Using radios instead of voice communication;

3. Minimizing crane use and pipe handling operations, pipe offloading from trucks and board loading to the maximum extent feasible and nighttime loading only for safety reasons;

4. Prohibiting material and supply deliveries to the project site, other than along designated truck routes, between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays and prohibiting deliveries on weekends and holidays, with exceptions only for safety; and

5. Limiting process alarms and communications over the broadcast system to the maximum extent feasible during all operations and use only for safety reasons.

K. If the site is within one thousand (1,000) feet of any prohibited zoning as listed in Table 1-1, a photometric analysis, which compares the baseline of the existing light measurements with the proposed light spill that will result from the oil and gas site.

L. An environmental quality assurance program (“EQAP”). (Ref. CMC 9531.1.) (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9507.2 Processing and Review.
Processing of CUPs shall comply with California’s Permit Streamlining Act requirements as consistent with Part 7 of Chapter 1 of Article IX.

A. The applicant may apply for:

1. The drilling operations only;

2. The production facilities only; or

3. Both the drilling and production facilities.

B. The Petroleum Administrator will review the submitted application(s) for completeness in compliance with the filing requirements of CMC 9507.1 and any other applicable sections of this Code, and shall refer the filed CUP to appropriate City departments or local and State agencies, as appropriate, for review and comment. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9507.3 Findings and Permitting Conditions.
A. In addition to the requirements of CMC 9172.21(D), Commission Findings and Decision, the Planning Commission shall approve a conditional use permit only if it is able to make affirmative findings of the following criteria:

1. The proposed project shall be in conformance with requirements of other local, regional, or State entities;

2. The project shall not be detrimental to the health, safety, environmental quality and general welfare of the community, and will be compatible with the uses in the surrounding area;

3. The project shall be in compliance with the development standards contained in Part 2 of this Chapter, commencing with CMC 9521; and

4. The project shall not result in an increased level of freshwater pollution or groundwater contamination in the immediate area or cause regulatory water standards at an existing water production well to be violated as defined in the California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Division 4, Chapter 15 and in the Safe Drinking Water Act, as they may be amended.

B. As a condition of approval of a CUP, the Planning Commission shall consider and impose appropriate conditions as deemed reasonable and necessary to find consistency with the findings in subsections (A)(1) through (A)(4) of this Section. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9507.4 Modifications and Extensions.
A. The provisions of CMC 9172.21 shall apply for all modifications or extensions requested for oil and gas operations.

B. Any existing oil and gas operation that does not have a CUP or development agreement for the operation shall be required to comply with this Chapter if any new development occurs at the existing oil and gas site. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9507.5 Change of Ownership/Operators Criteria.
A. Listing on Permit. Any person who operates an oil or gas site that is subject to this Chapter shall be listed as a permittee on the permit(s) issued for that facility.

B. Acceptance of Permit. Prior to being listed on a permit, any operator of an oil or gas site that is subject to this Chapter shall provide the City with a letter from an authorized agent or officer of the operator formally accepting all conditions and requirements of the permit.

C. Permits Transferable. Any CUP issued to any oil and gas site authorized pursuant to this Code shall be transferable to a new operator; provided, that the new operator accepts and meets all of the conditions and requirements of the CUP and this Chapter.

D. Ongoing Notification. All operators and guarantors shall, as an ongoing requirement, notify the Petroleum Administrator in writing of any change in the information required by this Section within thirty (30) days of such change.

E. Change of Operator. A change of operator shall require an application filed with the City within thirty (30) days prior to a change of operator. Upon approval by the Petroleum Administrator, such change of operator will become effective upon joint notice from the prior and new operators that the change of operator has become effective. An application is not required when the change of operator does not entail a substantive change to operations or personnel of the oil or gas site as determined by the Petroleum Administrator.

F. Liability for Compliance with Permit Conditions. Any operator listed on a permit pursuant to this Chapter shall comply with all conditions of such permit. Failure to comply with such permit conditions shall subject the operator to the applicable penalty and enforcement provisions of this Code or other applicable ordinance for such permits.

G. Liability for Abandonment. The operator, as determined by the records of the Petroleum Administrator, of a facility or site subject to this Chapter shall be responsible for the proper abandonment of the facility or site. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9508 Procedures for Development Agreements.
Projects appropriate for development agreements are subject to the requirements of this Section, which establishes procedures for adoption. The procedures for development agreements will comply with Article 2.5 of Chapter 4 of Division 1 of the California Government Code and the following additional requirements. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9508.1 Filing Requirements.
A. Only a qualified applicant may file an application to enter into a development agreement. A qualified applicant is a person(s) who has a legal or equitable interest in the real property of the oil or gas site. The qualified applicant shall provide proof of ownership interest, proof of interest in the real property, and proof of the authority of the agent or representative to act for the applicant. Said proof of interest and proof of authority shall be subject to review and approval by the City Attorney.

B. The Petroleum Administrator shall prescribe the form for each application, notice and documents provided for or required under these regulations for the preparation and implementation of development agreements. The applicant shall complete and submit such an application form to the Petroleum Administrator, along with a deposit for the estimated direct and indirect costs of processing the development agreement. The applicant shall deposit any additional amounts for all costs and fees to process the development agreement, including all legal fees, within fifteen (15) days of request by the Petroleum Administrator. Upon either completion of the application process or withdrawal of the application, the City shall refund any remaining deposited amounts in excess of the costs of processing.

C. The Petroleum Administrator shall require an applicant to submit such information and supporting data as the Petroleum Administrator considers necessary to process the application.

D. A community benefit assessment to evaluate the benefits the DA will provide to the community. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9508.2 Processing and Review.
A. The Petroleum Administrator shall endorse on the application the date it is received. An application or related document shall not be complete until an estimated deposit for the cost of processing has been paid to the City. If within thirty (30) days of receiving the application the Petroleum Administrator finds that all required information has not been submitted or the application is otherwise incomplete or inaccurate, the processing of the application and the running of any limits shall be suspended upon written notice to the applicant and a new thirty (30) day period shall commence once the required material is received by the Petroleum Administrator. If the Petroleum Administrator finds that the application is complete it shall be accepted for filing and the applicant so notified. The Petroleum Administrator shall review the application and determine the additional requirements necessary to complete processing of the agreement. After receiving the required information and the application is determined to be complete, the Petroleum Administrator shall prepare a staff report and recommendation to the Planning Commission and City Council stating whether or not the agreement as proposed or in an amended form would be consistent with policies of the City, this Chapter and any applicable general or specific plan. The City Attorney shall review the proposed development agreement as to legal form.

B. Notice of a hearing regarding the development agreement shall be given by the Petroleum Administrator and shall comply with the requirements of Section 65867 of the California Government Code, as may be amended, as well as in the manner set forth in CMC 9173.22, except that the Petroleum Administrator, not the Director, shall be responsible for providing notice.

C. The Planning Commission shall review the proposed development agreement and provide a recommendation to the City Council to approve, approve with modifications or deny the proposed development agreement. If the Planning Commission fails to take action within sixty (60) days of opening the hearing on the matter, such failure shall be deemed to have made a recommendation of denial to the City Council unless the applicant has requested an extension of time, either in writing or on the record, which has been approved by the Planning Commission prior to the running of the sixtieth day.

D. The proposed development agreement shall be set for hearing and consideration before the Council within sixty (60) days of the recommendation of the Planning Commission, unless the applicant agrees in writing to an extension of time with the Petroleum Administrator prior to the matter being heard by the Council.

E. Within ten (10) calendar days after the City enters into the development agreement, the City Clerk shall have the agreement recorded with the County Recorder. If the parties to the agreement or their successors in interest amend or cancel the agreement as provided in Section 65868 of the California Government Code, or if the City terminates or modifies the agreement as provided in Section 65865.1 of the California Government Code for failure of the applicant to comply in good faith with the terms or conditions of the agreement, the City Clerk shall have notice of such action recorded with the County Recorder. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9508.3 Findings and Development Agreement Conditions.
A. After the City Council completes the public hearing, the Council may not approve the development agreement unless it finds that the provisions of the agreement:

1. Are consistent with the goals, objectives, and policies of the general plan and any applicable specific plan;

2. Are compatible with the uses authorized in and the regulations prescribed for the zoned district in which the real property is located;

3. Will not be detrimental to the health, safety, environmental quality, and general welfare of the community;

4. Will not adversely affect the orderly development of property or the preservation of property values; and

5. Provides for a penalty for any violation of the development agreement consistent with the provisions of CMC 9514. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9508.4 Modifications and Extensions.
A. The provisions of Section 65868 of the California Government Code shall apply for all modifications, extensions or other amendments of the terms of a development agreement subject to this Chapter.

B. Either party may propose an amendment or termination of an approved development agreement subject to the following:

1. The procedure for amending or terminating the development agreement is the same as the procedure for entering into an agreement in the first instance.

2. The development agreement may be amended or cancelled only by the mutual consent of the parties, as provided in Section 65868 of the California Government Code.

C. Nothing herein shall limit the City’s ability to terminate or modify the agreement consistent with Section 65865.1 or 65865.3 of the California Government Code as may be amended. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9509 Periodic Review.
The City may choose to conduct a comprehensive review of any oil or gas drilling permit, CUP or DA every five (5) years from the date of approval to determine if the project and the associated CUP or DA are adequately mitigating significant environmental impacts caused by the drilling and operations. Nothing in this Section shall limit the City’s authority to conduct a review at more frequent intervals, engage in mitigation monitoring as required by CEQA, or otherwise act as directed or authorized by law.

A. Within thirty (30) days from the request by the City, the operator shall deposit to the City the funds necessary for the City to retain a third-party entity to prepare a periodic review, which includes all records, drawings, specifications, permits from State agencies, and analysis of the effectiveness of this Chapter, enforcement activity, and any other issues associated with potentially adverse effects of and complaints about oil and gas site operations. A periodic review will be funded by the operator at most once every five (5) year period following approval. If the periodic review identifies significant deficiencies in an oil and gas drilling permit, a CUP or DA that are resulting in unmitigated adverse impacts then the Petroleum Administrator may identify these deficiencies and bring forward recommendations of corrective actions to the Planning Commission for consideration and prospective amendments of oil and gas drilling permits and CUPs, and to the Planning Commission for recommendation to the City Council for consideration and prospective amendments of DAs.

B. A permit, CUP, or DA may also be reviewed by the Petroleum Administrator at any time, if more than three (3) violations occur within a twelve (12) month period and the Petroleum Administrator determines that resolution of the violations may be addressed by a new permit and/or an amendment to the CUP or DA. The Petroleum Administrator shall make a recommendation of amendments to the Planning Commission for CUPs and permits, and the Planning Commission and City Council for DAs, as deemed necessary. Nothing in this Section shall preclude the City from taking any other enforcement action authorized by this Code.

C. Nothing in this Section shall limit the requirements of an operator with a DA to demonstrate to the Petroleum Administrator good faith compliance with the terms of the agreement at least every twelve (12) months as required by Section 65865.1 of the California Government Code. If as a result of that review the Petroleum Administrator believes there is substantial evidence that the operator has not complied in good faith with the terms or conditions of the agreement, the Petroleum Administrator shall present the matter to the Commission for a recommendation to the City Council. The Commission shall set the matter for public hearing within forty (40) days of receipt of the matter from the Petroleum Administrator. If the Commission fails to act upon such request within a reasonable time, the Council may, by written notice, require the Commission to render its recommendation within forty (40) days. Failure to so report to the Council within the above time period shall be deemed to be a recommendation against modification or termination. After the Commission has rendered its recommendation, the matter shall be set for hearing before the City Council, who may terminate or modify the agreement if it finds and determines, on the basis of substantial evidence, that the operator or successor in interest has not complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the DA. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9510 Facility Closure, Site Abandonment, and Site Restoration Procedures.
The following provisions and procedures shall be implemented at the end of life of an oil and gas site, subject to a CUP, and govern the site (including well) facility closure and site restoration procedures. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9510.1 Purpose and Intent.
A. CMC 9510 et seq. establishes procedures and provisions to achieve the timely abandonment of oil and gas related activities and land uses, and following the abandonment, the timely and proper removal of applicable oil and gas facilities (including wells, equipment and gas-related structures), reclamation and remediation of host sites, and final disposition of pipelines, in compliance with applicable laws and permits.

B. The procedures ensure appropriate due process in differentiating idled from abandoned facilities and protecting the vested rights of permittees while also ensuring that sites with no reasonable expectation of restarting are removed, in compliance with the intent of abandonment permits. These procedures also ensure a process for abandoning or reabandonment of portions of sites where oil and gas operations will continue on the site, as well as procedures for restoration and redevelopment of a site to other uses at the end of the economic life of oil and gas production. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9510.2 Applicability.
Oil and gas sites and operations subject to CMC 9510 et seq. shall include all permitted uses identified in CMC 9501(A), regardless of whether these uses were permitted in compliance with this Chapter or any preceding ordinance. This includes all pipeline systems, except for public utility natural gas transmission and distribution systems, that either transport or at one time transported natural gas, oil, produced water, or waste water that originated from a reservoir, regardless of whether these uses were permitted in compliance with this Code or any preceding ordinance. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9510.3 Application Process.
The procedures for processing an abandonment and site restoration permit shall utilize the notice, hearing and appeal process for a conditional use permit as detailed in Part 7 of Chapter 1 of Article IX, as refined herein by CMC 9505. For any item required to be submitted less than one hundred eighty (180) days in advance, the Petroleum Administrator has the discretion to process and approve the application. Any person may submit an appeal to the Petroleum Administrator or the Planning Commission within fifteen (15) days of the Petroleum Administrator’s notice of decision consistent with CMC 9173.4. Mandatory requirements of the Code are not subject to appeal. All procedures shall be consistent with the following requirements. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9510.3.1 Requirement to File an Application.
A. Complete Abandonment of Oil and Gas Operations. The operator shall submit an application to the Petroleum Administrator upon intentional abandonment of the entire oil and gas operation or site. The application for abandonment and site restoration proceedings shall be submitted one hundred eighty (180) calendar days prior to the planned shutdown of all the facilities.

B. Partial Abandonment of Oil and Gas Operations. If any portion of the oil or gas site is being abandoned, or if a well is being reabandoned, the operator shall submit an application to the Petroleum Administrator for partial abandonment of oil or gas operations. Said application shall be submitted not later than thirty (30) calendar days prior to abandonment or reabandonment of wells involving no more than ten (10) percent of the total number of wells on site or ten (10) wells, whichever is more; all other applications shall be submitted not later than one hundred eighty (180) calendar days prior to abandonment, reabandonment or restoration.

C. Other Events Requiring an Application. The operator shall submit an application for abandonment, reabandonment, and site restoration proceedings to the Petroleum Administrator upon any of the following:

1. Any event or condition designated in an existing City permit or entitlement that would require consideration of abandonment. The application shall be submitted ninety (90) days in advance of the event or condition. If the event or condition cannot be known until after it occurs, the application must be submitted within fifteen (15) days of the event or condition.

2. Upon order of DOGGR. The application shall be submitted within thirty (30) days of a DOGGR order to abandon, reabandon, and restore the site; provided, however, that if the operator timely appeals such an order of the DOGGR, it shall have no obligation hereunder until thirty (30) days after a final decision affirming such order.

D. Nothing in this Chapter shall limit the City’s police powers. The City may require those measures reasonably necessary to address specific site or operational conditions that threaten public health, morals, safety or general welfare, which measures could include partial or complete abandonment. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9510.3.2 Content of Application.
The application shall be in a form and content specified by the Petroleum Administrator and this Section. The application shall contain the following:

A. Name, address, and contact information for the permittee.

B. Name, address, and general description of the permitted land use.

C. Gross and net acreage and boundaries of the subject property.

D. Location of all structures, above and underground, proposed to be removed.

E. Location of all structures, above and underground, proposed to remain in place.

F. Locations of all structures, above and underground, proposed for development, if any.

G. Location of all wells, including active, idled, abandoned or reabandoned wells, including distances from site boundaries, and existing structures. Each well shall include the DOGGR well name and number, as well as the American Petroleum Institute (API) well number. If available, the location of the wells shall be identified with the name of the operator and well designation.

H. An American Land Title Association (ALTA) survey of the site, showing all improvements, easements, rights-of-way, and other elements impacting the ownership of land.

I. Location of all utilities on the subject property.

J. Location of all easements on or adjacent to the subject property that may be affected by demolition or reclamation.

K. To the extent known, the type and extent of all contamination and proposed remedial actions to the level of detail that can be assessed through environmental review. This information does not require a new or modified Phase 2 site assessment in advance of any requirement by the Fire Department or State agencies with regulatory oversight of site assessments.

L. Location of areas of flood, geologic, seismic, and other hazards.

M. Location of areas of archaeological sites, habitat resources, prime scenic quality, water bodies, and significant existing vegetation.

N. Location and use of all structures within one hundred (100) feet of the boundaries of the subject property.

O. A proposed abandonment and restoration plan that details the activities for the proposed action, including the following details: hours of operation; estimated number of workers required on site to decommission facilities and structures or to otherwise abandon or reabandon wells; disposition of equipment and structures proposed for decommissioning; projected method and routes of transporting equipment, structures, and estimated debris from the site to the place of disposition as well as the number of trips required; and an estimated schedule for decommissioning the facilities or completion of the work.

P. A proposed waste management plan to maximize recycling and minimize wastes.

Q. Other permit applications that may be required by the Code to retain any existing structures, roadways, and other improvements to the property that were ancillary to the oil or gas operations and are proposed to be retained to support other existing or proposed uses of the property following abandonment of the oil or gas operations.

R. A proposed grading and drainage plan.

S. A proposed plan to convert the site to natural condition or convert to other proposed land use, including a detailed schedule for restoring the site. In the latter case, include other applicable permit applications required, if any, for the proposed land use.

T. A statement of intent regarding the disposition of utilities that served the oil and gas operations, including fire protection, power, sewage disposal, transportation, and water.

U. Measures proposed to be used to prevent or reduce nuisance effects (e.g., dust, fumes, glare, noise, odor, smoke, traffic congestion, vibration) and to prevent danger to life and property.

V. A copy of DOGGR approval to abandon, reabandon or remediate well(s).

W. A leak test report for each abandoned well on the site that meets the requirements of CMC 9537.

X. For abandonment or restoration in any circumstances where the permit is approved by the Petroleum Administrator without Planning Commission action, proof of mailed notice of intent to seek a permit to abandon or restore to the owner of record on the latest assessment roll for neighboring parcels within five hundred (500) feet of the oil and gas site property boundaries. The notice shall generally describe the scope of the activity being proposed.

Y. Any other information deemed reasonably necessary by the Petroleum Administrator to address site-specific factors. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9510.3.3 Permitting Specifications.
A. Application Filing. The Petroleum Administrator shall process complete applications for permits after determining the applications to be complete in compliance with CMC 9510.3.2, and submit applications subject to initial Planning Commission review to the Planning Commission with a recommendation regarding approval if the findings in CMC 9510.3.4 are met. An application shall not be complete unless the applicant has made a deposit for the estimated direct and indirect costs of processing the application. The applicant shall deposit any additional amounts for the costs to process the application, including legal review, within fifteen (15) days of request by the Petroleum Administrator. Upon either completion of the permitting process or withdrawal of the application, the City shall refund any remaining deposited amounts in excess of the direct and indirect costs of processing.

B. Independent or Concurrent Processing of Applications. For applications subject to initial Planning Commission review, the Planning Commission shall process complete applications for abandonment and site restoration permits independently of any other permit applications to develop the site in question, unless the Petroleum Administrator makes the determination that the concurrent processing of abandonment and site restoration permits and development permits for the same site do not unduly hinder timely restoration of abandoned sites or result in long delays in securing approval of development permits.

C. Demolition and Restoration Permit Shall Supersede. Upon approval of a demolition and restoration permit subject to initial approval by the Planning Commission, or upon abandonment of operations, whichever occurs later, the demolition and reclamation permit shall supersede any inconsistencies in the discretionary permit approved for construction and operation of the facilities.

D. Conditions of Permit. In addition to any other requirements of this Code, any permit for abandonment, reabandonment or restoration shall be subject to the following requirements regardless whether initially approved by the Petroleum Administrator or the Planning Commission:

1. Oil well abandonment shall be performed by oil service company contractors licensed to do business in the City.

2. All equipment and surface installations used in connection with the well which are not necessary, as determined by the Petroleum Administrator or Planning Commission, for the operation or maintenance of other wells on the drill or operation site shall be removed from the site.

3. The abandoned site or portions of the oil and gas site shall be restored to its original condition or as nearly as is practical given the nature of the location and continuing uses for an oil and gas site, so long as the restoration will not adversely impact ongoing oil and gas production operations.

4. All sumps, cellars, and ditches which are not necessary for the operation or maintenance of other wells on the oil or gas site shall be cleaned out and all oil, oil residue, drilling fluid, and rubbish shall be removed to reduce hydrocarbons to standards acceptable to Federal, State, or local agencies. All sumps, cellars, and ditches shall be leveled or filled. Where such sumps, cellars, and ditches are lined with concrete, the operator shall cause the walls and bottoms to be broken up and all concrete shall be removed.

5. The portions of the site not necessary for continuing oil or gas site operations shall be cleaned and graded and left in a clean and neat condition free of oil, rotary mud, oil-soaked earth, asphalt, tar, concrete, litter, and debris.

6. All public streets, alleys, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, and other places constituting public property which may have been disturbed or damaged in connection with any operation, including operations for the abandonment or reabandonment of the well, shall be cleaned, and, except for ordinary wear and tear, shall be repaired and restored to substantially the same condition thereof as the same existed at the time of issuance of the permit, or at the time operations were first commenced in connection with the drilling, operation, or maintenance of the well.

7. A copy of written approval of DOGGR confirming compliance with all State abandonment proceedings for all abandoned facilities must be furnished to the Petroleum Administrator.

8. Proposed restoration will leave the subject site in a condition that is compatible with any existing easements or dedications for public access through or public use of a portion of the property. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9510.3.4 Findings Required for Approval.
In addition to the findings specified in CMC 9172.21, for permits the Petroleum Administrator or Planning Commission shall also make affirmative findings based on the following criteria:

A. The subject site will be restored and remediated to its preproject conditions unless areas within the site are subject to approved development, in which case restoration and landscaping of these areas will conform to the permitted development. In cases where development is proposed but not yet permitted, restoration of affected areas to natural conditions may be waived by the Planning Commission; provided, the development is permitted within five (5) years and the permittee has posted financial assurances acceptable to the Petroleum Administrator to ensure restoration to natural conditions if the proposed development is not permitted.

B. The proposed restoration will leave the subject site in a condition that is compatible with any existing easements or dedications for public access through or public use of a portion of the property.

C. The permit conditions comply with CMC 9510.3.3 and contain specific enforceable requirements to ensure the timely completion of any abandonment or reabandonment of wells, restoration activities or cessation of other oil and gas site operations subject to the permit. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9511 Operational Noticing.
A. Each operator shall submit copies of notices provided to or received from DOGGR, to the Petroleum Administrator, within ten (10) business days of transmission or receipt of such notices, as applicable. These shall include: designation of agents, notice of intent to drill a new well, division approvals (permit to conduct well operations, notice and permit to drill, permit to rework/redrill well (p-report), enhanced recovery project approval, water disposal project approval, commercial water disposal approval), notice of intention to rework/redrill well, notice of intention to abandon/reabandon well, supplementary notices, report of property transfer forms and any inspection reports or notices of violation, as these notices may be updated or amended. All other DOGGR notices or other DOGGR communications shall be submitted at the discretion of the Petroleum Administrator.

B. The operator of (or any person who acquires) any well, property, or equipment appurtenant thereto, whether by purchase, transfer, assignment, conveyance, exchange or otherwise, shall each notify the Petroleum Administrator within ten (10) business days of the transaction closing date. The notice shall contain the following:

1. The names and addresses of the person from whom and to whom the well(s) and property changed.

2. The name and location of the well(s) and property.

3. The date of acquisition.

4. The date possession changed.

5. A description of the properties and equipment transferred.

6. The new operator’s agent or person designated for service of notice and his address.

C. The operator of any well shall notify the Petroleum Administrator, in writing, of the idling of any well. The operator shall notify the Petroleum Administrator in writing upon the resumption of operations of an idle well giving the date thereof.

D. The operator shall report any violations of State or Federal laws that occur on an oil and gas site to the Petroleum Administrator within thirty (30) days of their date of documentation by a State or Federal agency. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9512 Complaints.
All complaints related to activities regulated by this Chapter received by the operator shall be reported within one (1) business day to the Petroleum Administrator. If the complaint is received after normal business hours, it shall be reported to the Petroleum Administrator the next business day. In addition, the operator shall maintain a written log of all complaints and provide that log to the Petroleum Administrator on a quarterly basis. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9513 Injunctive Relief.
In addition to any administrative remedies or enforcement provided in this Code, the City may seek and obtain temporary, preliminary, and permanent injunctive relief to prohibit violation or mandate compliance with this Code. All remedies and enforcement procedures set forth herein shall be in addition to any other legal or equitable remedies provided by law. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9514 Notice of Violation and Administrative Fines.
A. The operator shall also be subject to a fine for violation of any requirement of a CUP or this Chapter as determined by the Petroleum Administrator, subject to the following:

1. Depending on the specific type and degree of the violation, the operator in violation may be penalized at a rate of up to $10,000 per day, per violation, until it is cured, but in no event in an amount beyond that authorized by State law. The Petroleum Administrator will develop a violation fine schedule for Council approval to specifically identify the fines associated with oil or gas site violations. This violation fine schedule may also include nuisance violations.

2. In the event of a violation of any of the City’s permitting actions, a written notice of violation and the associated fine determination will be sent to the operator by the Petroleum Administrator. The operator shall deposit the sum of $5,000 per well, up to $100,000, in an interest-bearing trust fund with the City within thirty (30) days of the date of the second violation notice sent to the operator by the Petroleum Administrator, to establish a draw down account. If the noted violation is not corrected within thirty (30) calendar days to the satisfaction of the Petroleum Administrator, or if steps satisfactory to the Petroleum Administrator have not been initiated during that period to effect a cure or to seek modification of the condition, the fine amount cited in the written notice will be deducted from the account. The operator shall reimburse the City for any additional reasonable costs above the amount of the original deposit.

3. The operator has a right of appeal to the Petroleum Administrator or Commission within fifteen (15) days of the written notice or contested determination of compliance. Decisions of the Petroleum Administrator not appealed within fifteen (15) days become final. If the operator appeals to the Petroleum Administrator or the Commission such that the decision is ultimately reversed and the operator is specifically designated the “prevailing party” by the Petroleum Administrator or Commission, then the City shall refund the operator the deposit related to the challenged determination.

B. Nothing in this Section or Chapter shall limit the City’s ability to pursue other enforcement procedures, including CUP revocation proceedings, actions to enforce a DA, or other legal or equitable remedies provided by this Code or available under the law. Revocations of a permit or CUP may be done pursuant to CMC 9172.28, except that the Commission may choose to amend rather than revoke, and the references to “Director” shall be replaced with “Petroleum Administrator.” (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9515 Nuisance Procedures.
Any violation of this Chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance for the purposes of CMC 5702, and may be abated pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 7 of Article V, Property Maintenance, except that references to “Director” shall be replaced with “City Manager or designee.” The procedures for abatement shall not be exclusive, and shall not in any manner limit or restrict the City from otherwise enforcing this Chapter or abating public nuisances in any other manner as provided by law, including the institution of legal action by the City Attorney to abate the public nuisance at the request of the City Manager. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9515.1 High Risk Operations.
A. Upon determination that any oil and gas production, processing or storage operation meets the definition of “high risk operation” from CMC 9503, the Petroleum Administrator shall give the operator written notice of the Petroleum Administrator’s intent to determine the operation a high risk operation under this Section. The intent of this Section shall be to remediate the high risk operation and bring the oil or gas site and the operator within normal, safe operating standards and protect the public safety, health and environment. The written notice of the intent to determine the operation a high risk operation shall include:

1. Facts substantiating the determination; and

2. A notice regarding the right to appeal the determination to the Commission within fifteen (15) days. During the pendency of any such appeal, the Petroleum Administrator’s determination shall remain in full force and effect until affirmatively set aside by the Commission. The Commission’s decision shall be supported by substantial evidence, and refusal by the operator to provide access to the operation to allow inspection or investigation to determine compliance as authorized by this Code or other law shall be deemed evidence the definition of a high risk operation has been met.

B. Along with the determination of the site being a high risk operation, the Petroleum Administrator may take either or both of the following actions:

1. An investigation of the causes leading up to the high risk determination;

2. Require a mandatory restoration plan to be submitted by the operator. Such plan shall include, but is not limited to:

i. A mandatory restoration schedule for bringing the site and operator within normal, safe operating standards. Such schedule does not supersede any timeline for abatement otherwise established for individual outstanding violations.

ii. An audit of overall site operation(s):

a. The audit shall be conducted by an independent third party approved by the Petroleum Administrator. Costs associated with the audit shall be borne by the operator;

b. The audit shall identify and analyze the root causes leading to the high risk designation;

c. The audit shall further identify and analyze other potential areas in overall site operation that could impact the site’s ability to operate within safe and normal standards (e.g., personnel training, operational policies, internal procedures, etc.);

d. Provide a plan for remediating all issues identified in the audit, including a mandatory schedule for remediating those issues. Such restoration plans shall be subject to approval by the Petroleum Administrator;

e. The audit may be ordered in lieu of, or in addition to, the investigation undertaken by the Petroleum Administrator.

iii. Any other requirements the Petroleum Administrator deems necessary to bring the site and operation within normal, safe operating standards for the purposes of protecting the public safety, health and environment.

C. The operator of the high risk operation shall carry out the approved restoration plan and shall be responsible for paying all reasonable costs associated with the implementation of the plan, including:

1. City staff time in enforcing these provisions at an hourly rate that provides for full cost recovery of the direct and indirect costs. Staff time shall include, but is not limited to, the ongoing monitoring and verification of compliance with the approved restoration plan;

2. Investigative, research (including legal research) and consulting costs associated with preparation of the restoration plan;

3. Third-party costs for investigation, consultation, engineering, clean-up, operator staff training, operations and all other related costs necessary to carry out the restoration plan;

4. Any other costs necessary to remediate the high risk operation as ordered by the Petroleum Administrator.

D. At the sole discretion of the Petroleum Administrator, at any time during which a site or operator is subject to this Section, the Petroleum Administrator may require a bond be posted to cover the cost of remediating the causative problems of the high risk operation.

E. The determination of high risk operations shall continue to apply until the goals and guidelines of the restoration plan established hereunder are achieved. The high risk operator shall notify the Petroleum Administrator when a milestone in the restoration plan has been satisfied. The Petroleum Administrator may conduct independent verification of the compliance upon such notification. The restoration plan may be amended from time to time as necessary to achieve the purposes of this Section. Upon a determination by the City that the goals and guidelines of the restoration plan have been achieved, the City shall notify the operator in writing that the site is no longer a high risk operation.

F. Failure of the operator of a high risk operation to post a bond required under this Section, prepare the restoration plan within a reasonable time frame as ordered by the Petroleum Administrator, or to reasonably achieve the goals and guidelines of an approved restoration plan under this Section may be cause for a shutdown of the high risk operation(s) or any other petroleum operations located in the City that are co-owned or co-operated by the high risk operator, at the discretion of the Petroleum Administrator.

G. The operator of a high risk operation shall compensate the City for any costs associated with the enforcement of this Section within thirty (30) days of written demand by the Petroleum Administrator. Any City costs associated with enforcement of this Section which are not promptly paid by the operator shall be subject to enforcement by tax bill lien or other collection methods at the discretion of the City.

H. The City may institute legal proceedings to require compliance provisions with this Section. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9516 Compliance Monitoring.
A. Environmental Compliance Coordinator(s). The City may hire Environmental Compliance Coordinators as needed to oversee the monitoring and condition compliance requirements of the City’s permitting actions subject to regulation under this Chapter, the costs of which shall be reimbursed by operator. The number of Environmental Compliance Coordinators shall be determined by the City and shall take into account the level of oil and gas operations associated with the project site. The Environmental Compliance Coordinator(s) shall be approved by, and shall report to, the Petroleum Administrator consistent with the Petroleum Administrator’s authority under CMC 2107. The responsibilities of the Environmental Compliance Coordinator(s) shall be determined by the City for the project site and shall generally include:

1. Monitoring of oil and gas sites for compliance with this Chapter as it relates to construction, drilling, operational or abandonment and site restoration activities as determined by the Petroleum Administrator.

2. Taking steps to ensure that the operator, and all employees, contractors and other persons working in the project site, have knowledge of and are in compliance with all applicable provisions of the conditional use permit or development agreement.

3. Reporting responsibilities to the various City departments with oversight responsibility at the project site, as well as other agencies such as DOGGR and SCAQMD.

B. Compliance Deposit Account. An applicant must establish a compliance deposit account with the City within thirty (30) days of receiving authorization for a CUP or DA from the City. The compliance security deposit amounts shall be determined by the Petroleum Administrator, and shall be based on the nature and extent of the compliance actions required and shall be a minimum of $5,000. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9517 Financial Assurances Applicability.
A. CMC 9518 through 9520 shall apply to any person who operates any oil or gas site involved in exploration, production, processing, storage or transportation of oil or gas extracted from reserves in the City of Carson.

B. This Chapter shall not apply to the change of operator of the following:

1. Sales gas pipelines operated by a public utility and regulated by the California Public Utilities Commission;

2. A change of ownership consisting solely of a change in percentage ownership of a site and which does not entail addition or removal of an owner or affect any financial guarantee or bonds for a permit, CUP, and/or DA. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9518 Operator’s Financial Responsibilities.
The applicant shall be fully responsible for all reasonable costs and expenses incurred by the City or any City contractors, consultants, or employees in reviewing, approving, implementing, inspecting, monitoring, or enforcing this Chapter or any CUP, DA, or permit, including, but not limited to, costs for permitting, permit conditions implementation, mitigation monitoring (including well abandonment and reabandonment), reviewing and verifying information contained in reports, inspections, administrative support, and including the fully burdened cost of time spent by City employees, City Attorney, or third-party consultants and contractors on such matters. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9519 Securities and Bond Requirements.
The operator or any contractor of any oil and gas operation subject to this Chapter shall provide, or cause to be provided, the securities and bond requirements described below.

A. The operator shall file a faithful performance bond with the Petroleum Administrator consistent with the following bonding requirements:

1. The Petroleum Administrator shall determine the amount of the bond based on the total number of wells, proposed operations, size and nature of the property, appropriate environmental studies on the property, including a phase I, II or human health risk assessment report and other relevant conditions related to the proposed wells or operations at a specific oil or gas site, and recognized commercial standards.

2. The amount of the bond shall be sufficient to assure the completion of the abandonment, necessary reabandonment, site restoration, to the extent not fully covered by DOGGR bonds, and remediation of contamination of the oil or gas site if the work had to be performed by the City in the event of forfeiture. The performance bond shall be inflation indexed to ensure the amount of the bond shall be sufficient to assure completion of the abandonment, restoration and remediation of contamination of the oil or gas site. The bond shall be available within a time frame to allow the City to undertake related activities in a timely manner, including at least one-half (1/2) for immediate access and use in the event of an emergency as determined by the Petroleum Administrator.

3. Prior to expansion of an oil or gas site, the operator shall apply to the Petroleum Administrator for a determination of the amount of the bond necessary to ensure completion for both the existing and expanded operations. In addition, every bond shall be reassessed by the Petroleum Administrator every five (5) years to ensure the amount is sufficient to ensure the completion of the abandonment, site restoration, and remediation of contamination of the oil or gas site.

4. Upon application by the operator, the Petroleum Administrator may reduce bonding amounts based upon change of physical circumstances, completion or partial completion of work, or significant reduction in cost to perform the work. In no event shall the amount of the bond be reduced to an amount insufficient to complete any remaining work, nor shall the bond be reduced due to economic hardship or similar considerations.

5. After completion of all abandonment and site restoration requirements, the bond shall be maintained in a sufficient amount to ensure remediation of contamination at the oil or gas site for a period not less than fifteen (15) years.

6. In no event shall the bonding amount required by the City be less than $10,000 per well.

7. The bond may be drawn only from a qualified entity without any economic interests or relationship with the operator and any related economic entities related thereto, and bonds must be rated “A” or better by a nationally recognized bond rating organization. The Petroleum Administrator shall receive all pertinent information related to the bond and bonding entity prior to issuance of a final approved permit, CUP, or DA.

B. In lieu of these bonding requirements, an operator may also submit any other legally adequate and binding financial mechanism, subject to City Attorney approval, to satisfy the monetary assurance requirements set by the Petroleum Administrator to assure completion of the abandonment, restoration and remediation of contamination of the oil or gas site.

C. For any evaluation of bonding amounts by the Petroleum Administrator in this Section, or evaluation of a financial mechanism proposed in lieu of a bond by the City Attorney, the operator shall deposit the estimated costs with the Petroleum Administrator with the application, and shall also make any additional deposit(s) within thirty (30) days of written request by the Petroleum Administrator. The Petroleum Administrator may retain consultants or other experts in the industry to assist in deriving a commercially reasonable bond amount. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9520 Operator Liability Insurance.
The operator of any oil and gas operation subject to this Chapter shall provide, or cause to be provided, the insurance described below for each oil and gas site during the pendency of oil and gas operations. The operator or contractor must provide to the City sufficient documentation that the insurance complies with the minimum requirements and coverage amounts of this Section before a permit may be issued.

A. General Provisions Regarding Insurance.

1. The operator or any contractor shall pay for and maintain in full force and effect all policies of insurance described in this Section with an insurance company or companies admitted by the California Insurance Commissioner to do business in the State of California and rated not less than “A-VII” in Best’s Insurance Rating Guide.

2. In the event any policy is due to expire, the operator or any contractor shall provide a new certificate evidencing renewal of such policy not less than thirty (30) calendar days prior to the expiration date of the expiring policy. Upon issuance by the insurer, broker, or agent of a notice of cancellation in coverage, operator or any contractor shall file with the Petroleum Administrator a new certificate and all applicable endorsements for such policy.

3. Liability policies shall name as “additional insured” the City, including its officers, officials, agents, employees and authorized volunteers.

4. All policies shall be endorsed to provide an unrestricted thirty (30) calendar day written notice in favor of City of policy cancellation of coverage, except for: (1) nonpayment, which shall provide a ten (10) day written notice of such cancellation of coverage, and (2) the workers’ compensation policy which shall provide a ten (10) calendar day written notice of such cancellation of coverage.

5. The operator shall present to the Petroleum Administrator copies of the pertinent portion of the insurance policies evidencing all coverage and endorsements required by this Section before the issuance of any permit subject to this Chapter, and the acceptance by the City of a policy without the required limits or coverage shall not be deemed a waiver of these requirements. The City may, in its sole discretion, accept a certificate of insurance in lieu of a copy of the pertinent portion of the policy pending receipt of such document by the City. After the issuance of the permit, the City may require the operator to provide a copy of the most current insurance coverage and endorsements for review at any time. The operator will be responsible for paying an administration fee to cover the costs of such review as may be established by the City’s fee schedule.

6. Claims-made policies shall not be accepted except for excess policies and environmental impairment (or seepage and pollution) policies.

7. Insurance coverage shall be reviewed by the Petroleum Administrator as required by CMC 9509 to ensure adequate insurance is maintained.

B. Required Insurance Coverage.

1. Commercial or Comprehensive General Liability Insurance.

i. Bodily injury and property damage coverage shall be a minimum combined single limit of $2,000,000 per occurrence, $2,500,000 in the aggregate. This coverage must include premises, operations, blowout or explosion, products, completed operations, blanket contractual liability, underground property damage, underground reservoir (or resources) damage, broad form property damage, independent contractor’s protective liability and personal injury.

ii. Environmental impairment (or seepage and pollution) coverage shall be either included in the comprehensive general liability coverage or as separate coverage. Such coverage shall not exclude damage to the lease site. If environmental impairment (or seepage and pollution) coverage is written on a claims-made basis, the policy must provide that any retroactive date applicable precedes the effective date of the issuance of the permit. Coverage shall apply to sudden and accidental pollution conditions resulting from the escape or release of smoke, vapors, fumes, acids, alkalis, toxic chemicals, liquids, oil and gas, waste material, or other irritants, contaminants or pollutants. Such policy shall provide for minimum combined single limit coverage of $2,000,000 per occurrence and $2,500,000 in the aggregate. A discovery period for such peril shall not be less than ten (10) years after the occurrence.

2. Commercial Automobile Liability Insurance. Minimum combined single limit of $1,000,000 per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage. The policy shall be at least as broad as the most current version of Insurance Services Office (ISO) Business Auto Coverage Form CA 00 01 and shall include coverage for all owned, hired, and nonowned automobiles or other licensed vehicles (Section 1, Subsection A.1 entitled “Any Auto”).

3. Workers’ Compensation Insurance. Maintain the minimum statutory requirements, coverage which shall not be less than $1,000,000 for each occurrence.

4. Excess (or Umbrella) Liability Insurance. Minimum limit of $25,000,000 providing excess coverage for each of the perils insured by the preceding liability insurance policies, except for underground reservoir (or resources) damage.

5. Control of Well Insurance (Only During Drilling or Reworking).

i. Minimum limit of $40,000,000 per occurrence, with a maximum deductible of $500,000 per occurrence.

ii. Policy shall cover the cost of controlling a well that is out of control, drilling or restoration expenses, and seepage and pollution damage. Damage to property in the operator’s care, custody and control with a sub-limit of $500,000 may be added.

iii. The Petroleum Administrator may reduce or waive the coverage requirements upon finding that the operations will be confined to depths and formations within which there is no substantial risk of loss of well control.

6. Self-Insurance. The operator shall have the option to self-insure if insurance is not commercially feasible to obtain and maintain in the commercial insurance market, as certified by a written report prepared by an independent insurance advisor of recognized national standing, for the following types of insurance required by this subsection: excess (or umbrella) liability insurance, control of well insurance, and environmental impairment (or seepage and pollution) coverage. The operator shall provide a certificate for self-insurance subject to approval by the Petroleum Administrator and Risk Management, and to the City Attorney for approval as to legal sufficiency. To the extent said insurance is limited to amounts less than that required by this Chapter, the operator must first obtain available insurance coverage to the extent it is commercially feasible, and then shall self-insure for the remaining amount.

C. Failure to Maintain Coverage. Upon failure of the operator or contractors to provide that proof of insurance as required by this Section when requested, the Petroleum Administrator may order the suspension of any outstanding permits and petroleum operations of the operator until the operator provides proof of the required insurance coverage. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

PART 2. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR PETROLEUM OPERATIONS
Sections:

§ 9521    Setback Requirements.

§ 9522    Site Access and Operation.

§ 9522.1    Deliveries.

§ 9522.2    Construction Time Limits.

§ 9522.3    Oil and Gas Site Parking.

§ 9523    Lighting.

§ 9524    Aesthetics.

§ 9524.1    Landscaping/Visual Resources.

§ 9524.2    Walls.

§ 9524.3    Sanitation.

§ 9524.4    Architecture.

§ 9525    Roads.

§ 9525.1    Construction of Site Access Roads.

§ 9526    Signage.

§ 9527    Steaming.

§ 9528    Utilities.

§ 9529    On-Site Storage and Placement of Equipment.

§ 9530    Safety Assurances and Emergency/Hazard Management.

§ 9530.1    Fire Prevention Safeguards.

§ 9530.2    Blowout Standards and Testing.

§ 9530.3    Earthquake Shutdown.

§ 9530.4    Storage Tank Monitoring.

§ 9530.5    Safety Measures and Emergency Response Plan.

§ 9530.6    Transportation of Chemicals and Waste On and Off Site.

§ 9530.6.1    Natural Gas Liquids (NGLs).

§ 9530.6.2    Transportation Risk Management and Prevention Program (TRMPP).

§ 9530.6.3    Pipeline Leak Detection.

§ 9531    Environmental Resource Management.

§ 9531.1    General Environmental Program.

§ 9531.2    Air Quality.

§ 9531.3    Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Energy Efficiency Measures.

§ 9531.4    Air Quality Monitoring and Testing Plan.

§ 9531.5    Water Quality.

§ 9531.5.1    Water Management Plan.

§ 9531.5.2    Storm Water Runoff.

§ 9531.5.3    Groundwater Quality.

§ 9531.6    Noise Impacts.

§ 9532    Standards for Wells.

§ 9533    Standards for Pipelines.

§ 9533.1    Pipeline Installations and Use.

§ 9533.2    Pipeline Inspection, Monitoring, Testing and Maintenance.

§ 9534    Temporary Buildings.

§ 9535    Reserved.

§ 9536    Reserved.

The following Sections of Part 2 apply only to those operations subject to a CUP or DA, except for those existing operations as noted in CMC 9501(B).

9521 Setback Requirements.
A. The surface locations of wells and tanks within an oil and gas site shall not be located within:

1. Seven hundred fifty (750) feet of the property boundaries of any public school, public park, clinic, hospital, long-term health care facility.

2. Seven hundred fifty (750) feet of the property boundaries of any residence or residential zone, as established in this Code, except the residence of the owner of the surface land on which a well might be located and except a residence located on the land which, at the time of the drilling of the well, is under lease to the person drilling the well.

3. Seven hundred fifty (750) feet of the property boundaries of the commercially designated zone CN, CA, MU-CS or MU-SB (see Table 1-1), as established by this Code.

4. Fifty (50) feet of any dedicated public street, highway, public walkway, or nearest rail of a railway being used as such.

B. For all injection wells, the applicant shall provide a copy of the area of review (AOR) study, consistent with the requirements of California Code of Regulations, Title 14, Section 1724.7, as per DOGGR.

C. Legally existing oil and gas operations that do not meet the setback requirements and were conforming immediately before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter are not considered nonconforming uses and are not made subject to Division 2 of Part 8 of Chapter 1 of Article IX, Nonconformities, by this Chapter. Such operations may continue to lawfully operate to the extent the operations can demonstrate to the City vested rights as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter, but are prohibited from expanding operations beyond those demonstrated vested rights. Vested rights for a particular well may be demonstrated by the existence of an installed conductor in a cellar for that well or any other method established by law. The operator can replace structures and equipment required for oil and gas operations that are damaged, have failed, are at risk of failure, or are at the end of their useful life. Said replacements shall be made with like-kind structures and equipment that do not expand capacity or structural footprint. If the operator can demonstrate that such structure or equipment is not reasonably available or appropriate for current operational practices, the Petroleum Administrator may approve minor expansion of equipment or structure upon finding the proposed changes are minor and do not constitute or tend to produce an expansion or intensification of capacity for the site. For existing oil and gas facilities and operations that do not meet the setback requirements as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter, drilling of new wells is prohibited unless the operator can demonstrate vested rights for each new well.

D. Consolidation and Relocation Incentives.

1. Existing Uses in Setback. For existing wells legally operating within the prohibited setback identified in subsection (A) of this Section, an operator can exchange wells, either existing or vested, at a one-to-two (1:2) ratio to another (existing) receiving site(s) without counting toward new development that would require a CUP or DA.

2. Existing Uses Outside Setback. For existing wells legally operating outside the prohibited setback, an operator can exchange only wells actually existing at the time of the ordinance codified in this Chapter (not vested or hypothetical wells) at a one-to-one (1:1) ratio to another existing receiving site(s) without counting toward “new development” that would require a CUP or DA. The contributing site must be completely abandoned before wells can be constructed at any receiving site. The operator must completely abandon all surface rights to the contributing site (i.e., no future oil and gas operations to occur at the site) and provide acceptable proof to the City of the same. All receiving sites must exist and have active operations as of the date of approval of the ordinance codified in this Chapter.

3. For All Consolidation or Relocation. The operator must provide the City with notice of intent to transfer prior to abandonment of any well(s) or contributing site intended to be consolidated or relocated. Transfers may occur at any time after abandonment is complete and the rights may be “banked” and assigned to another operator upon notice to the City. No well can be transferred more than one time. The receiving well location or site must be located outside the boundaries identified in subsections (A)(1) through (A)(3) of this Section, and comply with subsection (A)(4) of this Section outside of the prohibited setback. The receiving site cannot expand by more than ten (10) wells from any source or exchange, in addition to those existing or vested, without being considered new development. All receiving sites must comply with CMC 9501(B) for sites not required to obtain a new CUP. The receiving site must also extract petroleum from the same oil or gas field; consolidation or relocation between fields is prohibited for incentive purposes. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9522 Site Access and Operation.
The following measures shall be implemented throughout the operation of any oil and gas site or project subject to this Chapter. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9522.1 Deliveries.
For oil and gas sites located in nonindustrial areas or for delivery routes, other than designated truck routes, that pass through or adjacent to prohibited zones as listed in Table 1-1, (a) deliveries to the oil or gas sites shall not be permitted after 6:00 p.m. and before 8:00 a.m., except in cases of emergency, and (b) no deliveries shall be permitted on Saturdays, Sundays or legal holidays, except in cases of emergency. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9522.2 Construction Time Limits.
Construction of permanent structures, workovers and other maintenance, including replacement in kind, shall not be permitted after 7:00 p.m. and before 7:00 a.m., or during Saturdays, Sundays, or legal holidays, except in the event of an emergency as approved by the Petroleum Administrator. The drilling or redrilling of wells is not subject to construction time limits. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9522.3 Oil and Gas Site Parking.
A. At all times during the construction and operation of any oil and gas site, parking facilities shall be provided for all vehicles associated with the oil or gas site at a rate of one (1) parking space per shift-employee. If approved as part of a CUP or a DA, parking for vehicles of employees or workers engaged in any oil or gas site activities can also be provided by the operator at off-site parking lots or in parking facilities, other than public streets, at locations other than the oil or gas site. The operator shall prohibit personal parking on City streets by operator, permittees, contractors, or consultant staff. If the parking lot or parking facilities are not located within a reasonable walking distance of the controlled drill site, the operator shall provide transportation to and from the parking site for employees and workers.

B. At all times vehicular access to an oil and gas drill site shall be provided in accordance with the plans for vehicular access reviewed and approved by the City Engineer, except for operations existing prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter.

C. All entrances to an oil and gas site shall be equipped with sliding or swinging gates which shall be kept closed at all times except when authorized vehicles are entering or leaving the oil and gas site.

D. When traffic lanes on any public street are closed or impaired by the operator’s operations, flagmen and safety officers as required by the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s office shall be provided by the operator at all such times to control traffic and maintain traffic flow. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9523 Lighting.
Except for oil and gas sites located within industrial zones, and located farther than one thousand (1,000) feet from any prohibited zone as listed in Table 1-1, all lighting sources that may be introduced on a site in support of nighttime operations at the onset and throughout all operations at an oil and gas site shall be screened and directed to prevent light or glare from passing beyond site boundaries. Outdoor lighting shall be restricted to only those lights that are required by Article VIII for lighting building exteriors and safety and security needs. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9524 Aesthetics.
The following measures shall be implemented for all projects that are subject to this Chapter. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9524.1 Landscaping/Visual Resources.
A. Prior to any new development, the operator shall implement a landscaping plan prepared by a licensed landscape architect, that has been approved as part of a CUP or a DA, which provides adequate screening and blending of the facilities so that the site shall not appear unsightly or aesthetically deficient compared with the surrounding character of the area. Except for oil and gas sites located within industrial zones, all tanks shall not extend more than twenty (20) feet above the surface of any site, unless otherwise approved in a CUP or DA.

B. Within six (6) months after the completion of activities related to the drilling or redrilling of a well and the removal of the drilling well mast/rig, any oil and gas site shall be landscaped with suitable shrubbery and trees in accordance with a plan approved by the Planning Commission, unless the site is to be otherwise developed in such a manner that would preempt revegetation requirements.

C. If the site is within one thousand (1,000) feet of any prohibited zoning as listed in Table 1-1, if any drilling masts are in place on an oil and gas site for a time period of more than one (1) year and are visible from public viewing points, then the operator shall wrap all such masts to reduce their visibility prior to the onset of operations at an oil and gas site. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9524.2 Walls.
Prior to commencement of operations at an oil or gas site the following development standards shall be satisfied:

A. All oil and gas sites shall be enclosed with a wall not less than six (6) feet high, which shall be of a material and texture that blends in with the surrounding environment and is not visually obtrusive. There shall be no aperture below the wall larger than one (1) foot in height.

B. The wall enclosure around the oil and gas site shall have a setback of twenty-five (25) feet from all property lines. The gate or entrance through the wall shall remain locked at all times and constructed in a manner to prevent the public from coming closer than twenty-five (25) feet to the pumping facilities. Pursuant to the approval of the CUP, the location of the wall may be modified subject to compliance with the California Fire Code as approved in a CUP or DA with modifications as applicable.

C. The entire outside facing length of the wall must be coated with anti-graffiti paint or solutions. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9524.3 Sanitation.
The oil and gas site shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary condition, free from accumulations of garbage, refuse, and other wastes. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9524.4 Architecture.
The architectural design of any oil or gas site buildings, equipment, drilling mechanisms or other associated structures shall be consistent with the character of the surrounding community and shall utilize finishing materials and colors which blend in with the surrounding environment and are not visually obtrusive. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9525 Roads.
The following policies specific to streets or other roads shall apply to all projects for which this Chapter is applicable. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9525.1 Construction of Site Access Roads.
Private roads and other excavations required for the construction of access roads shall be designed, constructed, and maintained to provide stability of fill, minimize disfigurement of the landscape, prevent deterioration of vegetation, maintain natural drainage, and minimize erosion. Prior to construction of any new road, the operator shall prepare and submit to the Department of Public Works for review and approval a private road construction plan. The operator shall thereafter comply with all provisions of the approved private road construction plan. All new private access roads leading off any surfaced public street or highway shall be paved with asphalt or concrete not less than three (3) inches thick for the length of said access road from the public street or highway. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9526 Signage.
The following policies apply only to signs visible from the public right-of-way:

A. Signage as required by DOGGR or law shall be kept in good legible condition at all times.

B. No sign other than that described in this Chapter or required by law shall be allowed, other than informational signs, “No Smoking” signs, and other signs as reasonably required for safe operation of the project.

C. Identification signs shall be posted and maintained in good condition along the outer boundary line and along the walls adjoining the public roads that pass through the oil or gas site. Each identification sign shall prominently display current and reliable emergency contact information that will enable a person to promptly reach, at all times, a representative of the operator who will have the expertise to assess any potential problem and recommend a corrective course of action. Each sign shall also have the telephone number of the City Department of Planning or Zoning Enforcement section and the number of SCAQMD that can be called if odors are detected. For existing oil and gas sites, the signs shall be updated when they are replaced or repaired. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9527 Steaming.
The installation of any surface equipment designed to produce steam shall be prohibited without the approval of the Petroleum Administrator. The operator shall submit a steaming plan addressing equipment sizing and design to the Petroleum Administrator for review and approval. The operator shall also submit well casing and cementing design specifications as required by DOGGR. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9528 Utilities.
A. Each oil or gas site shall be served by and utilize only reclaimed water, aside from potable water used for human consumption, unless the use of reclaimed water is deemed infeasible by the Petroleum Administrator, in which case the following criteria apply:

1. The operator must prepare and submit a supply assessment study of all water resources available for use and submit the study for review to the Petroleum Administrator.

2. If the study indicates that potable water is the only feasible alternative then the operator may utilize such a water source only if the operator provides an equal and measurable benefit to the community for such use, as determined by the Petroleum Administrator.

B. New electrical power shall be routed underground from the nearest source adequate to meet the needs of the well site. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9529 On-Site Storage and Placement of Equipment.
No equipment shall be stored or placed on the site which is not either essential to the everyday operation of the oil or gas well located thereon or required for emergency purposes. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9530 Safety Assurances and Emergency/Hazard Management.
The following measures shall be implemented throughout the operation of any oil or gas site or project subject to this Chapter. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9530.1 Fire Prevention Safeguards.
A. All oil and gas site operations shall conform to all applicable fire and safety regulations, codes, and laws.

B. The oil and gas site shall be kept free of debris, pools of oil, water or other liquids, weeds, and trash.

C. Land within twenty-five (25) feet of the facilities shall be kept free of dry weeds, grass, rubbish or other combustible material at all times.

D. All equipment, facilities, and design shall be approved by the Los Angeles County Fire Department, as applicable, prior to approval of a CUP or DA. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9530.2 Blowout Standards and Testing.
The operator shall comply with DOGGR regulations for blowout prevention and will provide all equipment as stipulated in the DOGGR regulations during the drilling operations of any well. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9530.3 Earthquake Shutdown.
A. The operator shall immediately inspect all oil and gas-related facilities, equipment, and pipelines following any seismic event with a magnitude of four (4.0) or greater with an epicenter within ten (10) kilometers of the oil and gas site, magnitude four and one-half (4.5) or greater within thirty (30) kilometers, or magnitude six (6.0) within one hundred (100) kilometers.

B. The operator shall either (1) operate and maintain an accelerometer at the project site or (2) obtain real time data from the USGS to determine the earthquake magnitude of any seismic event in the area. The operator shall immediately inspect all project site pipelines, facilities, equipment, storage tanks, and other infrastructure following any seismic event above the thresholds defined in subsection (A) of this Section and promptly notify the City Engineer and the Petroleum Administrator of the results of the inspection within twenty-four (24) hours of the seismic event. Shall there be any structural damage or equipment failure as a result of any seismic event, the operator shall isolate and address any damage or equipment failure as appropriate to minimize environmental or safety impacts. The operator shall prepare and submit a written report of all inspections and findings to the City for review with one (1) week of the seismic event.

C. The operator shall not reinstitute operations at those portions of the project site and associated pipelines damaged by a seismic event until the damage has been repaired and confirmed by the operator to be structurally sound and safe for operation, and has passed any otherwise required inspection. Before returning any damaged structure, fixture or equipment to operation, the operator shall prepare and submit to the Petroleum Administrator a written report of inspections and repairs of that structure, fixture or equipment, and the results of any required inspection. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9530.4 Storage Tank Monitoring.
The operator shall install tank leak detection monitoring system that will indicate the physical presence of a leaked product underneath storage tanks on site that have the potential to result in soil contamination. The results of the monitoring shall be submitted to the Petroleum Administrator upon request. The monitoring system required by California Code of Regulations, Title 14, Section 1773.2, is sufficient. This Section does not apply to existing facilities. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9530.5 Safety Measures and Emergency Response Plan.
The operator is responsible for compliance with safety and emergency response requirements.

A. Copies of all emergency response plans, emergency action plans, oil spill plans, inspections, reports and any emergency response drill training as required by DOGGR, CalEPA, OSHA, Los Angeles County Fire Department, SCAQMD or any other agency shall be submitted to the City.

B. Safety Audit. The operator shall cause to be prepared an independent third-party audit, under the direction and supervision of the City, of all facilities, once constructed or within one (1) year of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this Chapter, including the well pads, to ensure compliance with the California Fire Code (as may be adopted by the City with modifications as applicable), applicable API and NFPA codes, EPA RMP, OSHA PSM, DOGGR and SPCC and emergency response plans requirements. All audit items shall be implemented in a timely fashion, and the audit shall be updated annually, as directed by the City and the Los Angeles County Fire Department. The operator shall also cause to be prepared a seismic assessment, including walkthroughs, of equipment to withstand earthquakes prepared by a registered structural engineer in compliance with Local Emergency Planning Committee Region 1 CalARP guidance and the seismic assessment shall be updated, with walkthrough inspections, annually to ensure compliance with the codes and standards at the time of installation.

C. Community Alert System. If the site is within one thousand (1,000) feet of any prohibited zoning as listed in Table 1-1, the operator shall implement a community alert notification system, or utilize an existing system operated by the Police, Sheriff or Fire Department, to automatically notify area residences and businesses in the event of an emergency at an oil or gas site that would require residents to take shelter or take other protective actions. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9530.6 Transportation of Chemicals and Waste On and Off Site.
The operator shall implement the following measures throughout the operations of any oil and gas site subject to this Chapter:

A. Solid Waste Disposal. Solid waste generated on the site shall be transported to a permitted landfill or hazardous waste disposal site as may be appropriate for the life of the operation. The operator shall provide written notice to the Petroleum Administrator of the landfill or hazardous waste disposal facility being utilized.

B. Site Waste Removal. The operator shall comply with the following provisions:

1. All drilling and workover waste shall be collected in enclosed bins. Any drilling and workover wastes that are not intended to be injected into a class II well, as permitted by DOGGR, shall be removed from the project site no later than thirty (30) days following completion of the drilling and workover.

2. No site waste shall be discharged into any sewer unless permitted by the Sanitation District, or into any storm drain, irrigation system, stream, or creek, street, highway, or drainage canal. Nor shall any such wastes be discharged on the ground.

C. Storage of Hazardous Materials. The operator shall submit to the Petroleum Administrator a copy of the hazardous material business plan, as reviewed by the Los Angeles County Fire Department, annually. This plan shall include a complete listing and quantities of all chemicals used on site, and provide the location of where hazardous materials are stored at the site. Hazardous materials shall be stored in an organized and orderly manner, and identified as may be necessary to aid in preventing accidents, and shall be reasonably protected from sources of external corrosion or damage to the satisfaction of the Fire Chief of the Los Angeles County Fire Department or designee. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9530.6.1 Natural Gas Liquids (NGLs).
Throughout the operation of any oil and gas site subject to this Chapter, NGLs, as defined by this Code, shall be blended with crude oil for shipment by pipeline to the maximum extent allowable within the technical specifications of the pipeline. Oil transportation pipelines and gas processing facilities shall be designed to maximize the blending of NGLs into the crude oil stream. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9530.6.2 Transportation Risk Management and Prevention Program (TRMPP).
If the transportation routes of any product from oil and gas development in the City passes through or adjacent to any prohibited zoning as listed in Table 1-1, excluding designated truck routes, the operator shall prepare and maintain a transportation risk management and prevention program which shall be provided to the Petroleum Administrator upon request. The TRMPP may contain the following components including, but not limited to:

A. Provisions for conducting comprehensive audits of carriers biennially to assure satisfactory safety records, driver hiring practices, driver training programs, programs to control drug and alcohol abuse, safety incentive programs, satisfactory vehicle inspection and maintenance procedures, and emergency notification capabilities. The operator shall submit to the City any audits that were conducted each calendar year.

B. Provisions for allowing only carriers which receive a satisfactory rating under the above audit process to transport oil and gas.

C. Truck loading procedures for ensuring that the loading rack operator and the truck driver both conduct, and document in writing, a visual inspection of the truck before loading and procedures to specify actions to be taken when problems are found during the visual inspection. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9530.6.3 Pipeline Leak Detection.
All new off-site DOT oil pipelines shall use a supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA-type) monitoring system for leak detection; unless the Petroleum Administrator determines that there is better available technology that shall be utilized instead. Flow meters used on the SCADA system shall be accurate to within one (1) percent. If a leak is detected the operator shall be responsible for immediately reporting it to the Petroleum Administrator. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9531 Environmental Resource Management.
Throughout operation of an oil and gas site, the operator shall comply with the following environmental resource management policies. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9531.1 General Environmental Program.
A. Environmental Quality Assurance Program (“EQAP”). The operator shall comply with all provisions of an environmental quality assurance program that has been accepted by the Petroleum Administrator and approved as part of a CUP or DA. For oil and gas sites that are existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this Chapter and are not required to have a CUP, completion of the requirements of CMC 9530.5(B) satisfies the requirements of this Section. The following provisions relate to the EQAP:

1. EQAP Requirements. The EQAP shall provide a detailed description of the process, individual steps, and submissions the operator shall take to assure compliance with all provisions of this Section, including, but not limited to, all of the monitoring programs called for by this Section.

2. Annual EQAP Reports. Within sixty (60) days following the end of each calendar year, the operator shall submit to the Petroleum Administrator an annual EQAP report that reviews the operator’s compliance with the provisions of the EQAP over the previous year and addresses such other matters as may be requested by the Petroleum Administrator. The annual EQAP report shall include the following:

i. A complete list and description of any and all instances where the provisions of the EQAP, or any of the monitoring programs referred to therein or in this Section, were not fully and timely complied with, and an analysis how compliance with such provisions shall be improved over the coming year.

ii. Results and analyses of all data collection efforts conducted by the operator over the previous year pursuant to the provisions of this Section.

3. EQAP Updates. Proposed updates to the EQAP shall be submitted to the Petroleum Administrator for approval along with the annual EQAP report. The Petroleum Administrator shall complete the review of EQAP updates as soon as practicable, and shall either approve the updated EQAP or provide the operator with a list of specific items that must be included in the EQAP prior to approval. The operator shall respond to any request for additional information within thirty (30) days of receiving such request from the Petroleum Administrator and shall modify the proposed EQAP update consistent with the Petroleum Administrator’s request.

B. Publicly Available Monitoring Data. The operator shall be responsible for making current monitoring results and data available to the public unless otherwise required by law. The up-to-date monitoring data and results shall be maintained by the operator. The monitoring results and data shall include the following information:

1. Air quality data (if required to be collected);

2. Wind direction speed (if required to be collected);

3. Seismic events;

4. Water quality monitoring results for both surface and groundwater monitoring locations at an oil or gas site, or from nearby groundwater monitoring location(s) as authorized by the Petroleum Administrator;

5. Pipeline testing and monitoring results;

6. Vibration (if required to be collected); and

7. Ambient noise levels (if required to be collected). (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9531.2 Air Quality.
The operator shall at all times conduct oil or gas site operations to prevent the unauthorized release, escape, or emission of dangerous, hazardous, harmful and/or noxious gases, vapors, odors, or substances, and shall comply with the following provisions:

A. Odor Minimization. If the site is within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of any prohibited zoning as listed in Table 1-1, or if three (3) odor complaints from three (3) different citizens of the City have been confirmed by the SCAQMD or the City within any twelve (12) month period, at all times the operator shall comply with the provisions of an odor minimization plan that has been approved by the Petroleum Administrator. The plan shall provide detailed information about the site and shall address all issues relating to odors from oil or gas operations. Matters addressed within the plan shall include setbacks, signs with contact information, logs of odor complaints, method of controlling odors such as flaring and odor suppressants, and the protocol for handling odor complaints. The odor minimization plan shall be reviewed and updated by the operator on an annual basis to determine if modifications to the plan are required. Any modifications to the odor minimization plan shall be submitted to the Petroleum Administrator for review and approval. Any operator’s submissions to the SCAQMD shall be provided to the Petroleum Administrator and shall be consistent with this Section. An odor minimization plan is not required for facilities existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this Chapter if the operator can demonstrate that the facility has not experienced a confirmed odor complaint within the previous five (5) years.

B. Portable Flare for Drilling. If the well is within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of any prohibited zoning as listed in Table 1-1, and either the historical operations of the producing zone have exhibited a gas-oil ratio (standard cubic feet per barrel) of more than four hundred (400) or no data is available on the producing zone targeted, the operator shall have a gas buster and a portable flare, approved by the SCAQMD, at the oil and gas site and available for immediate use to remove any gas encountered during drilling and abandonment operations from well muds prior to the muds being sent to the shaker table, and to direct such gas to the portable flare for combustion. The portable flare shall record the volume of gas that is burned in the flare. The volume of gas burned in the flare shall be documented in the operations logs. The operator shall notify the Fire Chief of the Los Angeles County Fire Department and the SCAQMD within forty-eight (48) hours in the event a measurable amount of gas is burned by the flare, and shall specify the volume of gas that was burned in the flare. All other drilling and abandonment operations shall be conducted so that any measurable gas that is encountered can, and will, be retained in the well bore until the gas buster and portable flare are installed on the rig, after which the gas will be run through the system to flare. The operator shall immediately notify the Fire Chief of the Los Angeles County Fire Department and the SCAQMD in the event any gas from operation is released into the atmosphere without being directed to and burned in the flare.

C. Odor Control for Drilling Operations. If the well is within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of any prohibited zoning as listed in Table 1-1 and either the historical operations of the producing zone have exhibited a gas-oil ratio of more than four hundred (400) standard cubic feet per barrel or no data is available on the producing zone targeted, the operator shall use an enclosed mud system that directs all mud vapors through an odor capturing system, such as a carbon bed, to prevent odorous pollutants from passing the site boundaries and impacting the area. An odor suppressant spray system may be used on the mud shaker tables for all drilling operations to ensure that no odors from said operations can be detected at the outer boundary line of the oil and gas site.

D. Closed Systems. The operator shall ensure that all produced water, gas and oil associated with production, processing, and storage, except those used for sampling only, are contained within closed systems at all times and that all pressure relief systems, including tanks, vent to a closed header and flare-type system to prevent emissions of pollutants. This subsection does not apply to existing facilities.

E. No open pits are allowed. Open tanks may be allowed to hold mud from active drilling operations.

F. Off-Road Diesel Construction Equipment Engines. All off-road diesel construction equipment shall comply with the following provisions:

1. Utilize California Air Resources Board (“CARB”) EPA Certification Tier III or other methods approved by the CARB as meeting or exceeding the Tier III standard.

2. Utilize a CARB Level 3 diesel catalyst. The catalyst shall be capable of achieving an eighty-five (85) percent reduction for diesel particulate matter. Copies of the CARB verification shall be provided to the Petroleum Administrator. Said catalysts shall be properly maintained and operational at all times when the off-road diesel construction equipment is in use. Use of an EPA Certification Tier 4i engine will also satisfy this requirement.

G. Drill Rig Engines. All drilling rig diesel engines shall comply with the following provisions:

1. Utilize CARB/EPA Certification Tier III or better certified engines.

2. Utilize a CARB Level 3 diesel catalyst. The catalyst shall be capable of achieving an eighty-five (85) percent reduction for diesel particulate matter. Copies of the CARB verification shall be provided to the Petroleum Administrator. Said catalysts shall be properly maintained and operational at all times when the off-road diesel construction equipment is in use. Use of an EPA Certification Tier 4i engine will also satisfy this requirement. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9531.3 Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Energy Efficiency Measures.
A. The operator of an oil and gas site shall completely offset all emissions from the oil and gas site through participation in the statewide cap and trade program, if applicable, or obtaining credits from another program, such as the SCAQMD Regulation XXVII, as approved by the Petroleum Administrator. On an annual basis, the operator shall provide the Petroleum Administrator with documentation of the operator’s participation in the program. This Section does not apply to existing facilities.

B. Throughout the oil and gas site life, as equipment is added or replaced, cost-effective energy conservation techniques shall be incorporated into project design. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9531.4 Air Quality Monitoring and Testing Plan.
If the site is within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of any prohibited zoning as listed in Table 1-1, at all times the operator shall comply with the provisions of an air monitoring plan that has been approved by the Petroleum Administrator. During all well operations, including but not limited to drilling, redrilling and workover operations, the operator shall continuously monitor for hydrogen sulfide, in a manner that allows for detection of pollutants from all wind directions, as approved by the Petroleum Administrator. Total hydrocarbon vapors shall be monitored at drilling, workover and processing plant areas as specified in the approved plan. Such monitors shall provide automatic alarms that are triggered by the detection of hydrogen sulfide or total hydrocarbon vapors. The alarms shall be audible and/or visible to the person operating the equipment. Actions to be taken shall be as follows when specified alarm levels are reached:

A. At a hydrogen sulfide concentration of equal to or greater than five (5) parts per million but less than ten (10) parts per million, the operator shall immediately investigate the source of the hydrogen sulfide emissions and take prompt corrective action to eliminate the source. The corrective action taken shall be documented in the drilling or workover log. If the concentration is not reduced to less than five (5) parts per million within four (4) hours of the first occurrence of such concentration, the operator shall shut down the drilling or workover operations and equipment in a safe and controlled manner, until the source of the hydrogen sulfide emissions has been eliminated, unless shutdown creates a health and safety hazard.

B. At a hydrogen sulfide concentration equal to or greater than ten (10) parts per million, the operator shall promptly shut down the drilling or workover operations and equipment in a safe and controlled manner until the source of the hydrogen sulfide emissions has been eliminated, unless shutdown creates a health and safety hazard. The corrective action taken shall be documented in the drilling or workover log. When an alarm is received, the operator shall promptly notify the Los Angeles County Fire Department, the Petroleum Administrator, and the SCAQMD.

C. At a total hydrocarbon concentration equal to or greater than five hundred (500) parts per million but less than one thousand (1,000) parts per million, the operator shall immediately investigate the source of the hydrocarbon emissions and take prompt corrective action to eliminate the source. The corrective action taken shall be documented in the drilling log for drilling or workover and in the log for the oil and gas site. If the concentration is not reduced to less than five hundred (500) parts per million within four (4) hours of the first occurrence of such concentration, the operator shall shut down the drilling or workover or site operations in a safe and controlled manner, until the source of the hydrocarbon emissions has been eliminated, unless shutdown creates a health and safety hazard.

D. At a total hydrocarbon concentration equal to or greater than one thousand (1,000) parts per million, the operator shall promptly shut down the drilling or workover or operations in a safe and controlled manner, until the source of the hydrocarbon emissions has been eliminated, unless shutdown creates a health and safety hazard. The corrective action taken shall be documented in the drilling log for drilling or workover and in the log. When an alarm is received, the operator shall promptly notify the Los Angeles County Fire Department Health Hazardous Materials Division, and the SCAQMD.

E. The Petroleum Administrator may also require additional monitoring at the closest residential receptor periodically for hydrogen sulfide, hydrocarbons or toxic air contaminants. All the monitoring equipment shall keep a record of the levels of total hydrocarbons and hydrogen sulfide detected at each of the monitors, which shall be retained for at least five (5) years. The operator shall, on a quarterly basis, provide a summary of all monitoring events where the hydrogen sulfide concentration was at five (5) parts per million or higher and the total hydrocarbon concentration was at five hundred (500) parts per million or higher to the Fire Chief of the Los Angeles County Fire Department. At the request of the Fire Chief, the operator shall make available the retained records from the monitoring equipment. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9531.5 Water Quality.
The operator shall at all times conduct operations to avoid any adverse impacts to surface and groundwater quality, and shall comply with the following provisions. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9531.5.1 Water Management Plan.
The operator shall comply with all provisions of a potable water management plan that has been approved by the Petroleum Administrator. The plan shall include best management practices, water conservation measures, and the use of a drip irrigation system. The water management plan shall be reviewed by the operator every three (3) years to determine if modifications to the plan are required. Any modifications to the water management plan shall be submitted to the Petroleum Administrator for review and approval. This Section does not apply to existing facilities. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9531.5.2 Storm Water Runoff.
Construction Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (“SWPPP”). The operator shall maintain and implement all provisions of a storm water pollution prevention plan (“SWPPP”) that has been submitted to the Regional Water Quality Control Board, if required. The operator shall provide the Petroleum Administrator with a copy of the SWPPP, and any future modifications, revisions, or alterations thereof, or replacements therefor upon written or verbal request of the Petroleum Administrator. The SWPPP shall be updated prior to new construction activities as required by the Regional Water Quality Control Board. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9531.5.3 Groundwater Quality.
A. Prior to any new development, the operator shall prepare and submit a baseline study of all groundwater resources located within and beneath the project site or directly adjacent to the site, to specifically include an analysis of the location and reservoir characteristics of all existing groundwater resources, a chemical analysis of the groundwater, and an overall assessment of the groundwater quality.

B. The operator shall not inject any water spoils/wastewater derived from the any oil or gas operations into any nonexempt or DOGGR exempt freshwater aquifers.

C. Within thirty (30) days of request by the City, the operator shall deposit funds with the City necessary to retain a third party to prepare a hydrological analysis groundwater testing program prior to any construction activities, or alternately, provide comparable analyses performed through the groundwater ambient monitoring and assessment program or other reliable source as determined by the Petroleum Administrator. Depending on the results of the geohydrological analyses the Petroleum Administrator has the discretion to require the operator to install one (1) or more groundwater monitoring wells to allow for confirmation that groundwater is not being affected by oil and gas activities. As part of the groundwater testing program the operator is required to provide the Petroleum Administrator with annual monitoring and testing results.

D. The operator shall be responsible for obtaining a field/site study from DOGGR. If DOGGR does not provide this to the operator then the operator shall submit evidence detailing DOGGR’s response to their field/site study request to the Petroleum Administrator for review.

E. The operator shall provide to the Petroleum Administrator a copy of the DOGGR annual injection project review (if the operator is operating a water injection or water disposal well) upon written or verbal request by the Petroleum Administrator. The operator shall provide to the Petroleum Administrator the results of any DOGGR required cement casing integrity testing, including radial cement evaluation logs or equivalent upon written or verbal request by the Petroleum Administrator, before any wells are put into production. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9531.6 Noise Impacts.
All facilities at an oil or gas site located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any prohibited zones, as indicated in Table 1-1, or if noise levels exceed City thresholds as confirmed by the Petroleum Administrator, operations shall comply with the following provisions:

A. All noise produced from the site shall conform to the noise thresholds specified in CMC 5500, 5501, 5502 and 5503.

B. Backup alarms on all vehicles operating within one thousand (1,000) feet of the prohibited zone in Table 1-1 shall be disabled between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. During periods when the backup alarms are disabled, the operator shall employ alternative low-noise methods for ensuring worker safety during vehicle backup, such as the use of spotters.

C. Any and all operations, construction, or activities on the site between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. shall be conducted in conformity with a quiet mode operation plan that has been approved by the Petroleum Administrator. The quiet mode operation plan shall be reviewed by the operator every year to determine if modifications to the plan are required. Any modifications to the quiet mode drilling plan shall be submitted to the Petroleum Administrator for review and approval. Operations that are existing at the time the ordinance codified in this Chapter is adopted are exempt from the quiet mode plan submittal requirements but are required to comply with the quiet mode provisions listed in CMC 9507.1(J).

D. All noise-producing oil and gas site equipment shall be regularly serviced and repaired to minimize increases in pure tones and other noise output over time. The operator shall maintain an equipment service log for all noise-producing equipment.

E. All construction equipment shall be selected for low-noise output. All construction equipment powered by internal combustion engines shall be properly muffled and maintained.

F. Unnecessary idling of construction equipment internal combustion engines is prohibited.

G. The operator shall instruct employees and subcontractors about the noise provisions of this Chapter. The operator shall prominently post quiet mode policies at every oil and gas site if applicable.

H. All oil operations on the oil and gas site shall be conducted in a manner that minimizes vibration. Additionally, vibration levels from oil or gas operations at the site, as measured from the perimeter of the oil or gas site, shall not exceed a velocity of one-quarter (0.25) millimeters per second over the frequency range one (1) to one hundred (100) Hertz.

I. For all oil and gas operations if noise levels exceed the levels prescribed in CMC 5500, 5501, 5502 and 5503, or the vibration thresholds specified in subsection (H) of this Section, including those outside of one thousand (1,000) feet as indicated above, within thirty (30) days of request by the Petroleum Administrator, the operator shall deposit funds for the Petroleum Administrator to retain an independent qualified acoustical engineer to monitor (1) ambient noise levels and (2) vibration levels in the areas surrounding the oil or gas site as determined necessary by the Petroleum Administrator. The monitoring shall be conducted unannounced and within a time frame specified by the Petroleum Administrator. Should noise or vibrations from the oil or gas site exceed the noise thresholds specified in CMC 5500, 5501, 5502 and 5503, or the vibration thresholds specified in subsection (H) of this Section, operation can also be subject to enforcement under this Chapter including notices of violation per CMC 9514. No new drilling permits, CUPs, or DAs shall be issued by the City until the operator in consultation with the Petroleum Administrator identifies the source of the noise or vibration and the operator takes the steps necessary to assure compliance with thresholds specified in this Chapter. The results of all such monitoring shall be promptly posted on the website for the oil or gas site and provided to the Petroleum Administrator. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9532 Standards for Wells.
The operator shall comply with all of the following provisions:

A. All DOGGR regulations related to drilling, workovers, operations and abandonment operations.

B. No more than two (2) rigs shall be present within the oil or gas site at any one time.

C. All derricks and portable rigs and masts used for drilling and workovers shall meet the standards and specifications of the American Petroleum Institute as they presently exist or as may be amended.

D. All drilling and workover equipment shall be removed from the site within ninety (90) days following the completion of drilling or workover activities unless the equipment is to be used at the site within thirty (30) days for drilling or workover operations.

E. All drilling sites shall be maintained in a neat and orderly fashion.

F. Belt guards shall be required over all drive belts on drilling and workover equipment. Guarding shall be as required by California Code of Regulations, Title 8, Section 6622, or as may be subsequently amended.

G. Aboveground pumpjack assemblies are prohibited for new wells located in nonindustrial areas, and new wells in nonindustrial areas sites are restricted to the exclusive use of submersible downhole pumping mechanisms for extraction. However, any well already lawfully existing at the time of implementation of this Chapter using a pumpjack assembly may continue to do so. The requirements of this subsection are applicable to all oil and gas sites in all nonindustrial zones except where the Petroleum Administrator determines that the use of submersible downhole pumping mechanisms is infeasible due to technical reasons or other circumstances which would specifically preclude the use of such technology. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9533 Standards for Pipelines.
The operator shall comply with the following provisions related to pipelines throughout operation of an oil or gas site. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9533.1 Pipeline Installations and Use.
A. Pipelines shall be used to transport oil and gas off site to promote traffic safety and air quality, unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Petroleum Administrator that a pipeline is infeasible and that transportation of products does not pass through or adjacent to prohibited areas as defined in Table 1-1, except on designated truck routes. Trucking on a temporary basis is allowed with approval of the Petroleum Administrator.

B. The use of a pipeline for transporting crude oil or gas may be a condition of approval for expansion of existing facilities or construction of new facilities unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City Manager that a pipeline is infeasible and that transportation of products does not pass through or adjacent to prohibited areas as defined in Table 1-1, except on designated truck routes.

C. New pipeline corridors shall be consolidated with existing pipeline or electrical transmission corridors where feasible, unless there are overriding technical constraints or significant social, aesthetic, environmental or economic reasons not to do so, as approved by the Petroleum Administrator.

D. New pipelines shall be routed to avoid residential, recreational areas, and schools if possible. Pipeline routing through recreational, commercial or special use zones shall be done in a manner that minimizes the impacts of potential spills by considering spill volumes, durations, and projected spill paths. New pipeline segments shall be equipped with automatic shutoff valves, or suitable alternatives approved by the Petroleum Administrator, so that each segment will be isolated in the event of a break.

E. Upon completion of any new pipeline construction, the site shall be restored to the approximate previous grade and condition. All sites previously covered with vegetation shall be reseeded with the same or recovered with the previously removed vegetative materials, and shall include other measures as deemed necessary to prevent erosion until the vegetation can become established, and to promote visual and environmental quality, unless there are approved development plans for the site, in which case revegetation would not be necessary.

F. Gas from wells shall be piped to centralized collection and processing facilities, rather than being flared, to preserve energy resources and air quality, and to reduce fire hazards and light sources, unless the AQMD approves the flaring of gas during the temporary operation of a well. Oil shall also be piped to centralized collection and processing facilities, in order to minimize land use conflicts and environmental degradation, and to promote visual quality. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9533.2 Pipeline Inspection, Monitoring, Testing and Maintenance.
A. Operators shall visually inspect all aboveground pipelines for leaks and corrosion on a monthly basis.

B. The operator shall install a leak detection system for all off-site DOT regulated oil and gas pipelines. The leak detection system for oil shall include pressure and flow meters, flow balancing, supervisor control and data acquisition system, and a computer alarm and communication system in the event of a suspected leak. The leak detection system for gas pipelines shall include pressure sensors. The accuracy shall be defined once the system is established and tested and approved by the Petroleum Administrator. The Petroleum Administrator may deviate from these requirements to address system specific operating requirements.

C. Pipe clamps, wooden plugs or screw-in plugs shall not be used for any permanent repair approved by the Petroleum Administrator.

D. Pipeline abandonment procedures shall be submitted to the Petroleum Administrator for review and approval prior to any pipeline abandonment.

E. Copies of pipeline integrity test results required by any statute or regulation shall be maintained in a local office of the operator and posted online on the same website that provides the monitoring results required in CMC 9531.1 for five (5) years and shall also be made available to the City, upon request. The City shall be promptly notified in writing by the operator of any pipeline taken out of service due to a test failure. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9534 Temporary Buildings.
During full production of an oil or gas site no temporary buildings are allowed to be constructed or maintained anywhere at the site. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9535 Reserved.
(Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

9536 Reserved.
(Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

PART 3. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR SITE ABANDONMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT
Sections:

§ 9537    Development Standards.

9537 Development Standards.
The following development standards shall be applied to all redevelopment projects within the footprint of an oil or gas site, including any building permit involving a current or former oil or gas site:

A. Any demolition, abandonment, reabandonment, or restoration shall be adequately monitored by a qualified individual, funded by the permittee or operator and retained by the City, to ensure compliance with those conditions designed to mitigate anticipated significant adverse effects on the environment and to provide recommendations in instances where effects were not anticipated or mitigated by the conditions imposed on the permit or entitlement. Pre-restoration and post-restoration surveys of sensitive biological resources shall be employed as appropriate to measure compliance.

B. The site shall be assessed for previously unidentified contamination.

1. The permittee shall ensure that any discovery of contamination shall be reported to the Petroleum Administrator and the Los Angeles County Fire Department.

C. The permittee shall diligently seek all necessary permit approvals, including revisions to an entitlement or the demolition, abandonment, reabandonment and restoration permit, if any are required, in order to remediate the contamination.

D. The permittee shall be responsible for any cost to remediate the contamination on the site. This Chapter is not intended to limit the permittee or operator’s rights under the law to seek compensation from parties who have contributed to contamination of the site.

E. The permittee shall ensure that appropriate notification has been recorded with the County Recorder to describe the presence and location of any contamination left in place under the authority of the Los Angeles County Fire Department.

F. All abandoned or reabandoned wells shall be leak tested subject to the following requirements:

1. All abandoned wells located within an oil and gas site must be tested for gas leakage and visually inspected for oil leakage. The operator shall apply to the Petroleum Administrator for an inspection permit to witness the well testing. The leak test shall be completed utilizing a gas detection meter approved in advance by the Petroleum Administrator, and shall be conducted by a State licensed geotechnical or civil engineer or a State registered environmental assessor, class II, or the Petroleum Administrator, or a designee, as determined necessary by the Petroleum Administrator.

2.  The permittee shall prepare and submit a methane assessment report for each tested well prepared per the City of Los Angeles Department of Building and Safety “Site Testing Standards for Methane” (P/BC 2014-101), as may be amended. The operator may use the City’s consultant to observe the leak test or be responsible for City consultant test fees. Following satisfactory test results as per the City of Los Angeles Department of Building and Safety standards, a well vent and vent cone shall be installed to the satisfaction of the Petroleum Administrator and in compliance with the recommendations contained in the methane assessment report.

3. The submitted methane assessment report shall be prepared by a State licensed geotechnical or civil engineer. A well shall be considered leaking if the leak test report indicates the meter read is greater than level II as defined by the City of Los Angeles Department of Building and Safety “Site Testing Standards for Methane,” which is set at one thousand (1,000) parts per million.

4. An approved methane assessment report is valid for twenty-four (24) months from approval by the Petroleum Administrator. If an abandonment permit has not been issued by this time, retesting shall be required. Following all testing and inspection, the test area shall be returned to its previous state to the satisfaction of the City Building Official.

5. If there has not been a change to the well, no leak test is required if a valid methane assessment report, accepted by the Petroleum Administrator and showing no leaks in excess of the leak limit, has been completed for an abandoned or reabandoned well within the prior twenty-four (24) months.

G. Prior to any development or redevelopment of a current or former oil or gas site, or prior to abandoning or reabandoning any well, the operator shall:

1. Obtain permit(s) and abandon all idled wells consistent with CMC 9510.3 and provide a certificate of compliance to show that the wells and/or sites are abandoned consistent with standards recommended or required by DOGGR to the satisfaction of the Petroleum Administrator. Permits shall not be required if the idled well is scheduled to produce oil or natural gas, or to be used for injection, as part of the development or redevelopment of a former oil or gas site and if said production or injection occurs within five (5) years of issuance of a CUP or DA under this Chapter.

2. Obtain permit(s) consistent with CMC 9510.3 to reabandon all previously abandoned wells that do not meet standards recommended or required by DOGGR for abandonment in effect at the time of reabandonment, and provide a certificate of compliance that the wells and/or sites are reabandoned consistent with current conditions and standards recommended or required by DOGGR to the satisfaction of the Petroleum Administrator. Permits shall not be required if reentry of an abandoned well is scheduled to occur within five (5) years of issuance of a CUP or DA under this Chapter, and if reentry actually occurs within that period of time.

3. In lieu of subsections (G)(1) and (G)(2) of this Section, obtain a deferral covenant from the City requiring abandonment or reabandonment to standards recommended or required by DOGGR, or equivalent standards as determined by the Petroleum Administrator, at a specific time or upon the occurrence of a future event. The deferral covenant shall be approved as to form by the City Attorney, contain a provision to indemnify and hold harmless the City for damages related to wells not abandoned or reabandoned consistent with standards recommended or required by DOGGR, and shall be recorded by the operator with the County Clerk prior to approval.

H. Other Development Standards.

1. Permanent structures, or other construction that would be difficult or expensive to demolish, shall not be located on top of any abandoned oil or gas well such that access for a well abandonment rig or other well maintenance equipment is constrained or inhibited from access to the well in the event of a future oil or gas leak, unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City Manager that it is not feasible or, within an industrial zone, the developer proposing such construction provides written assurances to the satisfaction of the Petroleum Administrator, to be included in the recorded declaration of covenant prescribed in subsection (H)(3) of this Section, that they are aware of and accept the risks associated with such construction. Pervious improvements, such as landscaping and porous parking areas with adequate landscape buffers, may be located on top of an abandoned or reabandoned well which has passed the leak test consistent with this Section.

2. Redevelopment of a Former Oil and Gas Site. If redevelopment of an oil and gas site for use other than an oil and gas operation is proposed at a completely or partially abandoned oil or gas site, the applicant shall submit an application to be processed as a conditional use permit consistent for that use under Chapter 1 of Article IX. Said application shall include the content required by CMC 9510.3.2, and the conditional use permit shall comply with the development standards of this Section.

3. Prior to issuance of a permit or entitlement for redevelopment of a former oil and gas site, the owner shall record a declaration of a covenant, in a form subject to the review and approval of the City Attorney, putting future owners and occupants on notice of the following: the existence of abandoned oil wells on the site; that the wells within the site have been leak tested and found not to leak; description of any methane mitigation measures employed; a statement as to whether or not access to these wells has been provided to address the fact that they may leak in the future causing potential harm; acknowledgment that the State may order the reabandonment of any well should it leak in the future; acknowledgment that the State does not recommend building over wells; and releasing and indemnifying the City for issuing any project permit or entitlement for the project, along with notice of the assurances, if any, required by subsection (H)(1) of this Section. The covenant shall run with the land, apply to future owners, and may only be released by the City. (Ord. 16-1590, Exh. B (§ 1))

ARTICLE X
Chapters:

1    Underground Utility Districts

CHAPTER 1
UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS
Sections:

§ 10000    Definitions.

§ 10001    Public Hearing by Council.

§ 10002    Report by City Engineer.

§ 10003    Council May Designate Underground Utility Districts by Resolution.

§ 10004    Unlawful Acts.

§ 10005    Exception – Emergency or Unusual Circumstances.

§ 10006    Other Exceptions.

§ 10007    Notice to Property Owners and Utility Companies.

§ 10008    Responsibility of Utility Companies.

§ 10009    Responsibility of Property Owners.

§ 10010    Responsibility of City.

§ 10011    Extension of Time.

10000 Definitions.
Whenever in this Chapter the words or phrases hereinafter in this Section defined are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions:

(a) “Commission” shall mean the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California.

(b) “Underground Utility District” or “District” shall mean that area in the City within which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of CMC 10003.

(c) “Person” shall mean and include individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships, and their agents and employees.

(d) “Poles, overhead wire and associated overhead structures” shall mean poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located aboveground within a District and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service.

(e) “Utility” shall include all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. (Ord. 52, § 1)

10001 Public Hearing by Council.
The Council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wire and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the City and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. The City Clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least ten (10) days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the Council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 52, § 1)

10002 Report by City Engineer.
Prior to holding such public hearing, the City Engineer shall consult with all affected utilities and shall prepare a report for submission at such hearing containing, among other information, the extent of such utilities participation and estimates of the total costs to the City and affected property owners. Such report shall also contain an estimate of the time required to complete such underground installation and removal of overhead facilities. (Ord. 52, § 1)

10003 Council May Designate Underground Utility Districts by Resolution.
If, after any such public hearing the Council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the Council shall by resolution declare such designated area an Underground Utility District and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. (Ord. 52, § 1)

10004 Unlawful Acts.
Whenever the Council creates an Underground Utility District and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in CMC 10003, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the District after the date when said overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except as said overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in CMC 10009, and for such reasonable time required to remove said facilities after said work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this Chapter. (Ord. 52, § 1)

10005 Exception – Emergency or Unusual Circumstances.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this Chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period not to exceed ten (10) days, without authority of the Council in order to provide emergency service. The Council may grant special permission on such terms as the Council may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. (Ord. 52, § 1)

10006 Other Exceptions.
In any resolution adopted pursuant to CMC 10003, the City may authorize any or all of the following exceptions:

(a) Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.

(b) Poles, or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting.

(c) Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a District within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a District, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited.

(d) Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty-four thousand five hundred (34,500) volts.

(e) Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one (1) location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street.

(f) Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for furnishing communication services.

(g) Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts.

(h) Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with the construction project. (Ord. 52, § 1)

10007 Notice to Property Owners and Utility Companies.
Within ten (10) days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to CMC 10003, the City Clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the District created by said resolution of the adoption thereof. Said City Clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location.

Notification by the City Clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to CMC 10003, together with a copy of this Chapter, to affected property owners as such as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. (Ord. 52, § 1)

10008 Responsibility of Utility Companies.
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a District created by any resolution adopted pursuant to CMC 10003, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the Commission. (Ord. 52, § 1)

10009 Responsibility of Property Owners.
(a) Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a District shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in CMC 10008 and the termination facility on or within said building or structure being served. If the above is not accomplished by any person within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to CMC 10003, the City Engineer shall give notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide the required underground facilities within ten (10) days after receipt of such notice.

(b) The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail on either of such persons, the notice must be deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of such premises at such premises, and the notice must be addressed to the owner thereof as such owner’s name appears, and must be addressed to such owner’s last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll, and when no address appears, to General Delivery, City of Carson. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within forty-eight (48) hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such premises, the City Engineer shall, within forty-eight (48) hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight (8) inches by ten (10) inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on said premises.

(c) The notice given by the City Engineer to provide the required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be done, and shall state that if said work is not completed within thirty (30) days after receipt of such notice, the City Engineer will provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefited and become a lien upon such property.

(d) If upon the expiration of the thirty (30) day period, the said required underground facilities have not been provided, the City Engineer shall forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, if such premises are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished thereto, the City Engineer shall in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to said property. Upon completion of the work by the City Engineer, he shall file a written report with the City Council setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and that the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed. The Council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which said time shall not be less than ten (10) days thereafter.

(e) The City Engineer shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing such protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing thereof to the owner thereof, in the manner hereinabove provided for the giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the Council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment.

(f) Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the Council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there be any, and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment.

(g) If any assessment is not paid within five (5) days after its confirmation by the Council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the City Engineer, and the City Engineer is directed to turn over to the Assessor and Tax Collector a notice of lien on each of said properties on which the assessment has not been paid, and said Assessor and Tax Collector shall add the amount of said assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which said assessment was not paid. Said assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as said property taxes are due and payable, and if not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate of six (6) percent per annum. (Ord. 52, § 1)

10010 Responsibility of City.
City shall remove at its own expense all City-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to CMC 10003. (Ord. 52, § 1)

10011 Extension of Time.
In the event that any act required by this Chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to CMC 10003 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. (Ord. 52, § 1)

ARTICLE XI
INTERIM DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
Chapters:

1    Title, Authority, and Purpose

2    Legislative Findings

3    Definitions

4    Procedure for Adoption of Fees

5    Establishment of Interim Development Impact Fees

6    Accounting and Reporting

7    Exemptions

8    Credits and Reimbursements

9    Protest Procedures

CHAPTER 1
TITLE, AUTHORITY, AND PURPOSE
Sections:

§ 11100    Title.

§ 11101    Authority.

§ 11102    Intent and Purpose.

11100 Title.
This Article may be cited as the Interim Development Impact Fee Ordinance. (Ord. 19-1931, § 2)

11101 Authority.
This Chapter is enacted pursuant to the Mitigation Fee Act (Title 7, Division 1 of the Government Code). The Community Development Director may, in his or her discretion, present to the Planning Commission for review and recommendation any proposed revisions to this Chapter. (Ord. 19-1931, § 2)

11102 Intent and Purpose.
Interim development impact fees are authorized by the City Charter and are charged by the City to applicants in connection with approval of development projects for the purpose of defraying all or a portion of the costs of public facilities (defined in CMC 11300) required to serve the development.

The legal requirements for enactment of interim development impact fee programs are set forth in the Mitigation Fee Act (Title 7, Division 1 of the Government Code). Interim development impact fees are legislatively adopted based on objective fair-share studies and standardized pro rata formulas. Development impact fee programs contrast with negotiated exactions, which are determined on an ad hoc project-by-project basis during the development approval process.

The provisions in this Chapter are intended to comply with the City Charter and the Mitigation Fee Act. In the event of any ambiguity in the provisions of this Chapter, such provisions shall be interpreted so as to be consistent with the City Charter and the Mitigation Fee Act. In the event that any provisions of the Chapter conflict with the Mitigation Fee Act, the provisions of the Charter shall control, and the Mitigation Fee Act shall secondarily control. (Ord. 19-1931, § 2)

CHAPTER 2
LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS
Sections:

§ 11200    Reports and Studies.

§ 11201    Need for Public Facilities.

§ 11202    Need for Interim Development Impact Fees.

11200 Reports and Studies.
The reports (defined in CMC 11300), which have been approved and adopted by the City, establish:

1. The need for and nexus to required public facilities throughout the City;

2. The total cost of such public facilities;

3. The allocation of such cost among the development types;

4. Formulas based on the development type to determine the amount of fees payable for each such type of development;

5. Maximum fees to impose upon each development type;

6. The relationship between the use of the fees and the type of uses within development projects on which the fees are imposed;

7. The relationship between the need for such public facilities and the type of uses within development projects on which the fees are imposed;

8. The reasonable relationship between the amount of the fee and the cost of the public facility or portion of the public facility attributable to the development upon which the fee is imposed; and

9. The reasonable cost of constructing and installing such public facilities. (Ord. 19-1931, § 2)

11201 Need for Public Facilities.
New development generates impacts on public facilities and community amenities for which revenues generated through property taxes are generally insufficient to accommodate. If additional capital facilities and public services are not added as development occurs, the existing facilities and services will not be adequate to serve the community. In order to avoid detrimental impacts new development will impose on the City’s existing facilities, and to address new development’s resulting demands for new public facilities, the City needs public facilities to accommodate the expected growth. (Ord. 19-1931, § 2)

11202 Need for Interim Development Impact Fees.
The City Council has determined, based on the reports, as well as substantial evidence submitted in a public hearing before the City Council, that interim development impact fees are needed Citywide in order to finance these public facilities and to allocate the cost of public facilities to each development project. (Ord. 19-1931, § 2)

CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
Sections:

§ 11300    Definitions.

11300 Definitions.
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section:

A. “Administrative fee” means a fee collected by the City to offset the administrative costs related to the interim development impact fee program. The fee shall be twelve (12) percent of the total interim development impact fee obligation charged to the developer for all interim development impact fee categories.

B. “Building permit” means the permit, as defined by the Building Code of the City of Carson, issued or required for the construction of residential dwelling units or for the construction or improvement of additional square footage of floor area for any nonresidential structure pursuant to and as defined by the Building Code of the City of Carson.

C. “City” means the City of Carson and its various employees, officers and officials.

D. “City Council” means the City Council of the City of Carson.

E. “Commercial” means any building with a primary use of general retail sales and/or services.

F. “Conditions of approval” means the conditions of approval and mitigation measures imposed upon the land use entitlements for a property, and any subdivision improvement, development or other agreement with the City relating to development of the property.

G. “Costs” means amounts spent, or authorized to be spent, in connection with the planning, financing, acquisition and development of a public facility, including, without limitation, the costs of land, construction, inspection, engineering, administration, and consulting fees.

H. “Credits” means offsets to the payment of specific components of the interim development impact fee program.

I. “Department” means the Carson Community Development Department.

J. “Developer” means any landowner or other person or entity undertaking development of real property in the City.

K. “Development project” means any project undertaken for the purpose of development, including a project involving the issuance of a permit for construction or reconstruction, but not a permit to operate.

L. “Director” means the Director of the Carson Community Development Department.

M. “Fee” means a monetary exaction, other than a tax or special assessment, which is charged by the City to the applicant in connection with approval of a development project for the purpose of defraying all or a portion of the cost of public facilities related to the development project, but does not include fees specified in Section 66477 of the Government Code, or fees for processing applications for regulatory actions or approvals (unless such meaning is clearly indicated by context), or fees collected under development agreements.

N. “Hotel” means a building with the primary use as either a hotel, motel or residence inn, or a building containing six (6) or more rooms intended to be used for sleeping purposes by guests.

O. “Industrial uses” means a building with the primary use of warehouse, manufacturing, storage or distribution, logistics, including multi-tenant buildings designated for industrial uses, and business parks.

P. “Office” means a building with primarily office uses. This includes office uses such as banks, other financial institutions, and professional and medical offices.

Q. “Public facilities” means public improvements, public services, and community amenities included in the reports.

R. “Reimbursement” means a payment made to a developer for the construction of a public improvement or facility included in the reports.

S. “Reports” means the Interim Development Impact Fee Nexus Study prepared by Kelly Associates Management Group and dated March 19, 2019, and approved by the City Council on April 2, 2019, along with all reports, studies, assessments, and memorandums referenced within that study.

T. “Residential” means and includes dwellings or permanent living accommodations.

U. “Square footage” means the area within the interior walls of a building, exclusive of the vent shafts and courts. When no exterior walls are provided, the square footage shall be the usable area under the roof and/or on the roof. Exterior hardscaped areas (i.e., parking, walkways, courtyards) covered by a roof shall be excluded. (Ord. 19-1931, § 2)

CHAPTER 4
PROCEDURE FOR ADOPTION OF FEES
Sections:

§ 11400    Procedure for Adoption of Fees.

§ 11401    Urgency Measure for Adopting Fees.

11400 Procedure for Adoption of Fees.
Except as provided in CMC 11401, the procedural requirements in Government Code Sections 66018 and 66019 shall be followed for the adoption or increase of an interim development impact fee:

A. The City shall hold at least one (1) public hearing at a regularly scheduled City Council meeting.

B. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in a newspaper regularly published at least once a week. The notice shall be published twice, with at least five (5) days intervening between the dates of the first and last publication, not counting such publication dates. The first publication shall occur ten (10) days prior to the public hearing.

C. Notice for the public hearing must be mailed to those who have filed a written request with the City at least fourteen (14) days prior to the City Council meeting.

D. At least ten (10) days before the City Council meeting, the City shall make available for public review the data indicating the amount of the cost required to provide the public facilities for which the fee is charged and the revenue sources anticipated to fund those public facilities.

E. Any new fee or increase to an existing fee shall be made by ordinance or resolution of the City.

F. Any costs incurred in conducting the public hearing may be recovered from the fees to be collected.

G. The interim development impact fees are effective sixty (60) days after the City Council’s final action on the adoption or increase of the fees. (Ord. 19-1931, § 2)

11401 Urgency Measure for Adopting Fees.
Pursuant to Government Code Section 66017, if the City determines that a new fee or an increase in an existing fee is necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, then an interim development impact fee can be adopted or increased on an interim basis by urgency measure without following the procedures outlined in CMC 11400. The urgency measure must be adopted by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the City Council and must include written findings that describe the current and immediate threat to the public health, safety, and welfare that justifies the urgency measure. The initial urgency measure is effective for thirty (30) days, but may be extended for up to two (2) additional thirty (30) day periods by a four-fifths (4/5) vote following notice and a public hearing. (Ord. 19-1931, § 2)

CHAPTER 5
ESTABLISHMENT OF INTERIM DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
Sections:

§ 11500    Interim Development Impact Fees.

§ 11501    Establishment of Fee Categories.

§ 11502    Imposition of Interim Development Impact Fees.

§ 11503    Notice of Imposition of Interim Development Impact Fees.

§ 11504    Payment of Interim Development Impact Fees.

11500 Interim Development Impact Fees.
The interim development impact fees established under this Chapter shall be in the amounts determined by City Council resolution. The amounts of such interim development impact fees shall be increased annually on July 1st of each year based on the State of California Construction Cost Index (the “CCCI”) increase for the previous calendar year as determined on March 1st of each year. Such interim development impact fee amounts also shall be reviewed and revised every five (5) years, based on the current estimated costs of the proposed public facilities in the report, as required by the Mitigation Fee Act. (Ord. 19-1931, § 2)

11501 Establishment of Fee Categories.
The following interim development impact fees are established for each development project located within the City:

A. General Government Facilities. A fee for general government facilities is established to finance the expansion, design, and construction of governmental facilities as specified in the reports, such as City Hall and Corporate Yard improvements.

B. Transportation Infrastructure and Facilities. A fee for transportation infrastructure and facilities is established to finance the expansion, design, and construction of transportation infrastructure and facilities specified in the reports, such as roads, bridges, public transit, bikeways, and pedestrian walkways.

C. Utilities and Sustainability. A fee for utilities and sustainability is established to finance the expansion, design, and construction of utilities and sustainable facilities as specified in the reports, such as green streets and renewable energy projects.

D. Beautification. A fee for beautification is established to finance the expansion, design, and construction of citywide beautification infrastructure and facilities as specified in the reports, including signage and street furniture that assist in reducing congestion and associated pollution.

E. Parks and Related Facilities. A fee for parks and related facilities is established to finance the land acquisition and infrastructure costs to meet the demand for park space attributable to new development, as specified in the reports.

F. Traffic Facilities. A fee for traffic facilities and related facilities is established to finance traffic improvements necessary to accommodate the increase in traffic generated by new development, as specified in the reports. (Ord. 19-1931, § 2)

11502 Imposition of Interim Development Impact Fees.
Unless otherwise specified in this Article, development projects and developers thereof shall pay the interim development impact fees if the development project includes the new construction, significant demolition and redevelopment in relationship to the project site, or building additions of ten (10) percent or more of the on-site building footprint. (Ord. 19-1931, § 2)

11503 Notice of Imposition of Interim Development Impact Fees.
At the time of approval or conditional approval of a development project, or within fifteen (15) days from the date of approval, the City shall give written notice to each developer of the interim development impact fees imposed, as well as a description of any dedication, reservation, or other exaction imposed on such development project as a condition of its approval. The notice shall also state that the developer may protest the imposition of any such fee, dedication, reservation, or other exaction and that the ninety (90) day approval period in which the developer may submit a protest has begun. (Ord. 19-1931, § 2)

11504 Payment of Interim Development Impact Fees.
Except as provided below and in Government Code Section 66007, interim development impact fees shall be calculated and paid prior to issuance of the building permit. Notwithstanding the above, at the discretion of the City Council, the payment of specified fees may be deferred to a time no later than the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or up to twelve (12) months following the issuance of the building permit, whichever occurs first. The deferred fee payments will be based on the fees in effect at the time of actual payment. (Ord. 19-1931, § 2)

CHAPTER 6
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING
Sections:

§ 11600    Creation of Special Fund and Accounts.

§ 11601    Reporting Requirements.

11600 Creation of Special Fund and Accounts.
The Mitigation Fee Act requires the City to account for all interim development impact fees collected. Interim development impact fees shall be deposited into a separate capital facilities account or accounts and shall not be commingled with any other City funds, except for temporary investments. All collected interim development impact fees (“IDIF”) shall be distributed into the six (6) IDIF categories in accordance with their respective percentages as they relate to the IDIF amount. See Table A below. Interim development impact fees shall be expended solely for the purpose for which they were collected. While funds are accruing for individual public facilities, the City must track each fund and provide an annual report.

TABLE A

INTERIM DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE ALLOCATION 

Project Type

Fee Category

Percentage Breakdown

of IDIF Fee

Hotel

Traffic

51.91%

Parks

42.76%

Beautification

0.17%

General Government Facilities

1.19%

Transportation Infrastructure

2.43%

Utilities and Sustainability

1.54%

TOTAL (PER ROOM)

100%

Truck Yard

Traffic

38.36%

Parks

49.33%

Beautification

0.38%

General Government Facilities

2.76%

Transportation Infrastructure

5.62%

Utilities and Sustainability

3.55%

TOTAL (PER TRUCK SPACE)

100%

Recreational

Traffic

98.04%

Parks

0.00%

Beautification

0.06%

General Government Facilities

0.44%

Transportation Infrastructure

0.89%

Utilities and Sustainability

0.56%

TOTAL (PER KSF)

100%

Industrial/

Business Park

Traffic

29.75%

Parks

35.17%

Beautification

1.10%

General Government Facilities

7.86%

Transportation Infrastructure

16.02%

Utilities and Sustainability

10.11%

TOTAL (PER KSF)

100%

Residential MFR Studio/

One (1) Bedroom

Traffic

3.77%

Parks

85.57%

Beautification

0.33%

General Government Facilities

2.39%

Transportation Infrastructure

4.87%

Utilities and Sustainability

3.07%

TOTAL (PER UNIT)

100%

Residential MFR All Other

Traffic

2.13%

Parks

87.03%

Beautification

0.34%

General Government Facilities

2.43%

Transportation Infrastructure

4.95%

Utilities and Sustainability

3.12%

TOTAL (PER UNIT)

100%

Commercial

Traffic

58.75%

Parks

20.65%

Beautification

0.64%

General Government Facilities

4.62%

Transportation Infrastructure

9.41%

Utilities and Sustainability

5.94%

TOTAL (PER KSF)

100%

Office

Traffic

40.53%

Parks

29.76%

Beautification

0.93%

General Government Facilities

6.66%

Transportation Infrastructure

13.56%

Utilities and Sustainability

8.56%

TOTAL (PER KSF)

100%

Dormitory

Traffic

20.79%

Parks

70.43%

Beautification

0.27%

General Government Facilities

1.97%

Transportation Infrastructure

4.01%

Utilities and Sustainability

2.53%

TOTAL (PER BED)

100%

(Ord. 19-1931, § 2)

11601 Reporting Requirements.
A. Annual Reporting Requirements. Pursuant to Government Code Section 66006, within one hundred eighty (180) days after the last day of the fiscal year (i.e., by December 27th), the City must make the following information available:

1. A brief description of the type of fee in each account or fund;

2. The amount of the fee;

3. The beginning and ending balance of the account or fund;

4. The amount of the fees collected and the interest earned;

5. An identification of each public facility on which fees were expended and the amount of each expenditure, including the total percentage of the cost of the public facility that was funded with fees;

6. An identification of an approximate date by which the construction of the public facility will commence if the City determines that sufficient funds have been collected to complete financing on an incomplete public facility and the public facility remains incomplete;

7. A description of any interfund transfer or loan, and the public facility on which the transferred funds will be expended, and, in the case of an interfund loan, the date on which the loan will be repaid, and the rate of interest that the account or fund will receive on the loan; and

8. The amount of any refunds made and any allocations of unexpended fees that are not refunded.

B. At the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting occurring within fifteen (15) days after the annual reporting requirements described above are made available to the public, the City Council shall review the annual report.

1. Notice of the time and place of the meeting, including the address where this information may be reviewed, shall be mailed, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the meeting, to any interested party who files a written request with the City Council for mailed notice of the meeting. The City Council may establish a reasonable annual charge for sending notices based on the estimated cost of providing the service.

2. Any written request for mailed notices shall be valid for one (1) year from the date on which it is filed unless a renewal request is filed. Renewal requests for mailed notices shall be filed on or before April 1st of each year.

C. Five (5) Year Reporting Requirements. Pursuant to Government Code Section 66001, the fifth fiscal year following the first deposit into each public facility account or fund, and every five (5) years thereafter, the City must make the following findings for any portion of the account or fund remaining unexpended:

1. Identify the purpose to which the fee is to be put.

2. Demonstrate a reasonable relationship between the fee and the purpose for which it is charged.

3. Identify all sources and amounts of funding anticipated to complete financing of incomplete public facilities.

4. Designate the approximate date on which the funding referred to above is expected to be deposited into the appropriate account or fund.

If the City fails to make these findings, it must refund any undisbursed monies to the owner of record of the project sites originally contributing to the funds, to the extent required by State law. (Ord. 19-1931, § 2)

CHAPTER 7
EXEMPTIONS
Sections:

§ 11700    Exemptions.

11700 Exemptions.
The following exceptions apply to the fees imposed by this Chapter:

A. Senior citizen housing developments as defined by the Carson Municipal Code;

B. Affordable housing as described in the Carson Municipal Code;

C. Accessory dwelling units as defined by State law;

D. Tenant improvements;

E. Business license renewals;

F. Lease extensions;

G. Renovations of existing structures;

H. Building additions of less than ten (10) percent of the on-site building footprint; and

I. Development projects owned by the City of Carson, the Carson Successor Agency, the Carson Reclamation Authority, and the Carson Housing Authority. (Ord. 19-1931, § 2)

CHAPTER 8
CREDITS AND REIMBURSEMENTS
Sections:

§ 11800    Fee Credits (Based on Demolition and New Construction).

§ 11801    Fee Credits (Based on Construction of Public Facilities).

§ 11802    Reimbursements.

§ 11803    Requirements for Construction of Public Facilities.

§ 11804    Improvements Not Eligible for Credit or Reimbursement.

11800 Fee Credits (Based on Demolition and New Construction).
The amount of interim development impact fee which would otherwise be due and payable in accordance with the provisions of this Article may be reduced by interim development impact fee credits (“fee credits”) described in this Chapter.

A. General Provisions of Fee Credits for Demolitions.

1. Eligibility. A developer may be eligible for fee credits if a development project meets both of these criteria:

a. The development project includes demolition of an existing permitted structure or structures at the development project site prior to construction of the new development project; and

b. The development project is subject to interim development impact fees pursuant to this Article, payable in an amount determined by City Council resolution setting the interim development impact fees.

2. Applying for a Fee Credit.

a. A developer may apply for a fee credit by applying for a demolition permit for the existing permitted structure(s) on the development project site. On the demolition permit application, the developer shall specify in writing if the developer requests a fee credit.

b. The demolition permit application shall include the prior use, the floor area, and other information necessary to determine the amount of fee credits available. If the existing permitted structure or the development project’s new construction, or both, consist of industrial/business parks or recreational projects, then the demolition permit application shall also include building volume of the existing permitted structure and the proposed new structure(s). All information submitted in a demolition permit application is subject to review and verification by the Director or his/her designees.

c. The Building Official will require additional inspections, subject to additional fees, if the City determines that the developer provided inaccurate information on its demolition permit application.

d. If a developer is eligible for fee credits, then the fee credits shall be calculated based on approved and verified information on the demolition permit application, and according to the formulas and procedures described in this Chapter.

e. The amount of the fee credit shall be determined at the time of demolition permit issuance, or prior to issuance. The Director shall provide written approval of a fee credit and the amount of the fee credit.

3. Applying Fee Credits to Interim Development Impact Fees.

a. Fee credits shall apply when interim development impact fees are due. Unused fee credits shall be forfeited. Fee credits cannot be transferred to another development project, whether on the same site or different site than the development project for which the fee credits are approved.

b. Fee credits shall not apply to the administrative fee.

c. Fee credits shall not exceed interim development impact fee minus the administrative fee.

d. After deducting applicable fee credits and administrative fees, the remaining IDIF shall be distributed into the six (6) IDIF categories in accordance with their respective percentages. See Table A.

4. Fee Credits for Demolition (Same Development Project Type). Interim development impact fee balance (interim development impact fees including administrative fees less any fee credits) for development projects replacing an existing permitted structure with a new structure of the same development project type (e.g., residential development project replacing existing permitted residential) shall be calculated based on the following:

a. For residential MFR studio/one (1) bedroom and residential MFR all other, dormitory, hotel, truck yard (permanent structure(s) on truck yards are only eligible for industrial credits), commercial, and office project types, the following steps will determine the interim development impact fee balance:

i. Determine the total IDIF of the new development project, which includes IDIF administrative fees.

ii. Determine the fee credit amount. The fee credit shall be the “existing structure net IDIF,” which is the hypothetical total IDIF of the existing permitted structure (i.e., the total IDIF for which the existing permitted structure would be responsible if the existing permitted structure was a new development project subject to the IDIF) minus the administrative fee.

iii. Subtract the fee credit (i.e., the existing structure net IDIF) from the total IDIF of the new development project to determine the IDIF balance due.

[(Total IDIF of new development project) – (existing structure net IDIF)] = IDIF balance due.

b. For recreational and industrial/business park project types, the following steps will determine the interim development impact fee balance:

i. Determine the building volume of existing permitted structure as specified on the City’s fee credit approval letter from the demolition permit application.

ii. Calculate building volume of new development project. In general, this means multiply the total building footprint by the average weighted building height to most accurately determine actual building volume. Final volume is measured in cubic feet.

iii. Determine the net building volume (i.e., the increase in building volume, if any) arising from the new development project by subtracting the building volume of existing permitted structure from the building volume of the new development project:

New development project building volume – existing structure building volume = net building volume.

iv. Divide the net building volume by the average weighted new building height to get the IDIF applicable floor area of the building footprint (i.e., the increase in square footage of the first floor).

v. Add the IDIF applicable floor area of the building footprint to all other building areas (“other building areas” meaning second floor and above, including any mezzanine areas) to obtain total IDIF applicable square footage.

vi. Multiply total IDIF applicable square footage by IDIF rates to obtain final total IDIF balance.

5. Fee Credits Calculations for Demolition (Change in Development Project Type). Interim development impact fee balance (total interim development impact fees including administrative fees, less any fee credits) for development projects replacing an existing permitted structure with a development project type that is different from the existing permitted structure (e.g., industrial building converting to commercial) shall be calculated based on the following steps:

a. Determine the total IDIF of the new development project, which includes IDIF administrative fees.

b. Determine the fee credit amount. The fee credit shall be the “existing structure net IDIF,” which is the hypothetical total IDIF of the existing permitted structure (i.e., the total IDIF for which the existing permitted structure would be responsible if the existing structure was a new development project subject to the IDIF) minus the administrative fee.

c. Subtract the fee credit (i.e., the existing structure net IDIF) from the total IDIF of the new development project to determine the IDIF balance due.

[(Total IDIF of new development project) – (existing structure net IDIF)] = IDIF balance due. (Ord. 19-1931, § 2)

11801 Fee Credits (Based on Construction of Public Facilities).
If a developer constructs public facilities to satisfy a condition of approval on a development project for which an interim development impact fee is imposed, then the developer may be eligible to receive a fee credit toward the interim development impact fee imposed on the development project. The credit shall be limited to the fee category applicable to the constructed public facility. For example, construction of a park facility may be eligible for a credit against interim development impact fees for parks, but shall not apply as a credit against other fee categories. Fee credits shall be issued in accordance with the following requirements:

A. The developer must enter into a credit agreement with the City prior to receiving credits. If a credit agreement is not in place at the time the interim development impact fees are due to the City, the developer shall pay its interim development impact fee obligation in full or will not receive building permits.

B. The amount of the credit shall be the developer’s reasonable and actual costs of construction, as determined by the City Engineer. The reasonable and actual costs of construction shall not, however, exceed the City’s engineering cost estimates. Notwithstanding the above, the credit shall not be greater than the amount of the fee owed for the relevant fee category. If the credit is less than the fee owed for the relevant fee category, then the developer shall pay the balance of the fee to the City.

C. Credits earned for the construction of a public facility can only be applied to the interim development impact fee category for which the public facility is programmed. Credits shall not apply outside the category for which the public facility is programmed.

D. Credits cannot be applied to the administrative fee.

E. Credits shall accrue when the developer has completed the construction of a creditable improvement and the improvement has been accepted by the City, or when the developer has bonded for the construction of the improvement per the credit agreement with the City and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.

F. All rights to fee credits shall be personal to the property owner that was financially responsible for building or funding the improvement. The constructing property owner may transfer and/or assign its rights upon sale of the property to the new owner with a written document approved in form and acknowledged by the City. Fee credits shall not be sold and/or transferred to other property owners or guest builders, unless otherwise agreed upon in a written document that has been reviewed and approved by the City Council. Project credits shall not be sold and/or transferred. (Ord. 19-1931, § 2)

11802 Reimbursements.
If a developer constructs public facilities to satisfy a condition of approval on a development project for which an interim development impact fee is imposed, and the cost of constructing the public facility exceeds the amount of the interim development impact fee for the relevant fee category, then the developer may be entitled to a reimbursement for the difference between the cost of construction and the relevant interim development impact fee. Cost reimbursement shall be made in accordance with the following requirements:

A. The developer shall enter into a reimbursement agreement prior to commencing construction of a public facility.

B. The amount of the reimbursement shall be the difference between the fees owed and the developer’s reasonable and actual costs of construction, as determined by the City Engineer; provided, that the reasonable and actual costs of construction shall not exceed the engineering cost estimates included in the reports, unless approved by City Council.

C. The agreement shall set forth the amount to be reimbursed, the time and manner in which payments are to be made, and shall require the City to reimburse the developer from the applicable fund when funds are available.

D. The City’s general fund shall not be used for payment of any obligations rising from a reimbursement agreement under this Section.

E. Reimbursement priority will be determined on a first-in and first-out basis. When funds are available, and no high priority projects need to be financed (as determined by the City Manager), reimbursements will be paid to the developer that first became eligible for reimbursement. Once that developer is paid in full, the developer that next became eligible for reimbursement will be paid until paid in full. A developer will only become eligible for reimbursement after the public facility constructed by that developer is formally accepted by the City Council.

F. The developer shall submit a request for reimbursement in accordance with the reimbursement agreement, including full documentation therefor, no later than one (1) year after the public facility is accepted by the City Council. The time to apply for reimbursement may be extended up to one (1) additional year by the City Council for good cause shown. Failure to submit a timely request for reimbursement shall constitute a waiver of the developer’s right to reimbursement. (Ord. 19-1931, § 2)

11803 Requirements for Construction of Public Facilities.
The construction of public facilities under this Section shall comply with the following requirements. A developer that fails to comply with these requirements shall not be eligible for a credit or reimbursement under this Section.

A. Contracts for the construction of public facilities shall be advertised and awarded in accordance with the requirements of the Public Contract Code and City’s purchasing ordinance (Chapter 6 of Article II) relating to public works projects, or as otherwise directed by City staff.

B. Developer shall ensure compliance with all provisions of the Labor Code regarding payment of prevailing wages and similar provisions, including Labor Code Sections 1720 et seq. and 1810 et seq.

C. Prior to soliciting bids for any portion of the public facilities, developer shall submit to the City for review and approval the bid packet and a set of construction drawings signed by developer or another authorized representative designated by developer for the work being bid. The City’s approval shall be granted or denied within fifteen (15) calendar days after submission of such bid packet. If the City denies approval of such bid packet and construction drawings, the City shall specify the reasons for such disapproval and developer shall resubmit a revised bid packet for review and approval until such approval is obtained.

D. Developer shall provide the City with copies of all bids received from contractors and a bid summary in a form approved by the City to assure that the contractor/subcontractors adhere to the applicable legal requirements for public works projects. The contract or contracts for the construction of the public facilities shall be awarded to the responsible bidder(s) submitting the lowest responsive bid(s) for the construction of the public facilities. Developer shall enter into a construction contract with each contractor selected to perform work on the public facilities (after competitive bidding as set forth above), for the performance of the work set forth in the selected bid, and the terms of each construction contract entered into by developer and each contractor/subcontractor shall be reasonably acceptable to the City. Developer shall submit to City a copy of each executed construction contract for the public facilities within fifteen (15) days after execution thereof.

E. All work shall be done and the public facilities completed as shown on the plans and specifications, as well as any subsequent alterations thereto, mutually agreed upon by City and developer. If developer desires to make any alterations to the plans and specifications resulting in a change order to the contract, it shall provide written notice to the City of such proposed alterations. City shall have ten (10) business days after receipt of such written notice for change or work to administratively approve or disapprove such alterations, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, conditioned or delayed. If City fails to provide written notice to developer of its approval or disapproval of the alterations within such ten (10) business day period, City will be deemed to have disapproved such alterations to the plans and specifications.

F. Developer shall complete construction of the public facilities in accordance with the City-approved plans and specifications within one (1) year of the issuance of a building permit, unless both the City and developer agree to an extension in writing.

G. City shall not be responsible or liable for the maintenance or care of, and shall exercise no control over, the public facilities until such public facilities are accepted by City. Developer shall have no obligation to make the public facilities available for public use at any time before the public facilities are accepted by City. Any use by any person of the public facilities, or any portion thereof, shall be at the sole and exclusive risk of developer at all times prior to City’s acceptance of the improvements. (Ord. 19-1931, § 2)

11804 Improvements Not Eligible for Credit or Reimbursement.
Unless otherwise negotiated in the credit or reimbursement agreement between the City and the developer, the developer shall not receive interim development impact fee credits or reimbursements for the following improvements:

A. Interim Public Facilities. A developer may elect, with the approval of the City, to construct interim public facilities pending the construction of needed improvements included in the reports. No credits or reimbursement shall be available for such interim or temporary improvements.

B. Frontage Improvements. Unless otherwise specified in the reports, developers shall not be entitled to credits or reimbursement for the construction of frontage improvements, including concrete curbs, gutters, asphalt concrete street pavement, landscaping, and sidewalks.

C. Utility Undergrounding and Utility Poles. Developers shall be not entitled to credits or reimbursement for the undergrounding of utility devices or relocation of utility poles. (Ord. 19-1931, § 2)

CHAPTER 9
PROTEST PROCEDURES
Sections:

§ 11900    Protests.

§ 11901    Time Limits on Filing Protests.

§ 11902    Council Consideration of Protests.

11900 Protests.
In accordance with Government Code Section 66020, a developer may protest the imposition of interim development impact fees on a development project by complying with the following requirements:

A. Tendering any required payment in full or providing satisfactory evidence of arrangements to pay the fee when due; and

B. Serving a written notice on the City Clerk, including (1) a statement that the required payment is tendered or will be tendered when due and (2) a statement informing the City of the factual elements of the dispute and the legal theory forming the basis for the protest. (Ord. 19-1931, § 2)

11901 Time Limits on Filing Protests.
Any such protest shall be filed within the applicable time frame, as follows:

A. For projects that require approval or conditional approval of a development, the protest shall be filed at the time of the approval or conditional approval. For purposes of this Section, and pursuant to Government Code Section 66020(g), “approval or conditional approval of a development” occurs when the tentative map, tentative parcel map, or parcel map is approved or conditionally approved, or when the parcel map is recorded if a tentative map or tentative parcel map is not required.

B. For projects that do not require approval or conditional approval of a development, as defined above, the protest shall be filed within ninety (90) days after approval by the City of the entitlement or permit that imposes the interim development impact fees on the development. (Ord. 19-1931, § 2)

11902 Council Consideration of Protests.
The City Council shall consider the protest at a public hearing within sixty (60) days after it is filed, and the decision of the City Council shall be final. (Ord. 19-1931, § 2)