
Title 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapters:

1.02    Municipal Code

1.08    Enforcement of Provisions of Municipal Code

1.10    Code Enforcement Administrative Fines

1.12    Appeal Hearings

1.16    Repealed

1.20    Conflict of Interest Code

1.80    Elections

1.82    Filing Fees – Elective Office

1.84    Campaign Regulations

1.86    Candidate’s Statement of Qualifications

Chapter 1.02
MUNICIPAL CODE
Sections:

1.02.010    Adoption.

1.02.020    Severability.

1.02.030    Definitions.

1.02.040    Judicial review.

1.02.050    Repeal of ordinance.

1.02.060    Duty of officers and employees.

1.02.070    Corporate seal.

1.02.010 Adoption.
The ordinances embraced in the following titles, together with such amendments as may be made, shall constitute and be cited as the “Municipal Code” for the City of Coronado. The Municipal Code shall include such secondary codes as are adopted by reference, except those portions of the secondary codes that are modified or deleted by provisions of the Municipal Code. (Ord. 1778)

1.02.020 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, and will pass any amendments thereto, irrespective of the fact that any one or more of the other sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional.

1.02.030 Definitions.
A. Unless the provisions or the context otherwise require, words and phrases in this code shall be construed and understood according to their common and approved usage. Words or phrases that have acquired a particular meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.

B. Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify, or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of this code.

C. The provisions of this code, and all proceedings under them, are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice.

1.02.040 Judicial review.
A. Pursuant to Section 1094.5 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the provisions of Section 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure are hereby made applicable to persons seeking judicial review of an adjudicative decision of the City.

B. The City Clerk shall ensure that the parties to each adjudicative decision of the City are given notice of the decision and this code section.

1.02.050 Repeal of ordinance.
The repeal of any ordinance within this code shall not repeal the repealing clause of such ordinance, nor shall it revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby.

1.02.060 Duty of officers and employees.
The obligations imposed upon the City officers and employees for implementation and enforcement of the provisions of this code are directory in nature. Nothing in this code shall be construed as limiting or eliminating any defense or immunity from liability for the City or its officers or employees established by the provisions of Title 1, Division 3.6 of the California Government Code, or by any other provision of law. The manner and timing of enforcement and implementation of this code shall be within the discretion of the City Manager and other designated City officers and employees. This code shall not be construed to hold the City or any officer or employee of the City responsible for any damage to persons or property by reason of a failure to enforce, implement or execute any of the provisions of this code. Nothing in this code shall be construed to hold the City or any officer or employee of the City responsible for any damage resulting to persons or property by reason of any interpretation of this code by any City officer or employee.

1.02.070 Corporate seal.
A. The common seal of the City of Coronado shall consist of the following device: A crown with the inscription, “City of Coronado, State of California,” arranged in a circle, surrounding the crown. Within such circle shall be the words and figures, “incorporated 1890.”

B. The seal shall be a circle, approximately one-fourth larger than a silver dollar, and shall be an impression seal.

Chapter 1.08
ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS OF MUNICIPAL CODE
Sections:

1.08.010    Purpose.

1.08.020    Enforcement Officer.

1.08.030    Violation as public nuisance.

1.08.040    Continuing violation.

1.08.050    Enforcement through criminal prosecution.

1.08.060    Enforcement through civil lawsuit.

1.08.070    Enforcement through administrative abatement.

1.08.010 Purpose.
A. It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this code within the City.

B. In addressing a particular code violation, the City may use one or more of the enforcement procedures provided herein. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the City from enforcing the provisions of this code in any manner authorized in law. (Ord. 1778; Ord. 1767)

1.08.020 Enforcement Officer.
A. The City Manager may by ordinance designate one or more Enforcement Officers to enforce provisions of this code in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

B. Every Police Services Officer, Code Enforcement Officer, or Fire Marshal for the City of Coronado is authorized to make an arrest and release the arrested person on a notice to appear, as provided by law, for any violation of this code committed in their presence. (Ord. 1907)

1.08.030 Violation as public nuisance.
A. It is unlawful for any person to create, cause, commit or maintain a public nuisance within the City.

B. A violation of any regulatory provision of this code constitutes a public nuisance. (Gov. Code § 38771)

1.08.040 Continuing violation.
A. Where a continuing violation of this code is created by a former property owner upon, or in the use of, such property, every successive owner of such property who neglects to abate the continuing violation is responsible for the violation in the same manner as the former owner who created the violation. (CC 3483)

B. No lapse of time can legalize a violation of a provision of this code. (CC 3490)

1.08.050 Enforcement through criminal prosecution.
A. Infraction. Any person who violates a provision of this code, where such violation constitutes a crime, shall be guilty of an infraction, unless otherwise expressed, punishable as follows:

1. A fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation;

2. A fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation of the same section of the Municipal Code within one year;

3. A fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional violation of the same section of the Municipal Code within one year. (Gov. Code § 36900(b))

B. Misdemeanor. Any person convicted of violating a provision of this code, where such violation is expressly made a misdemeanor, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Gov. Code § 36901)

C. Separate Violation. Each separate day, or any portion thereof, during which a violation of this code occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense.

D. Aiding or Abetting a Violation. Whenever an act or omission is made unlawful by this code, it shall also be unlawful for any person to allow, permit, aid, abet, suffer or conceal such act or omission.

E. Treble Costs. Upon a second or subsequent offense within two years, the City shall request as part of the criminal prosecution that the court order the convicted defendant who owns the property on which the violation is maintained to pay treble the costs incurred by the City in obtaining the abatement of the nuisance, in accordance with law. (Gov. Code § 38773.7)

1.08.060 Enforcement through civil lawsuit.
A. A violation of a provision of this code may be redressed by civil action which seeks, among other things, declaratory and injunctive relief. A public nuisance that is not a violation of a provision of this code may nonetheless be redressed in accordance with the provisions of this section. (CC 3494)

B. In seeking a civil judgment against any person who creates, causes, commits or maintains a public nuisance within the City, the City shall seek an award of damages to the City in an amount equal to the expenses incurred by the City in abating such nuisance.

C. Treble Costs. Upon a second or subsequent offense within two years, the City shall request that the court order the person who creates, causes, commits or maintains a violation of this code within the City to pay treble the costs incurred by the City in obtaining the abatement of the violation, in accordance with law. (Gov. Code § 38773.7)

1.08.070 Enforcement through administrative abatement.
A violation of a regulatory provision of this code may be redressed in accordance with the provisions of this section.

A. Conduct of Administrative Hearing. An administrative hearing may be conducted for the purpose of abating a violation of this code as follows:

1. The City Manager, or the City Manager’s designee, shall serve as the hearing officer and shall set an administrative hearing at which the City presents its case in support of the contention that a violation of this code does in fact and in law exist and that the named party is responsible.

2. No less than 30 days prior to the hearing, notice of the hearing shall be:

a. Served on the responsible party in the same manner as a summons is served in a civil action;

b. Served by mail on any mortgagee or beneficiary of a deed of trust recorded against the premises where the public nuisance is occurring; and

c. Posted on the affected premises.

3. Proof of service and posting of the notice shall be made by declaration, under penalty of perjury, and shall be retained as part of the code enforcement file. (Gov. Code § 38773.1(b))

4. The responding parties shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present a response to the City’s presentation.

5. If the hearing officer determines, based upon competent, sworn evidence that a violation of this code does in fact and in law exist and that the responding party or parties have created, caused, committed or maintained the violation within the City, the hearing officer shall issue an administrative order of abatement which:

a. Describes the violation;

b. Sets forth the time and manner in which the public nuisance is to be abated;

c. Directs the responsible party or parties to abate the violation; and

d. Includes a statement that if the violation is not timely abated by the responsible party or parties, the City will cause the abatement to be accomplished at the expense of the responsible party or parties.

6. The City may record an administrative order of abatement with the County Recorder.

B. Abatement by the City.

1. If the responsible party or parties fail to comply fully with the administrative order of abatement, the City may abate the violation in accordance with law.

2. In abating the violation, the City Manager is authorized to utilize City forces or private contract.

3. To abate the violation, the City forces are authorized to go upon the affected premises in accordance with law.

4. The City Manager shall ensure that there is kept an account of the cost incurred by the City in abating the violation on each premises and shall cause to be prepared an itemized report, in writing, showing the cost of abatement.

C. Hearing to Assess Costs.

1. If the City is required to incur costs in abating the violation, the City Manager, or the City Manager’s designee, shall serve as the hearing officer and shall set an administrative hearing:

a. To establish the costs incurred by the City in abating the violation; and

b. To determine the method for assessing the obligation.

2. No less than 30 days prior to the hearing, notice of the hearing shall be:

a. Served on the responsible party in the same manner as a summons is served in a civil action; and

b. Served by mail on any mortgagee or beneficiary of a deed of trust recorded against the premises where the public nuisance is occurring.

3. Proof of service of the notice shall be made by declaration, under penalty of perjury, and shall be retained as part of the code enforcement file. (Gov. Code § 38773.1(b))

4. The responsible party or parties shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present a response to the City’s presentation.

5. Upon ascertaining that the costs claimed by the City in abating the violation are correct and reasonable, the hearing officer may direct one of the following:

a. Direct that an abatement lien be recorded against the property on which the violation is maintained and that notice be given to the owner of record of that property prior to such recordation, in accordance with law (Gov. Code § 38773.1); or

b. Direct that the costs of such abatement shall be a special assessment against the land on which the violation is maintained, in accordance with law, to be collected in the same manner as the real property tax is collected. (Gov. Code § 38773.5)

Chapter 1.10
CODE ENFORCEMENT ADMINISTRATIVE FINES
Sections:

1.10.010    Enforcement through administrative fine.

1.10.020    Amount of fines.

1.10.030    Notice of violation.

1.10.040    Issuance of administrative citation.

1.10.050    Review to contest administrative citation.

1.10.060    Review Officer.

1.10.070    Review procedure.

1.10.080    Review Officer’s decision.

1.10.090    Appealing Review Officer’s decision.

1.10.100    Collection of fines and charges.

1.10.010 Enforcement through administrative fine.
A person who has violated a regulatory provision of this code may be required to pay an administrative fine in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Gov. Code § 53069.4) (Ord. 1862)

1.10.020 Amount of fines.
The following fines shall be imposed for each separate violation of same code section:

A. $100.00 for a first violation;

B. $200.00 for a second violation within the same year; and

C. $500.00 for each additional violation in the same year. (Gov. Code § 36900)

1.10.030 Notice of violation.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall provide a reasonable period of time for the person who has violated a regulatory provision of the code to correct the violation, if the violation pertains to building, plumbing, electrical, or other similar structural or zoning issues, and does not create an immediate danger to health or safety.

B. If the person fails to cure the violation within the time provided by the Code Enforcement Officer, the Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to issue an administrative citation.

1.10.040 Issuance of administrative citation.
An administrative citation shall contain the following information:

A. The date of the violation.

B. The address or a description of the geographic location where the violation occurred.

C. The section of the code violated.

D. A description of the conditions which caused the code violation.

E. An order to bring the conditions into compliance with the code.

F. Information concerning the fine:

1. The amount of the fine which the citee is to pay;

2. The date, 20 working days from the date of the citation, by which the citee must pay the fine; and

3. The location where the citee must pay the fine.

G. Notice that the citee’s payment of the fine does not excuse a continued or subsequent violation of the code.

H. Notice of the citee’s entitlement to request an administrative review.

1.10.050 Review to contest administrative citation.
A. Request for Review. A citee may contest the citation by:

1. Completing a request for review form and returning it to the City Clerk within 20 days from the issuance of the administrative citation; and

2. Depositing with the City Clerk a refundable $25.00 deposit for the review.

B. Suspension of Payment of Fine. If the citee files a timely request for review, the requirement to pay the fine shall be suspended and the payment of the fine, if any, shall be in accordance with the decision of the Review Officer.

C. Processing Request.

1. Upon the receipt of a request for review, the City Clerk shall set the matter for hearing and provide the citee at least 10 days’ notice of the time, date, and location of the review.

2. If the City intends to submit any written material for consideration at the review, other than the citation, then the City Clerk shall provide copies of such additional material to the citee at least five working days prior to the review.

1.10.060 Review Officer.
The City Manager shall designate a competent person or persons to serve as a Review Officer.

1.10.070 Review procedure.
A. If the citee requesting the review fails to appear, the Review Officer shall enter a decision upholding the citation.

B. At the review, the City shall present its case in support of the contention that a violation of this code has occurred and that the citee is responsible.

C. At the review, the person contesting the penalty shall be given the opportunity to testify and to present evidence that a violation did not occur and/or the citee is not responsible for the violation.

1.10.080 Review Officer’s decision.
A. The Review Officer shall issue a written decision to uphold or set aside the administrative citation and shall present the reasons for the decision.

B. The City Clerk shall send a copy of the Review Officer’s decision to the citee with notice of the citee’s entitlement to appeal the Review Officer’s decision in Superior Court.

C. The decision of the Review Officer shall be the City’s final action on the matter. The decision shall be final as of the date of the decision.

D. If the Review Officer upholds the administrative citation, the City shall reimburse the citee’s $25.00 deposit.

1.10.090 Appealing Review Officer’s decision.
A. A citee may appeal the Review Officer’s decision by filing an appeal with the Superior Court, within 20 days from service of the Review Officer’s decision. (Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.6; Gov. Code § 53069.4)

B. Suspension of Payment of Fine. If the citee files a timely appeal with the Municipal Court, the requirement to pay the fine shall be suspended and the payment of the fine, if any, shall be in accordance with the decision of the Superior Court.

1.10.100 Collection of fines and charges.
If a citee fails to pay the fine in a timely manner, the City may collect any past due fines by use of all available legal means.

Chapter 1.12
APPEAL HEARINGS
Sections:

1.12.010    Scope.

1.12.020    Filing of an appeal.

1.12.030    Matter set for hearing and notification.

1.12.040    Material for hearing.

1.12.050    Conduct of hearing.

1.12.060    Determination.

1.12.070    Continuances.

1.12.080    Judicial review.

1.12.010 Scope.
An appeal seeking City Council review of a final, nonrecommending determination by a board, committee, commission (with the exception of the Civil Service Commission), or department subordinate to the City Council shall be made and processed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2042 § 1, 2014; Ord. 2025 § 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

1.12.020 Filing of an appeal.
A. To be sufficient for filing, the written appeal must be delivered to the City Clerk, together with any required fee, within 10 calendar days following the determination for which a review is sought. Further, the appeal must be legible and contain all information that the appellant desires to be considered at the appeal hearing and set forth at a minimum, the following:

1. The appellant’s full name, address, and phone number;

2. The board, commission, committee, or department which rendered the final determination;

3. The date of the determination;

4. The determination for which review is sought;

5. The appellant’s interest in the appealed determination; and

6. Each reason why the appellant is requesting a review including the grounds for the appeal and relevant code sections.

B. An incomplete appeal shall be returned to the appellant. Any revised appeal submitted after the 10-calendar-day period will be rejected. (Ord. 2025 § 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

1.12.030 Matter set for hearing and notification.
A. If the appeal is complete and filed in a timely manner, the City Clerk shall notify:

1. The “appellant” who filed the appeal;

2. The “real-party-in-interest,” if not the appellant, whose interest is affected by the action along with a copy of the written appeal material; and

3. The appropriate City department along with a copy of the written appeal material.

B. The City Clerk shall set the matter for consideration as a public hearing at the next available City Council meeting, or if agreed upon by the parties involved, i.e., the appellant, real-party-in-interest, and appropriate City department, a date as soon thereafter as is practical.

C. The appropriate City department shall provide notice of the public hearing for the appeal as required by the Government Code or other applicable law, and shall provide notice to any parties who received notice of the action by the subordinate authority. (Ord. 2025 § 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

1.12.040 Material for hearing.
A. In response to the notification received by the City Clerk, the real-party-in-interest shall submit all written documentation the party desires to be considered at the appeal hearing to the appropriate City department a minimum 15 days prior to the public hearing.

B. The appropriate City department shall prepare the staff report for the public hearing. The staff report may include, but not be limited to, the appeal material filed by the “appellant” at the time of the filing of the appeal; response material submitted by the “real-party-in-interest”; staff report, plans, and written information presented to and used by the decision-making body to render the decision which is the subject of the appeal; correspondence received; and any additional information the City department determines is appropriate to include in the staff report to assist the City Council in rendering a decision on the appeal. (Ord. 2025 § 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

1.12.050 Conduct of hearing.
A. The City Manager or the Manager’s designee shall present the staff report, analysis and facts relating to the nature of the appeal hearing.

B. The appellant shall have the right to present information and evidence regarding the nature of the appeal hearing under City Council consideration.

C. The real-party-in-interest, if not the appellant, shall have the right to present information and evidence regarding the merits of the appeal hearing under City Council consideration.

D. The public will be provided an opportunity to speak to the Council regarding the appeal and decision before the City Council.

E. Following public comment, the appellant, real-party-in-interest, and City staff shall have the right to present additional evidence in explanation or rebuttal of written or verbal comments presented at the hearing. (Ord. 2025 § 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

1.12.060 Determination.
After applying rules and regulations to the information presented at the hearing, the City Council shall by resolution make a final determination on the application which is the subject of the appeal hearing and affirm, modify, or overturn the decision made by subordinate entity’s determination. (Ord. 2025 § 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

1.12.070 Continuances.
Continuances or extensions of time may be granted by the City Council for good cause or upon agreement of all parties and the City Manager. (Ord. 2025 § 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

1.12.080 Judicial review.
Judicial review of any determination of the City Council on an appeal pursuant to this chapter may be had pursuant to Section 1094.5 of the California Code of Civil Procedure, but only if the petition for writ of mandate authorized by said section is filed no later than the ninetieth day following the date on which the decision becomes final. (Ord. 2025 § 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

Chapter 1.16
ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS
(Repealed by Ord. 2025)

Chapter 1.20
CONFLICT OF INTEREST CODE
Sections:

1.20.010    Purpose.

1.20.015    Amendment and review.

1.20.020    Definitions incorporated.

1.20.030    Place of filing.

1.20.040    Filing officer.

1.20.050    Disclosure categories.

1.20.060    Department positions.

1.20.070    Boards, commissions, committees.

1.20.080    Consultants.

1.20.010 Purpose.
A. The Political Reform Act of 1974, Government Code Section 81000 et seq., “the Act” herein, requires the City to adopt and promulgate a conflict of interest code. The Fair Political Practices Commission has adopted a regulation, 2 California Code of Regulations Section 18730, which contains the terms of a standard conflict of interest code. It can be incorporated by reference, and may be amended by the Fair Political Practices Commission after public notice and hearings to conform to amendments in the Act. Therefore, the terms of 2 Cal. Code of Regulations Section 18730 and any amendments to it duly adopted by the Fair Political Practices Commission are hereby incorporated by reference.

B. This chapter shall be known as the “conflict of interest code” of the City.

C. Nothing in this chapter is intended to modify or abridge the provisions of the Act commencing with Government Code Section 87100, which is applicable to all public officials of the City and directs that no public official of the City shall make, participate in making, or in any way attempt to use their official position to influence a City decision in which the official knows, or has reason to know, that he or she has a financial interest as defined by the Act.

D. This chapter intends to designate those public officials of the City who are involved in City decisions, and to require such designated officials to disclose those financial interests (using Form 700) which could foreseeably be affected, in a material manner, by a City decision made by the official in the performance of the official’s responsibilities. (Ord. 2081 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018)

1.20.015 Amendment and review.
A. Amendment.

1. Changed Circumstances. Changed circumstances include, but are not limited to, the following: the creation of new positions, which must be designated pursuant to this chapter, and relevant changes in the duties assigned to existing positions. (Gov. Code § 87306(a).)

2. Amendment Due to Changed Circumstances. Within 90 days after the changed circumstances necessitating the amendment to this chapter become apparent, the City Manager shall submit a proposed amendment to the City Council. (Gov. Code § 87306(a).)

3. Manner of Amendment. This chapter shall be amended by the City Council after a noticed public hearing is held prior to adoption of the proposed amendment. (Gov. Code § 87311.)

B. Biennial Review.

1. No later than July 1st of each even-numbered year, the City Manager shall review this chapter. (Gov. Code § 87306.5(a).)

2. If a change in this chapter is necessitated by changed circumstances, it shall be amended pursuant to subsection A of this section. (Gov. Code § 87306.5(a).)

3. If no change in this chapter is required, the City Manager shall submit a written statement to that effect to the City Council no later than October 1st of the same year. (Gov. Code § 87306.5(b).) (Ord. 2081 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018)

1.20.020 Definitions incorporated.
Unless otherwise indicated, the definitions of the Act, regulations and amendments thereto and binding judicial opinions thereon are incorporated herein, and this chapter shall be interpreted in a manner consistent with such definitions. (Ord. 2081 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018)

1.20.030 Place of filing.
Designated employees shall file their statements with the filing officer of the City, who will make the statements available for public inspection and reproduction. (Gov. Code § 81008.) Statements for all designated employees will be retained by the City. (Ord. 2081 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018)

1.20.040 Filing officer.
The City Clerk is the filing officer of the City. (Ord. 2081 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018)

1.20.050 Disclosure categories.
A. Category 1 – Business Position/Investment Interests/Real Property Interests (Full Disclosure for Officials and Employees Whose Duties Are Broad and Indefinable). The designated employee shall report (1) all investments, business positions in, and income, including gifts, loans, and travel payments, from sources located in or doing business in the jurisdiction, and (2) interests in real property (not including primary residence) located in the jurisdiction, including any property owned or used by the City, in which the designated employee has a direct or indirect interest.

B. Category 2 – Real Property Interests. The designated employee shall report each interest in real property (not including primary residence) located within the jurisdiction of the City in which the designated employee has a direct or indirect interest.

C. Category 3 – Business Position/Investment Interests. The designated employee shall report all investments, business positions in, and income, including gifts, loans, and travel payments, from sources located in or doing business in the jurisdiction.

D. Category 4 – Income Interests. The designated employee shall report all income, including gifts, loans, and travel payments, of the designated employee from sources located in or doing business in the jurisdiction.

E. Category 5 – Less Inclusive Reportable Interests. The designated employee shall report all investments and business interests in, and income, including gifts, loans, and travel payments, from sources contracting with, providing services to, or selling to, the City. (Ord. 2081 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018)

1.20.060 Department positions.
A. The following positions are not covered by this chapter because they must file under Section 87200 of the Act and, therefore, are here listed for informational purposes only: City Manager, City Treasurer, and members of the Planning Commission.

B. The following are the designated positions within City departments together with the required disclosure category (* denotes 87200 filers):

Position

Category

A.

Administrative Services Department:

 

 

1.

Director of Administrative Services/City Treasurer

*

 

2.

Human Resources Manager

5

 

3.

Finance Manager

5

 

4.

Information Technology Manager

5

B.

City Clerk’s Department:

 

 

1.

City Clerk

1

C.

City Manager’s Department:

 

 

1.

City Manager

*

 

2.

Assistant City Manager

1

 

3.

Senior Management Analyst

5

D.

Community Development Department:

 

 

1.

Director of Community Development, Redevelopment and Housing

1

 

2.

Senior Planner

1

 

3.

Building Inspection Supervisor

1

 

4.

Associate Planner

2, 5

 

5.

Building Inspector

2, 5

 

6.

Assistant Planner

2, 5

E.

Public Services and Engineering Department:

 

 

1.

Director of Public Services and Engineering

1

 

2.

City Engineer

1

 

3.

Principal Engineer

1

 

4.

Capital Projects Manager

1

 

5.

Associate Engineer

1

 

6.

Public Services Supervisor – Fleet

2, 5

 

7.

Public Services Supervisor – Parks

2, 5

 

8.

Public Services Supervisor – Services

2, 5

 

9.

Assistant Engineer

2, 5

 

10.

Public Services Technician

4

 

11.

Accounting Technician I

4

 

12.

Senior Management Analyst

5

 

13.

Management Analyst

5

 

14.

Master Mechanic

5

F.

Fire Services Department:

 

 

1.

Director of Fire Services

1

 

2.

Battalion Chief/Fire Marshal

1

 

3.

Fire Captain

2, 4

 

4.

Beach Lifeguard Captain

4

 

5.

Beach Lifeguard Sergeant

5

G.

Library Services Department:

 

 

1.

Director of Library Services

1

 

2.

Principal Librarian

5

 

3.

Senior Librarian

5

 

4.

Librarian II

5

 

5.

Library Technician

5

 

6.

Accounting Technician I

5

H.

Police Services Department:

 

 

1.

Director of Police Services

1

 

2.

Police Captain

1

 

3.

Police Support Services Manager

5

I.

Recreation and Golf Services Department:

 

 

1.

Director of Recreation and Golf

1

 

2.

Golf Maintenance Supervisor

5

 

3.

Aquatics Supervisor

5

 

4.

Recreation Services Supervisor

5

J.

Other positions as may be designated by resolution of the City Council from time to time.

 

(Ord. 2081 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018)

1.20.070 Boards, commissions, committees.
Members of the following boards, commissions, and committees occupy designated positions with the following disclosure categories:

Position

Category

A.

All members of boards, commissions, or committees designated by resolution of the City Council, from time to time.

 

B.

Board of Appeals

1

C.

Civil Service Commission

3

D.

Design Review Commission

1

E.

Historic Resource Commission

1

F.

Library Board of Trustees

1

G.

Planning Commission

*

H.

Coronado Improvement Corporation

1

I.

Coronado Finance Authority:

 

 

1.

Authority Members

1

 

2.

Executive Director

1

 

3.

Treasurer

1

J.

Coronado Parks and Recreation Commission

2, 5

K.

Coronado Port Commissioner

1

L.

Coronado Tourism Improvement District Board

1

M.

Coronado Transportation Commission

1

N.

Bicycle Advisory Committee

1

O.

Cultural Arts Commission

1

P.

Successor Agency

1

Q.

Oversight Board

1

(Ord. 2081 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018)

1.20.080 Consultants.
A. Consultants, as defined in 2 California Code of Regulations Section 18700.3, as may be amended from time to time, and which are not subject to subsection B of this section, shall be subject to Disclosure Category 1.

B. Limitation to Disclosure Category. The City Manager may determine that a particular consultant, although in a “designated position,” is hired to perform a range of duties that is limited in scope and thus is not required to fully comply with the disclosure requirements described in this section. Such determination shall include a description of the consultant’s duties and, based upon that description, a statement of the extent of disclosure required. The determination shall be included in the contract by which the consultant is hired by the City. The City Manager’s determination is a public record and shall be retained for public inspection in the same manner and location as this conflict of interest code. (Ord. 2081 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018)

Chapter 1.80
ELECTIONS
Sections:

1.80.010    Date for general municipal election.

1.80.020    Election to fill City Council vacancy.

1.80.030    Term limits.

1.80.010 Date for general municipal election.
The general municipal election for the City shall be held on the same day as the day of the Statewide general election. (Gov. Code § 36503.5) (Ord. 1787)

1.80.020 Election to fill City Council vacancy.
A. The purpose and intent of this section is to establish an orderly procedure for the City Council to follow in filling any vacancy caused by the resignation or death of an incumbent member of the City Council. (Gov. Code § 36512 – 36512.2)

B. The City Council shall call a special election to fill every vacancy on the City Council. Such special election shall be held on the next regularly established election date and not less than 114 days from the call of the special election. A person elected to fill a vacancy holds office for the unexpired term of the former incumbent.

C. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection B of this section, the City Council may fill a vacancy on the City Council by appointment. The person appointed to fill a vacancy holds office only until the date of the next special election. (Ord. 2001 §§ 1, 2, 2009)

1.80.030 Term limits.
A. The purpose of this section is to encourage qualified candidates to seek public office and limit the powers of incumbency by placing limits on the number of consecutive terms, which members of the City Council and Mayor may serve.

B. No person shall be elected as a member of the City Council for more than two full consecutive terms.

C. No person shall be elected to serve as Mayor for more than two full consecutive terms.

D. Pursuant to California Government Code Section 36502, the provisions of this section shall not become operative unless they are submitted to the voters in the City in a regularly scheduled election and a majority of the votes cast on the question favor adoption of the proposal. If a majority of the votes cast is in favor of the adoption of this section, then the provisions of this section will apply prospectively from the date of the election.1

1
Code reviser’s note: The proposal was adopted by the voters on Proposition F on November 6, 2002.


Chapter 1.82
FILING FEES – ELECTIVE OFFICE
Sections:

1.82.010    Purpose.

1.82.020    Filing fees.

1.82.030    Disposition of fees.

1.82.010 Purpose.
To offset the costs in processing nomination papers for elective office, the City is authorized to impose a filing fee proportionate to the costs of processing a candidate’s nomination paper. (EC § 22843) (Ord. 1787)

1.82.020 Filing fees.
A. A filing fee of $25.00 is hereby established for processing a candidate’s nomination papers for any elective office at municipal elections held in the City.

B. Each candidate for elective office shall pay the filing fee at the time the candidate’s nomination papers are filed with the City Clerk.

1.82.030 Disposition of fees.
The City Clerk shall pay to the City Treasurer all filing fees received which shall be deposited in the general fund.

Chapter 1.84
CAMPAIGN REGULATIONS
Sections:

1.84.010    Scope of chapter.

1.84.020    Campaign statements.

1.84.030    Form of monetary contribution.

1.84.040    Limitation on amount of contribution.

1.84.050    Limitation on who can contribute.

1.84.060    Prohibitions.

1.84.070    Appointment of special counsel.

1.84.080    Enforcement.

1.84.090    Penalties.

1.84.010 Scope of chapter.
A. This chapter is intended to place realistic and enforceable limits on political campaigns conducted within the City, as well as to supplement the requirements of State law with regard to the reporting of campaign contributions and expenditures, for the purpose of preventing the exercise by campaign contributors of potential undue or improper influence over elected officials and to inform the public of the sources and objects of campaign contributions and expenditures. The City Council finds that municipal elections are municipal affairs; the regulation of campaign contributions and expenditures in municipal elections is not preempted by general State law; and such activity is the proper subject of municipal regulation under the authority granted to cities by Article XI, Section 7 of the California Constitution and State Government Code Section 81013. This chapter is to be interpreted in a manner consistent with constitutional requirements. Should any provision of this chapter be determined to be invalid for any reason, the remainder shall be severed therefrom and shall remain in full force and effect.

B. Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this subsection:

“Campaign statement” means an itemized report which is prepared on a form provided by the City Clerk and which provides the information required by this chapter.

“Candidate” means an individual who is listed on the ballot or who has qualified to have write-in votes on his or her behalf counted by election officials for nomination for or election to the position of Mayor or on the City Council, or who receives a contribution or makes an expenditure or gives his or her consent for any other person to receive a contribution or make an expenditure with the intention of bringing about his or her nomination or election to the position of Mayor or City Council, whether or not the specific elective office for which he or she will seek nomination or election is known at the time the contribution is received or the expenditure is made and whether or not he or she has announced his or her candidacy or filed a declaration of candidacy at such time. “Candidate” also includes any Mayor or Councilmember who is the subject of a recall election.

“Closing date” means the date which any report or statement filed under this chapter is required to be complete.

“Committee,” including controlled and independent committees, means any person who directly or indirectly receives contributions or makes expenditures or contributions for the purpose of influencing or attempting to influence the action of voters:

For or against the nomination or election of one or more candidates for City elective office; or

For or against the qualification or passage of a City measure.

“Contribution” shall have the meaning set forth in Government Code Section 82015, as amended from time to time.

“Controlled committee” means a committee which is controlled directly or indirectly by a candidate or which acts jointly with or in coordination with a candidate or another controlled committee in connection with the making of expenditures. A candidate controls a committee if such candidate, his or her agent or any other committee such candidate controls has significant influence on the actions or decisions of the committee or if such committee coordinates its expenditures with the expenditures of a candidate or committee controlled by a candidate, whether or not such candidate is personally aware of such coordination.

“Election” means any City general, special, initiative, referendum or recall election.

“Electronic filing” means use of a system that provides for the online or electronic transfer of data using telecommunications technology that ensures the integrity of the data transmitted and that creates safeguards against efforts to tamper with or subvert the data.

“Entity” means any corporation, company, association, or other organization other than an individual or a political party.

“Expenditure” shall have the meaning set forth in Government Code Section 82025, as amended from time to time.

“Fundraiser event” means any political event organized for the purpose of raising funds to be used in the support of or opposition to any candidate or measure.

“Independent committee” means any committee which receives contributions or makes expenditures for the purpose of influencing or attempting to influence a City election which is neither controlled by a candidate nor coordinates its expenditures with the expenditures of a candidate or a committee controlled by a candidate.

“Individual” means a sole human being.

“Measure” means any proposition submitted to a popular vote, only at a City election.

“Person” means an individual, proprietorship, firm, partnership, joint venture, syndicate, business trust, company corporation, association or committee (including both controlled and independent committees), labor union, and any other organization or group of persons acting in concert.

“Political party” means any organization qualified to participate in any primary election in the State of California as set forth in California Elections Code Section 5100, or such law as may replace Section 5100.

C. For purposes of this chapter, a person or combination of persons becomes a “committee” subject to the regulations of this chapter when such person or combination of persons:

1. Receives, for a City election, campaign contributions totaling $200.00 or more in a calendar year; or

2. Expends for a City election a total of $200.00 or more in a calendar year.

D. Unless otherwise provided herein, the provisions, definitions and interpretations of the Political Reform Act of 1974, as amended, are to be relied upon in administering this chapter. (Gov. Code § 8100 et seq.)

E. The requirements of this chapter are in addition to, and shall not be administered or interpreted to be in conflict with, the requirements of the Political Reform Act of 1974. (Ord. 2073 § 2, 2018; Ord. 2066 § 2, 2017; Ord. 1828)

1.84.020 Campaign statements.
A. Each candidate, each treasurer of a committee supporting or opposing a candidate, and each treasurer of a committee supporting or opposing a measure shall prepare an itemized statement of campaign contributions received and campaign expenditures made. The statutory provisions of the Political Reform Act of 1974 (Proposition 9) and the Elections Code Section 11500 et seq. shall be complied with as well as the reporting of campaign contributions and expenditures indicated in the following subsections:

1. Each contribution received with a value of $5.00 or more must be itemized listing the value of the contribution with the contributor’s name, street address, occupation and the name of employer, if any, or principal place of business if self-employed;

2. Each expenditure of a value of $5.00 or more must be itemized listing the full name and address of the person to whom the expenditure is made and a brief description of the consideration or service received; and

3. Successful candidates and committees who support successful candidates must file their campaign statements before the candidate takes office. No certificate of election shall be issued nor shall an elected candidate assume office unless all campaign statements are filed in the Office of the City Clerk.

B. Campaign statement forms shall be provided by the City Clerk and campaign statements shall be filed with the City Clerk in accordance with the deadlines established by the Political Reform Act of 1974.

C. The City Clerk shall ensure that all campaign statements, filed with the City in accordance with this chapter, are retained and available for public review at City Hall, in accordance with law. Also, the City Clerk shall ensure that copies of the campaign statements are available for public review at the City Library by the close of business on the day following the filing of the statement with the City Clerk; and shall remain there for no less than six months following the related election.

D. 1. Any elected officer, candidate, committee, or other person required to file statements, reports or other documents (“statements”) as required by Chapter 4 of the Political Reform Act (California Government Code Section 84100 et seq.) (“filers”) may file such statements using the City Clerk’s online system according to procedures established by the City Clerk (the “procedures”). This online filing requirement shall become mandatory beginning April 1, 2018.

2. The City Clerk shall have the authority to establish and amend the procedures, as necessary, to accomplish the following:

a. Ensure that the online system complies with the requirements set forth in Section 84615 of the California Government Code, as may be amended from time to time;

b. Meet the purpose and intent of this section and comply with other applicable law; and

c. Ensure the integrity of the data transmitted and include safeguards against efforts to tamper with, manipulate, alter, or subvert the data.

3. Online filings made under this chapter will only be accepted if made in the standardized format that is developed by the California Secretary of State pursuant to Section 84602(a)(2) of the California Government Code, as may be amended from time to time, and that is compatible with the Secretary of State’s system for receiving an online or electronic filing. (Ord. 2073 § 3, 2018)

1.84.030 Form of monetary contribution.
A. It is unlawful to make or receive a monetary campaign contribution in any amount unless the contribution is by check or credit card.

B. Every person required to file a campaign statement in accordance with this chapter shall:

1. Make a photocopy of each check or credit card receipt by which a reportable contribution is made and obtain documentation showing the contributor’s name, address, and occupation;

2. Retain each such photocopy or documentation for one year after the date of the related election; and

3. Make the photocopy or documentation available for inspection upon the reasonable request by the City’s special counsel. (Ord. 2066 § 3, 2017)

1.84.040 Limitation on amount of contribution.
A. No individual or entity shall make one or more contributions, with a total value of more than $200.00, per election, to:

1. The same candidate for City Council;

2. The same candidate for Mayor; or

3. The same controlled committee of a candidate for City Council or Mayor.

B. This section does not:

1. Apply to a candidate’s contribution of his or her personal funds to his or her own campaign contribution account.

2. Prohibit a controlled committee or political party from conveying to a candidate any moneys legally received as contributions.

C. Spouses are two separate individuals for purposes of the contribution limitations of this section.

D. The contribution limitation of this section is not a limitation upon expenditures and shall not limit the expenditures by any candidate, person or committee.

E. Joint Funding.

1. Joint funding of campaign expenditures by two or more committees shall not be deemed to be a contribution by any such committee to any candidate; provided, that each such committee contributes equal amounts to each such expenditure.

2. Any such joint expenditure shall cause any theretofore independent committee participating therein to be deemed a controlled committee of any and all candidates for whose benefit such joint expenditure is made.

3. Any independent committee, which becomes a controlled committee by reason of subsection (E)(2) of this section, shall be deemed a controlled committee for purposes of the contribution limitation of this section to the committee, effective retroactive to the date upon which the first contribution to such committee was received by such committee.

F. Subject to subsections (E)(2) and (3) of this section, the contribution limitation of this section shall not apply to any independent committee:

1. Composed solely of one individual;

2. Organized principally for a purpose other than participating in or influencing an election or elections;

3. Organized for the purpose of supporting or opposing the qualification for the ballot or the adoption of one or more City measures; or

4. Which receives contributions to be expended in the elections of more than one city. (Ord. 2066 § 4, 2017)

1.84.050 Limitation on who can contribute.
A. No person or entity, other than an individual or political party, shall make a contribution to:

1. A candidate for City Council or Mayor;

 

2. A controlled committee of a candidate for City Council or Mayor.

B. No Contributions by City Contractors.

1. No person who contracts with the City, either for the rendition of personal services or for the furnishing of any material, supplies, or equipment to the City, or for selling any land or building to the City, shall make any contributions to a City Council candidate or a committee supporting or opposing a City Council candidate.

2. The prohibition of subsection (B)(1) of this section shall exist at all times between the commencement of negotiations for and during the completion of the performance under, or the termination of negotiations for such a contract or the furnishing of materials, supplies, equipment, land or building, whichever occurs later.

C. No contributor shall make a contribution anonymously or under an assumed name, or on behalf of another person, whether as agent, intermediary or otherwise. (Ord. 2066 § 5, 2017)

1.84.060 Prohibitions.
A. It is unlawful for any contributor to make, knowingly or willfully, a contribution which is prohibited by this chapter.

B. It is unlawful for any candidate, agent for a candidate, committee, or agent for a committee to solicit, knowingly or willfully, a contribution which is prohibited by this chapter.

C. It shall be unlawful for any candidate, agent for a candidate, committee, or agent for a committee to accept, knowingly or willfully, a campaign contribution which is prohibited by this chapter.

D. It is unlawful for any person to aid, abet, advise or participate in, knowingly or willfully, a violation of this chapter.

E. No committee shall make any expenditures to influence or attempt to influence the voters in a City election if such committee has not complied with the contribution limitations imposed by this chapter upon such committee’s receipt of funds.

1.84.070 Appointment of special counsel.
A. At least 90 days prior to a City election, the City Council shall appoint a special counsel for that election and such additional special counsel as may be required, on such terms and conditions as the City Council deems appropriate.

B. The special counsel shall be the District Attorney, the Attorney General, or such other qualified and independent special counsel or combination of the foregoing as may be appointed by the City Council.

1.84.080 Enforcement.
A. Review and Investigation of Complaints.

1. The City’s review and investigation of complaints of alleged violations of this chapter shall be commenced and carried out only by an appointed special counsel.

2. If the special counsel determines that there is a reason to believe that a violation of this chapter has occurred, special counsel shall conduct an investigation as it deems necessary for the enforcement of this chapter.

3. The special counsel shall have such investigative powers as are necessary for the performance of duties described in this chapter and may demand and shall be furnished records of campaign contributions and expenditures of any person or committee subject to this chapter. In the event that production of such records is refused, the special counsel may commence civil litigation to complete such production.

B. Persons residing in the City who believe that a violation of this chapter has occurred may file a written complaint for review by the special counsel. If the complaint presents probable cause to believe that a violation has occurred, the special counsel will initiate an investigation of such violation.

C. Action to Enforce. If the special counsel determines that there is good reason to believe that a violation of this chapter has occurred, special counsel may commence such administrative, civil, or criminal legal action as it deems necessary for the enforcement of this chapter.

D. Review, investigation, enforcement, litigation, and prosecution under this chapter shall be commenced and carried out only by an appointed special counsel.

E. Activity by special counsel in accordance with this chapter shall not be subject to review or control by the City Council or City Attorney.

F. The City Attorney shall not review, investigate, prosecute or otherwise deal with any alleged violation of this chapter, but shall defend the constitutionality and legality of this chapter in any civil proceeding in which the City or the City Council is a party.

G. Any action alleging a violation of this chapter must be commenced no later than four months after the mandatory filing date for semi-annual statements which cover the period during which the violation is alleged to have occurred, but in no case later than six months from the date of the related election.

1.84.090 Penalties.
A. Any person who knowingly or willfully violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.

B. Any person who violates a provision of this chapter shall be liable in a civil action for damages in the amount of three times the amount not properly reported or unlawfully contributed, solicited, or accepted, not to exceed $1,000. Upon collection, said sum shall be deposited into the general fund of the City, earmarked to be used for the purpose of defraying the costs of municipal elections.

Chapter 1.86
CANDIDATE’S STATEMENT OF QUALIFICATIONS
Sections:

1.86.010    Statement of qualifications.

1.86.020    Federal Voting Rights Act.

1.86.030    Cost of candidate’s statement.

1.86.040    Copy of statement of qualifications.

1.86.010 Statement of qualifications.
Pursuant to Section 10012 of the Elections Code of the State of California, each candidate for elective office to be voted for at any municipal election to be held in the City may prepare a candidate’s statement on an appropriate form provided by the City Clerk. Such statement may include the name, age and occupation of the candidate and a brief description of no more than 200 words of the candidate’s education and qualifications expressed by the candidate himself. Such statement shall not include party affiliation of the candidate, nor membership or activity in partisan political organizations. Such statement may be withdrawn but not changed during the period for filing nomination papers and until 5:00 p.m. of the next working day after the close of the nomination period. (Ord. 1787)

1.86.020 Federal Voting Rights Act.
The City Clerk shall provide a Spanish translation of the candidate’s statement to be included in the voter’s pamphlet and mailed with the sample ballot to each registered voter in the City, if the candidate requests such statement in Spanish. (In compliance with the amendments to the Federal Voting Rights Act of 1965, Public Law 94-73, August 6, 1975.)

1.86.030 Cost of candidate’s statement.
A. Each candidate filing a candidate’s statement shall be billed for the services rendered, a sum not greater than the actual prorated costs of printing and handling, and such bill shall be due and payable immediately upon receipt thereof.

B. Each candidate may request a Spanish translation of the statement of qualifications but the candidate may not be billed for the additional cost of preparing candidate’s statement in Spanish nor for translation costs thereof.

1.86.040 Copy of statement of qualifications.
The City Clerk shall provide each candidate or the candidate’s representative a copy of this chapter at the time nomination petitions are issued.

Title 2
ORGANIZATION
Chapters:

2.02    City Council

2.03    Mayor

2.04    City Manager

2.08    Executive Positions

2.20    Purchasing Agent

2.30    Boards, Commissions and Committees

2.34    Auditing Committee

2.38    Board of Appeals

2.42    Civil Service Commission

2.46    Design Review Commission

2.50    Disaster Council

2.54    Historic Resource Commission

2.58    Library Board of Trustees

2.59    Library

2.62    Parks and Recreation Commission

2.66    Planning Commission

2.70    Senior Affairs Commission

2.74    Repealed

Chapter 2.02
CITY COUNCIL
Sections:

2.02.010    Election and tenure.

2.02.020    Presiding officer.

2.02.030    Compensation.

2.02.040    Regular meetings.

2.02.050    Rules of procedure.

2.02.060    Orderly conduct.

2.02.010 Election and tenure.
A. The electors of the City shall elect Councilmembers at the general municipal election held every two years.

B. The general municipal election shall be consolidated with the Statewide general election. (Gov. Code § 36503.5)

C. Councilmembers shall each serve a term of four years, staggered to result in two seats being open at every general municipal election. (Ord. 1794)

2.02.020 Presiding officer.
A. The Mayor shall be the presiding officer of the City Council.

B. The City Council shall consider the selection of one of its members as Mayor Pro Tempore.

C. The Mayor Pro Tempore shall serve a term of one year, or until a successor for the position is chosen. Three affirmative votes shall be required to choose or change the Mayor Pro Tempore.

D. In addition to the powers and duties of a Councilmember, the Mayor Pro Tempore shall be the presiding officer of the City Council in the absence of the Mayor. (Gov. Code § 36802)

2.02.030 Compensation.
A. Each Councilmember shall be entitled to a salary in the amount of $913.50 per month.

B. In addition to reimbursement on demand and consistent with existing policies for extraordinary expenses and out-of-county expenses actually and necessarily incurred in the performance of official duties, each Councilmember shall receive a monthly expense allowance of $150.00 for the normal expenses actually and necessarily incurred in the performance of official duty within San Diego County.

C. As used in this section, “normal expenses actually and necessarily incurred” shall mean those costs associated with keeping, maintaining, repairing and fueling a privately owned or leased and reliable automobile for use when conducting official business within San Diego County. (Ord. 2076 § 4, 2018; Ord. 2069 § 2, 2017; Ord. 1979 § 2, 2006)

2.02.040 Regular meetings.
A. Regular meetings of the City Council shall be held on the first and third Tuesdays of each month.

B. Regular meetings shall commence at 4:00 p.m.

C. If a regular meeting falls on a holiday, the regular meeting shall be held on the next business day. (Gov. Code § 54954)

D. Regular meetings shall be conducted in the City Council Chambers.

E. Upon notice to the public and news media, the City Council may designate another location for a regular meeting within the City limits. (Ord. 2036 § 2, 2013)

2.02.050 Rules of procedure.
The City Council may, from time to time, adopt by resolution rules of procedure for the conduct of meetings. These resolutions shall be compiled and maintained by the City Clerk and made available to the public and to the City Council during every meeting. (Gov. Code § 36813)

2.02.060 Orderly conduct.
A. Any person who fails to comply with a lawful direction given by the presiding officer for the purpose of maintaining order at a City Council meeting shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

B. All persons shall comply with the meeting procedures announced by resolution of the City Council and no person shall interfere with or interrupt a City Council meeting.

C. The presiding officer may designate a member of the Coronado Police Department or other public official to act as Sergeant at Arms who shall carry out the directions of the presiding officer and arrest persons violating this section.

Chapter 2.03
MAYOR
Sections:

2.03.010    Election and tenure.

2.03.020    Duties.

2.03.030    Compensation.

2.03.010 Election and tenure.
A. Every four years, the electors of the City of Coronado shall elect a Mayor at the general municipal election, consolidated with the Statewide general election.

B. The Mayor shall serve a term of four years. (Ord. 1794)

2.03.020 Duties.
A. The Mayor shall be the presiding officer of the City Council.

B. The Mayor shall preserve strict order and the decorum at all meetings of the City Council.

C. The Mayor shall decide all questions of order, subject, however, to a majority vote of the City Councilmembers present.

D. The Mayor shall serve as the official head of the City for all ceremonial purposes.

E. The Mayor shall perform all duties imposed on the position of Mayor by the laws of the State of California or by ordinance of the City.

F. The Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, shall make all appointments to boards, commissions, and committees.

2.03.030 Compensation.
A. The Mayor shall be entitled to a salary in the amount of $913.50 per month.

B. In addition to reimbursement on demand and consistent with existing policies for extraordinary expenses and out-of-county expenses actually and necessarily incurred in the performance of official duties, the Mayor shall receive a monthly expense allowance of $225.00 for the normal expenses actually and necessarily incurred in the performance of official duty within San Diego County.

C. As used in this section, “normal expenses actually and necessarily incurred” shall mean those costs associated with keeping, maintaining, repairing and fueling a privately owned or leased and reliable automobile for use when conducting official business within San Diego County. (Ord. 2077 § 4, 2018; Ord. 2070 § 2, 2017; Ord. 1979 § 3, 2006)

Chapter 2.04
CITY MANAGER
Sections:

2.04.010    Office of City Manager created.

2.04.020    Appointment.

2.04.030    Full-time position.

2.04.040    Compensation.

2.04.050    Reimbursement of expenses.

2.04.060    Bond.

2.04.070    Duties, responsibilities and authority.

2.04.080    Repealed.

2.04.010 Office of City Manager created.
A. The Office of City Manager is hereby created and established.

B. The City Manager shall be the administrative head of the municipal government under the direction and control of the City Council, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.

C. The City Manager shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all of the affairs of the City under the City Manager’s control.

D. The City Council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the City only through the City Manager, except for purposes of inquiry. Neither the City Council nor a member of the City Council shall give orders to the subordinates of the City Manager.

E. The City Council shall give directions and instructions to the City Manager only during a City Council meeting. Unless authorized by the City Council, no individual Councilmember shall give any order or instruction to the City Manager. (Ord. 1798)

2.04.020 Appointment.
A. The City Manager shall be appointed by the City Council wholly on the basis of the City Manager’s executive and administrative qualifications and ability.

B. Residence in the City at the time of appointment of a City Manager shall not be required as a condition of the appointment, but within 180 days thereafter the City Manager must become a resident of the City, or the City Council shall declare the Office of City Manager to be vacant.

C. No person elected as a Councilmember of the City shall, subsequent to such election, be eligible for appointment as City Manager until one year has elapsed after such Councilmember shall have ceased to be a member of the Council.

D. The City Manager shall appoint, subject to the approval of the City Council, one of the other City officers or department directors to serve as temporary City Manager during any temporary absence or disability of the City Manager. If required, failing such an appointment, the City Council may designate a temporary City Manager.

2.04.030 Full-time position.
The City Manager shall expend full time on the performance of the duties enumerated herein.

2.04.040 Compensation.
The City Manager shall receive such compensation and expense allowances as the City Council shall, from time to time, determine and fix by resolution. Such compensation and expenses shall be a proper charge against such funds of the City as the City Council shall designate.

2.04.050 Reimbursement of expenses.
A. The City Manager shall be reimbursed for all sums necessarily and reasonably incurred or paid by the City Manager in the performance of the City Manager’s duties or incurred when traveling on business pertaining to the City under direction of the City Council.

B. Reimbursement shall only be made when the City Manager has presented to the City Council for approval a verified and itemized claim setting forth the sum for which reimbursement is sought and the justification for reimbursement.

2.04.060 Bond.
A. The City Manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond to be approved by the City Council in such sum as may be determined by the City Council and shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties imposed upon the City Manager. A person appointed as temporary City Manager shall also be required to post a bond in accordance with this section.

B. Any premium for such bond shall be a proper charge against the City of Coronado.

2.04.070 Duties, responsibilities and authority.
The duties, responsibilities and authority of the City Manager shall include, without limitation:

A. To enforce all laws and ordinances of the City;

B. To enforce and ensure the faithful observation of all franchises, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the City Council;

C. To control, order and give directions to all department directors and to subordinate officers and employees of the City under the City Manager’s jurisdiction through their department directors;

D. To appoint, remove, promote and demote all persons in City executive positions serving at the pleasure of the City Manager;

E. To attend all meetings of the City Council, unless excused therefrom, except for a matter where the City Manager’s removal is being considered;

F. To attend any and all meetings of City commissions, boards and committees upon the City Manager’s own volition or upon the direction of the City Council, and to cooperate to the fullest extent with members of all City commissions, boards and committees;

G. To recommend to the City Council the adoption of such measures and ordinances as the City Manager deems necessary;

H. To keep the City Council fully advised at all times as to the financial conditions and needs of the City;

I. To control the purchase of all supplies for all departments or divisions of the City and to submit for City Council approval only those expenditures that are contained in a report whose approval is recommended by the City Manager;

J. To prepare and submit a proposed annual budget and a proposed salary plan to the City Council for approval;

K. To investigate into the affairs of the City and any department or division thereof, and into the proper performance of any contract, franchise or other obligation pertaining to the City;

L. To investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the City to include services maintained by public utilities in the City;

M. To supervise the use of all public buildings, public parks, and all other public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of the City;

N. To recommend to the City Council such reorganization of officers, positions, departments or units under the City Manager’s direction as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective and economical conduct of the City’s business;

O. To perform such other duties and to exercise such other powers and authority as may be delegated to the City Manager, from time to time, by action of the City Council;

P. To provide executive staff support to the Community Development Agency of the City of Coronado. (Ord. 1896)

2.04.080 Repealed.
Repealed by Ord. 1842.

Chapter 2.08
EXECUTIVE POSITIONS
Sections:

2.08.010    Executive positions.

2.08.020    Appointment/removal of executives.

2.08.030    Compensation of executives.

2.08.040    Duty to cooperate.

2.08.050    Service at pleasure.

2.08.060    Assistant City Manager.

2.08.070    Director of Administrative Services.

2.08.080    Director of Engineering and Project Development.

2.08.090    Director of Fire Services.

2.08.100    Director of Community Development.

2.08.110    Director of Police Services.

2.08.120    Director of Public Services.

2.08.130    Director of Recreation Services.

2.08.140    Director of Golf Course Operations.

2.08.150    City Clerk.

2.08.160    Executive Assistant to City Manager.

2.08.170    Director of Community Development, Redevelopment and Housing Services.

2.08.180    Director of Library Services.

2.08.010 Executive positions.
The following executive positions are established, each of which shall have the duties, responsibilities and authority necessary for the performance of the position, to include, without limitation, the authority to appoint and promote, and for cause, remove or demote any employee who works for such executive:

A. Assistant City Manager;

B. Director of Administrative Services;

C. Director of Engineering and Project Development;

D. Director of Fire Services;

E. Director of Community Development, Redevelopment and Housing Services;

F. Director of Police Services;

G. Director of Public Services;

H. Director of Recreational Services;

I. Director of Golf Course Operations;

J. City Clerk;

K. Executive Assistant to the City Manager; and

L. Director of Library Services. (Ord. 2089 § 3, 2019; Ord. 2000 § 2, 2009)

2.08.020 Appointment/removal of executives.
The City Manager is authorized to appoint, remove, promote and demote all executives.

2.08.030 Compensation of executives.
Executives shall receive salaries, compensation and benefits fixed and determined by resolution of the City Council.

2.08.040 Duty to cooperate.
It shall be the duty of all executives to cooperate with and assist the City Manager in administering the affairs of the City in an efficient, economic, and harmonious manner, so far as may be consistent with their duties as prescribed by law.

2.08.050 Service at pleasure.
A. Every executive serves at the pleasure of the City Manager and such employment status may be terminated by the City Manager without a specification of cause, in accordance with this section.

B. The City Manager may deliver to an executive a written notice dated as of the date of delivery to the executive that the executive’s services shall no longer be required as of a specified date of termination, which shall be no sooner than 90 days from the date of delivery of the notice.

C. Upon the date of termination, the executive shall be entitled to a lump sum final payment equal to three months’ basic pay, in addition to any other entitlements owed by the City to the executive.

D. If the executive determines that the termination under this section has been accomplished in a manner that is likely to adversely stigmatize the executive in obtaining other employment, the executive shall deliver to the City Manager a written request setting forth the manner in which the executive has been stigmatized and the actions requested of the City Manager to remove the apparent stigmatization.

E. In order to support a claim of stigmatization, the executive must identify public statements or actions taken by the City that have resulted in what the executive has concluded to be a stigmatizing action. The fact of a personal delivery of the notice of termination, and the consequent termination of employment, do not constitute stigmatization.

F. If the City Manager does not take the actions requested by the executive to remove the apparent stigmatization, then the executive may apply to the City Council for an opportunity to present exculpatory information.

2.08.060 Assistant City Manager.
A. The Assistant City Manager shall be responsible for performing the functions specified in this code, in addition to such other and further duties or functions as the City Manager may, from time to time, prescribe.

B. The Assistant City Manager shall be qualified through education, training, and experience to be proficient in the field of public administration and in providing assistance to the City Manager. (Ord. 1977 § 2, 2006)

2.08.070 Director of Administrative Services.
A. The Director of Administrative Services shall be responsible for performing the functions specified in this code, in addition to such other and further duties or functions as the City Manager may, from time to time, prescribe. The Director of Administrative Services shall provide executive staff support to the Community Development Agency of the City of Coronado.

B. The Director of Administrative Services shall be qualified through education, training, and experience to be proficient in the field of public administration, finance and personnel.

C. The Director of Administrative Services is specifically charged with the following duties:

1. Performing the duties of the chief accounting officer for the City, and the duties of City Treasurer.

2. The financial and accounting duties imposed upon the City Clerk by the laws of the State of California are hereby transferred to the Director of Administrative Services.

D. The Director of Administrative Services shall furnish a corporate bond for the faithful performance of the duties imposed on the Director of Administrative Services. (Ord. 1896)

2.08.080 Director of Engineering and Project Development.
A. The Director of Engineering and Project Development shall responsible for performing the functions specified in this code, in addition to such other and further duties or functions the City Manager may, from time to time, prescribe.

B. The Director of Engineering and Project Development shall be qualified through education, training, and experience to manage public sector engineering, planning and design services and the construction of public facilities.

C. The Director of Engineering and Project Development is specifically charged with managing the City department that provides the services of a civil engineer or land surveyor, as defined by the California Professional Engineers Act, who shall perform the functions required by State law and this code. (Ord. 1851)

2.08.090 Director of Fire Services.
A. The Director of Fire Services shall be the Chief of the Fire Department and shall be responsible for performing the functions specified by State law and this code, in addition to such other and further duties or functions as the City Manager may, from time to time, prescribe.

B. The Director of Fire Services shall be qualified through education, training, and experience to be proficient in the field of public fire safety services.

2.08.100 Director of Community Development.
A. The Director of Community Development shall be responsible for performing the functions specified by State law and this code, in addition to such other and further duties or functions as the City Manager may, from time to time, prescribe.

B. The Director of Community Development shall be qualified through education, training, and experience to be proficient in the field of municipal land use planning, regulation and community development.

2.08.110 Director of Police Services.
A. The Director of Police Services shall be the Chief of Police and shall be responsible for performing the functions specified by State law and this code, in addition to such other and further duties or functions as the City Manager may, from time to time, prescribe.

B. The Director of Police Services shall be qualified through education, training, and experience to be proficient in the field of public law enforcement services.

2.08.120 Director of Public Services.
A. The Director of Public Services shall be responsible for performing the functions specified in this code, in addition to such other and further duties or functions as the City Manager may, from time to time, prescribe.

B. The Director of Public Services shall be qualified through education, training, and experience to be proficient in the field of public works operations.

2.08.130 Director of Recreation Services.
A. The Director of Recreation Services shall be responsible for performing the functions specified in this code, in addition to such other and further duties or functions as the City Manager may, from time to time, prescribe.

B. The Director of Recreation Services shall be qualified through education, training, and experience to be proficient in the field of recreational services and activities.

2.08.140 Director of Golf Course Operations.
A. The Director of Golf Course Operations shall be responsible for performing the functions specified in this code, in addition to such other and further duties or functions as the City Manager may, from time to time, prescribe.

B. The Director of Golf Course Operations shall be qualified through education, training, and experience to be proficient in the field of golf course operations.

2.08.150 City Clerk.
A. The City Clerk shall be responsible for performing the functions imposed by the statutes of the State of California (Gov. Code Section 40801) and this code, in addition to such other and further duties or functions as the City Manager may, from time to time, prescribe. The City Clerk shall provide staff support to the Community Development Agency of the City of Coronado.

B. The City Clerk shall be qualified through education, training, and experience to be proficient in the field of City Clerk duties as prescribed by law. (June 1992 Ballot Measure) (Ord. 1896)

2.08.160 Executive Assistant to City Manager.
A. The Executive Assistant to the City Manager shall be qualified through education, training, and experience to be proficient in providing administrative support to the City Manager.

B. The Executive Assistant to the City Manager shall perform those tasks as the City Manager may, from time to time, prescribe. (Ord. 1851; Ord. 1798)

2.08.170 Director of Community Development, Redevelopment and Housing Services.
A. The Director of Community Development, Redevelopment and Housing Services shall be responsible for performing the functions specified by State law and this code, in addition to such other and further duties or functions as the City Manager may, from time to time, prescribe. The Director of Community Development, Redevelopment and Housing Services shall provide executive staff support to the Community Development Agency of the City of Coronado.

B. The Director of Community Development, Redevelopment and Housing Services shall be qualified through education, training, and experience to be proficient in the field of municipal land use planning, regulation and community development as well as redevelopment, public housing and housing assistance. (Ord. 1999 § 2, 2009)

2.08.180 Director of Library Services.
A. The Director of Library Services shall be responsible for performing the functions specified by State law and this code for a city librarian, in addition to such other and further duties, powers or functions as the City Manager may, from time to time, prescribe. The Director of Library Services shall provide executive staff support to the Library Board of Trustees.

B. The Director of Library Services shall be qualified through education, training, and experience to be proficient in the field of municipal library management and services. (Ord. 2089 § 4, 2019)

Chapter 2.20
PURCHASING AGENT
Sections:

2.20.010    Position.

2.20.020    Duties.

2.20.010 Position.
A. There is hereby created the position of Purchasing Agent. (Gov. Code § 54201).

B. The Purchasing Agent shall be appointed by and be directly responsible to the City Manager.

C. The position of Purchasing Agent may be assigned to an existing City employee, as an additional duty. (Ord. 1794)

2.20.020 Duties.
The Purchasing Agent shall have authority, subject to the approval of the City Manager, to:

A. Purchase or contract for supplies and equipment required by any using department in accordance with purchasing procedures prescribed by this chapter or such administrative regulations as the Purchasing Agent or City Manager may prescribe from time to time;

B. Negotiate and recommend execution of contracts for the purchase of supplies and equipment;

C. Act to procure for the City the needed quality in supplies and equipment at least expense to the City;

D. Encourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases;

E. Prepare and recommend to the City Council rules governing the purchase of supplies and equipment for the City;

F. Prepare and recommend to the City Council revisions and amendments to the purchasing rules;

G. Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions, and new products;

H. Prescribe and maintain such forms as are reasonably necessary to the operation of this chapter and other rules and regulations;

I. Supervise the inspection of all supplies and equipment purchased to ensure conformance with specifications;

J. Recommend the transfer of surplus or unused supplies and equipment between departments as needed and the sale of all supplies and equipment which cannot be used by any agency or which have become unsuitable for City use; and

K. Maintain a bidder’s list, vendors’ catalog file and records needed for the efficient operation of the purchasing division.

Chapter 2.30
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
Sections:

2.30.010    Establishment.

2.30.020    General residency requirement.

2.30.030    Membership.

2.30.040    Term.

2.30.050    Removal of member.

2.30.060    Compensation of members.

2.30.070    Finances.

2.30.080    Meetings.

2.30.090    Supplemental rules and regulations.

2.30.100    Officers.

2.30.110    Records.

2.30.010 Establishment.
A. The City Council may establish boards, commissions and committees to carry out the proper functions and administration of the City.

B. In establishing a City board, commission or committee, the City Council shall specify the duties and authority of the entity. (Ord. 1794)

2.30.020 General residency requirement.
In addition to the requirements specified elsewhere in this code, a person appointed as a member of a City board, commission or committee must be a citizen of the United States, must not be a registered voter in any city in the State of California other than this City, and must have as the place of habitation a residency fixed within the boundaries of the City when such appointment is made. During the term of appointment, if such person ceases to reside within the City, the appointment of such person shall be deemed to have been terminated.

2.30.030 Membership.
A. At least three affirmative votes of members of the City Council are required to appoint an individual to a City board, commission or committee for a full term or the unexpired portion of a vacated term.

B. On or before December 31st of each year, the City Clerk shall prepare an appointments list of all regular and ongoing boards, commissions and committees which are appointed by the City Council. (Gov. Code § 54972)

C. Whenever a vacancy occurs, the City Clerk shall post notice. Final appointment shall not be made by the City Council for at least 10 days after the posting of notice. (Government Code Section 54974).

D. Whenever a vacancy occurs prior to the expiration of the term, the vacancy shall be filled in the same manner as an original appointment and the newly appointed member shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. (Ord. 1814)

2.30.040 Term.
A. Persons appointed to a City board, commission or committee serve at the pleasure of the City Council.

B. If a member of a board, commission or committee is absent for four successive, regular meetings without cause, the term of such member is automatically vacated. The board, commission or committee shall determine whether the absence was for cause.

2.30.050 Removal of member.
A member of a board, commission or committee appointed by the City Council serves at the pleasure of the City Council and may be removed by a majority vote of the City Council.

2.30.060 Compensation of members.
No member of a City board, commission or committee shall receive compensation for services as a member. However, members may be compensated for expenses reasonably and necessarily incurred in the performance of official duties.

2.30.070 Finances.
The City Council shall provide the funds, equipment and accommodations deemed necessary by the City Council, for the work of each board, commission and committee.

2.30.080 Meetings.
All meetings of a City board, commission or committee shall be conducted in accordance with the Ralph M. Brown Act. (Government Code Section 54950 et seq.)

2.30.090 Supplemental rules and regulations.
Each City board, commission or committee may adopt such rules and regulations as are required to conduct their business and which are consistent with the provisions of this code.

2.30.100 Officers.
A. At the first meeting of the City board, commission or committee, and at the first meeting in each calendar year thereafter, the members of the City board, commission or committee shall elect a chairperson and a vice chairperson from among its members.

B. The chairperson and vice chairperson shall serve for a term of one year and until the successor of each takes office.

C. The chairperson shall preside at all meetings of the City board, commission or committee. The chairperson shall appoint all subcommittees subject to the approval of the entity and shall perform the duties necessary or incidental to the office.

D. The vice chairperson shall serve as chairperson in the absence of the chairperson or in case of the inability of the chairperson to act.

2.30.110 Records.
Each City board, commission or committee shall keep a record of the resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations made, which shall be filed with the City Clerk and maintained as a public record.

Chapter 2.34
AUDITING COMMITTEE
Sections:

2.34.010    Auditing Committee established.

2.34.020    Membership.

2.34.030    Meetings.

2.34.040    Duties of the Committee.

2.34.010 Auditing Committee established.
The Auditing Committee of the City Council is hereby established in accordance with the other provisions of this code. (Ord. 1794)

2.34.020 Membership.
A. The Auditing Committee shall consist of two members of the City Council, appointed by the Mayor.

B. Should a vacancy exist on the Committee from any cause, the Mayor shall appoint a successor to fill such vacancy. (Ord. 2039 § 1, 2013)

2.34.030 Meetings.
The Auditing Committee shall meet as required.

2.34.040 Duties of the Committee.
The Auditing Committee shall conduct tasks in accordance with City Council policy, which may be revised from time to time. (Ord. 2039 § 1, 2013)

Chapter 2.38
BOARD OF APPEALS
Sections:

2.38.010    Board of Appeals established.

2.38.020    Membership.

2.38.030    Meetings.

2.38.040    Duties.

2.38.050    Fees.

2.38.010 Board of Appeals established.
There is hereby established a Board of Appeals. (Ord. 1794)

2.38.020 Membership.
A. The Board of Appeals shall consist of five members appointed by the City Council.

B. Members shall appointed for staggered, three-year terms.

C. Persons appointed to the Board of Appeals shall be qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to building construction.

2.38.030 Meetings.
A. The meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be held in the City Council Chambers at City Hall, as required to render a determination of an appeal.

B. Three members of the Board of Appeals shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.

2.38.040 Duties.
Members shall perform those Board of Appeals functions identified in the various Uniform Codes adopted by the City relating to the construction of buildings.

2.38.050 Fees.
To complete the filing of an appeal, the appellant shall pay a fee established, from time to time, by resolution of the City Council.

Chapter 2.42
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
Sections:

2.42.010    Civil Service Commission established.

2.42.020    Membership.

2.42.030    Meetings.

2.42.040    Duties.

2.42.050    Staff support.

2.42.060    Delegation of Commission duties.

2.42.070    Contract for support.

2.42.010 Civil Service Commission established.
There is hereby established a Civil Service Commission. (Ord. 1794)

2.42.020 Membership.
A. The Civil Service Commission shall consist of five members appointed by the City Council.

B. The members of the Civil Service Commission shall be appointed for staggered, three-year terms.

C. Members of the Civil Service Commission shall be qualified electors of the City. No person who holds any paid public office or employment shall be a member of the Civil Service Commission.

2.42.030 Meetings.
A. The regular meetings of the Civil Service Commission shall be held in the City Council Chambers at City Hall at least once a month on a day and at an hour specified and fixed by resolution of the Civil Service Commission.

B. Three members of the Civil Service Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.

2.42.040 Duties.
The Civil Service Commission shall discharge the duties assigned to it by the provisions of the code, to include, without limitation, the following:

A. As necessary, the adoption, revision and administration of a position classification plan covering all positions in the classified service;

B. The establishment of educational, experience and other requirements for entrance into civil service examinations or for employment;

C. The public recruitment of applicants, examination of the fitness of qualified applicants, and the establishment of an eligibility list reflecting the relative fitness of applicants who pass the examination;

D. The establishment and administration of an employee performance report system;

E. If requested by the City Council, the Civil Service Commission shall administer the retirement system prescribed by the City Council;

F. The enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and the civil service rules and regulations established under this code;

G. The conduct of investigations and hearings;

H. The preaudit or postaudit of payrolls and related documents to ascertain compliance with this chapter, the compensation plan, the civil service rules and the regulations, orders and decisions thereunder, and may require correction of payrolls or salary and wage payments; and

I. The recommendation to appropriate City officials of measures which are not within the immediate jurisdiction of the Civil Service Commission but which are in furtherance of reasonable, equitable and uniform treatment of personnel.

2.42.050 Staff support.
The Civil Service Commission shall be supported by the Director of Administrative Services, or the Director’s designee, whose support duties shall be assigned by the Civil Service Commission.

A. The Director of Administrative Services shall be the custodian of all personnel records to the Civil Service Commission and shall be the official upon or with whom all notices, requests for Civil Service Commission review, complaints, or other official documents for the Civil Service Commission shall be served or filed.

B. In the absence of the Director of Administrative Services, notices, requests for Civil Service Commission review, complaints or other official documents may be served on or filed with the City Clerk.

2.42.060 Delegation of Commission duties.
The Civil Service Commission shall have the power to delegate to one of its members, the Director of Administrative Services, or the City Manager any of its powers and duties set forth in this chapter except the following:

A. Adoption or revision of civil service rules;

B. Adoption or revision of a classification plan; or

C. Final review of evidence and the decision in disciplinary cases.

2.42.070 Contract for support.
The City Council may, on request of the Civil Service Commission, contract with the governing body of a city or county within this State or with a department of the State or other public or private agency for the performance for the Civil Service Commission of any duties under the jurisdiction of the Civil Service Commission, subject, however, to the following exceptions:

A. Those duties which this chapter provides cannot be delegated by the Civil Service Commission; and

B. Those duties of the Director of Administrative Services specified in this chapter.

Chapter 2.46
DESIGN REVIEW COMMISSION
Sections:

2.46.010    Design Review Commission established.

2.46.020    Membership.

2.46.030    Meetings.

2.46.040    Duties.

2.46.050    Staff support.

2.46.010 Design Review Commission established.
There is hereby established a Design Review Commission. (Ord. 1794)

2.46.020 Membership.
A. The Design Review Commission shall consist of five members appointed by the City Council.

B. The members of the Design Review Commission shall be appointed for staggered three-year terms.

C. Three members of the Commission shall be professional in some field of design, including but not limited to architecture, landscaping, interior design, or graphic design. One member shall be a businessperson owning, operating, or managing property in the City of a commercial or industrial nature. The qualifications of the remaining member of the commission shall be established by the City Council at its discretion. (Ord. 2035 § 1, 2013; Ord. 1913)

2.46.030 Meetings.
A. The regular meetings of the Design Review Commission shall be held in the City Council Chambers of City Hall at least twice a month on a day and at an hour specified by resolution of the Design Review Commission.

B. Three members of the Design Review Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.

C. The affirmative vote of three members of the Design Review Commission shall be necessary for it to take action.

2.46.040 Duties.
A. The Design Review Commission duties include considering and making determinations on all applications submitted pursuant to the design review process as established in this code.

B. At the request of the Planning Commission, the Design Review Commission may review proposed specific plans used to implement the City’s General Plan, from the standpoint of the environmental design review process, and may prepare and recommend to the Planning Commission a “design element” to be included in the General Plan.

C. The City Council may, from time to time, assign other duties and responsibilities to the Design Review Commission as the City Council sees fit.

2.46.050 Staff support.
The Director of Community Development or the Director’s designee shall serve as the Secretary to the Design Review Commission, and shall provide the staff services necessary to ensure the effective functioning of the Design Review Commission.

Chapter 2.50
DISASTER COUNCIL
Sections:

2.50.010    Purpose.

2.50.020    Definition.

2.50.030    Disaster Council membership.

2.50.040    Disaster Council powers and duties.

2.50.050    Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services.

2.50.060    Powers and duties of Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services.

2.50.070    Emergency organization.

2.50.080    Emergency Plan.

2.50.090    Expenditures.

2.50.100    Punishment of violations.

2.50.110    Repeal of conflicting ordinances.

2.50.120    Declaration of emergency.

2.50.130    Imposition of curfew – Prohibition of certain sales and suspension of certain business activities.

2.50.140    Imposition of curfew may be total.

2.50.150    Announcement of curfew.

2.50.160    Penalty for violations during curfew.

2.50.170    Penalty for violations during total curfew.

2.50.180    Penalty for sales during emergency.

2.50.190    Penalty for business operations during emergency.

2.50.200    Permission to perform essential public services.

2.50.210    Termination of curfew.

2.50.220    Police Services Officers.

2.50.230    Designated Level I Reserve Officers.

2.50.010 Purpose.
The purposes of this chapter are to provide for:

A. The preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within this City in the event of an emergency;

B. The direction of the emergency organization; and

C. The coordination of the emergency functions of this City with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons. (Ord. 1794)

2.50.020 Definition.
As used in this chapter, “emergency” shall mean the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this City caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of this City, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat.

2.50.030 Disaster Council membership.
The City’s Disaster Council is hereby created and shall consist of the following:

A. The Mayor, who shall be chairperson.

B. The Director of Emergency Services, who shall be vice chairperson.

C. The Assistant Director of Emergency Services.

D. Such chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in the current Emergency Plan of this City, adopted pursuant to this chapter.

E. Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans’, professional, or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be appointed by the Director of Emergency Services with the advice and consent of the City Council.

2.50.040 Disaster Council powers and duties.
A. It shall be the duty of the Disaster Council, and it is hereby empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the City Council emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances, resolutions, and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The Disaster Council shall meet upon call of the chairperson or, in the chairperson’s absence from the City or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the vice chairperson.

B. In the absence of the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tempore, any member of the City Council may, after conferring with the Director of Emergency Services or their designee in order of succession, execute any of the duties and powers of the Mayor for purposes of carrying out the provisions of this chapter.

2.50.050 Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services.
A. There is hereby created the Office of Director of Emergency Services. The City Manager shall be the Director of Emergency Services, “Director” hereinafter.

B. There is hereby created the Office of Assistant Director of Emergency Services who shall be appointed by the Director.

2.50.060 Powers and duties of Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services.
A. The Director is hereby empowered to:

1. Request that the City Council proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a “local emergency” if the City Council is in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the Director, the City Council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect.

2. Request that the Governor proclaim a “state of emergency” when, in the opinion of the Director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency.

3. Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this City for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter.

4. Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of this City and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them.

5. Represent this City in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined herein.

6. In the event of the proclamation of a “local emergency” as herein provided, the proclamation of a “state of emergency” by the Governor or the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a “state of war emergency,” the Director is hereby empowered:

a. To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations are confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the City Council;

b. To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the City for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use;

c. To require emergency services of any City officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a “state of emergency” in the County in which this City is located or the existence of a “state of war emergency,” to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he deems necessary in the execution of his duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits, and immunities as are provided by State law for registered disaster services workers;

d. To requisition necessary personnel or material of any City department or agency; and

e. To execute all of the ordinary powers of the City Manager, all of the special powers conferred by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the City Council, and all powers conferred by any statute, by any agreement approved by the City Council, and by any other lawful authority.

B. The Director shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the Director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the City Council.

C. The Assistant Director shall, under the supervision of the emergency service chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of this City, and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the Director.

2.50.070 Emergency organization.
All officers and employees of this City, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations, and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of this chapter, be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this City during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the City.

2.50.080 Emergency Plan.
The Disaster Council shall be responsible for the development of the City’s Emergency Plan, which Plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this City, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency; and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services, and staff of the emergency organization. Such Plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the City Council.

2.50.090 Expenditures.
Any lawful expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the City.

2.50.100 Punishment of violations.
It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both, for any person during an emergency to:

A. Willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this chapter.

B. Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this City, or to prevent, hinder, or delay the defense or protection thereof.

C. Without authority, to wear, carry, or display any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the State.

2.50.110 Repeal of conflicting ordinances.
Under the provisions of Section 8668(a) of the California Emergency Services Act, civil defense and disaster ordinances adopted during an emergency remain in full force and effect until revised, amended, or revoked. City civil defense and disaster ordinances shall be expressly repealed by number. In amending a City civil defense and disaster ordinance, the following provision should be included in order to preserve existing rights and privileges:

The enactment of this ordinance is intended to be a revision and continuation of prior ordinance [insert number of prior ordinance] which is amended by this ordinance. The status of volunteers under that prior ordinance shall not be affected by this ordinance except as expressly provided herein; nor shall plans and agreements, rules and regulations, or resolutions adopted pursuant to such prior ordinance be affected by this ordinance except as expressly amended, modified, or superseded by this ordinance.

2.50.120 Declaration of emergency.
In the event that there exists within any part of the City a great public crisis, disaster, riot, catastrophe, or similar public emergency which is menacing life and property, the Mayor, in addition to any other powers authorized by the Government Code of the State of California, shall have the power and authority to declare the existence of an emergency.

2.50.130 Imposition of curfew – Prohibition of certain sales and suspension of certain business activities.
During all or any portion of the day in the area where the emergency exists, or throughout all or any part of the City, the Mayor shall have the further power and authority to do any of the following:

A. Impose a curfew;

B. Prohibit the sale, distribution, transportation and use of any alcoholic beverage, firearm, dangerous weapon, ammunition, explosive, gasoline, or flammable material or liquid; and

C. Suspend the operation of all or any part of a business establishment where there is sold any alcoholic beverage, firearm, dangerous weapon, ammunition, explosive, gasoline, or flammable material or liquid; as well as suspend the operation of any other activity which in the opinion of the Mayor would hinder, hamper, or impede efforts to control and terminate the emergency.

2.50.140 Imposition of curfew may be total.
The curfew imposed pursuant to this chapter may be limited to the movement of persons on the street, or may be total and extend to the prohibition of the sale, distribution, transportation, and use of any alcoholic beverage, firearm, dangerous weapon, ammunition, explosive, gasoline, flammable material or liquid.

2.50.150 Announcement of curfew.
The Mayor, for and on behalf of the City, shall announce that an emergency has been declared and that a curfew has been imposed. The announcement shall state the type of curfew imposed, whether total or not, and shall give a description of the area, or areas, of the City which it affects. If the sale, distribution, transportation and use of any matter have been prohibited pursuant to this chapter or if the operation of any business establishment has been suspended pursuant to this chapter, the announcement shall also describe the materials and businesses and the area, or areas, of the City affected thereby. The Mayor’s announcement shall be given the widest possible dissemination through all the information media of press, television and radio, as well as by sound trucks and police vehicles.

2.50.160 Penalty for violations during curfew.
During the time and times and in the area or areas that a curfew has been imposed and is in force, it shall be an infraction for any person to be or remain, whether in a vehicle or not, in, on, upon, or about any public street or alley, park or playground, public building or place, or any place of amusement or entertainment or any private place unless it be inside a building and out of public view.

2.50.170 Penalty for violations during total curfew.
During the time and times and in the area or areas that a total curfew has been imposed and is in force, it shall be an infraction for any person to do any of those acts prohibited in accordance with this chapter, and additionally thereto, it shall be an infraction to distribute, transport or use any of the following:

A. Any alcoholic beverage;

B. Firearm, dangerous weapon, ammunition or explosive;

C. Gasoline or flammable material or liquid.

2.50.180 Penalty for sales during emergency.
If, by order, the Mayor has prohibited the sale, distribution, transportation or use of any material pursuant to this chapter, it shall be an infraction for any person to violate such order during the time or times and in the area or areas that the prohibition is in force.

2.50.190 Penalty for business operations during emergency.
If, by order, the Mayor has suspended the operation of all or any part of a business establishment pursuant to this chapter, it shall be an infraction for any person to violate such order during the time or times and in the area or areas such an order is in force.

2.50.200 Permission to perform essential public services.
The Director of Police Services may grant permission to any person to engage in activities otherwise prohibited in accordance with this chapter in order to perform or do anything necessary to the preservation of life or property, to the maintenance of law and order, or to the maintenance of essential public facilities or services.

2.50.210 Termination of curfew.
When the Mayor has determined that conditions permit, he shall terminate any curfew imposed and rescind any other orders issued pursuant to this chapter. The curfew shall be terminated and rescinded in the same manner as when declared and announced. The curfew may be terminated or rescinded totally or partially. The termination, either total or partial, may apply to any part or all of an area affected by a curfew or order.

2.50.220 Police Services Officers.
During an emergency declared in accordance with this chapter, Police Services Officers, while working within the City, are authorized to arrest and release on a notice to appear any person who, in the presence of the Police Services Officer, violates any provision of the Coronado Municipal Code or San Diego County Code which is applicable to the City of Coronado. Police Services Officers may also enforce any provision of the California Vehicle Code pertaining to the parking of motor vehicles on public streets or property.

2.50.230 Designated Level I Reserve Officers.
During an emergency declared in accordance with this chapter, the authority of Designated Level I Reserve Officers, appointed by the Police Department and assigned to the prevention and detection of crime and the general enforcement of the laws of the State of California, shall include the full powers and duties of a Peace Officer as provided by Penal Code Section 883.1. (Reference Penal Code 832.6(a)(2))

Chapter 2.54
HISTORIC RESOURCE COMMISSION
Sections:

2.54.010    Historic Resource Commission.

2.54.020    Membership.

2.54.030    Meetings.

2.54.040    Duties.

2.54.010 Historic Resource Commission.
There is hereby established in the City of Coronado a Historic Resource Commission, hereinafter referred to as the “Commission.” (Ord. 1915)

2.54.020 Membership.
A. The Commission shall consist of five unpaid members appointed by the City Council. All members of the Commission shall have a demonstrated interest in and knowledge of historic preservation and the cultural resources of the City.

B. The members of the Commission shall be appointed for staggered three-year terms.

C. The five at-large Commission members are encouraged to be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of history, architecture, architectural history, planning, or other historic preservation-related disciplines, such as urban planning, American studies, American civilization, cultural geography, cultural anthropology, or conservation and landscape architecture, to the extent that such professionals are available in the community. (Ord. 2031 §§ 1, 2, 2012)

2.54.030 Meetings.
A. The meetings of the Commission shall be held in the City Council Chambers of City Hall on an as-needed basis depending upon when historic resource applications are received, but at least four times a year to provide for general Commission discussion regarding the City’s Historic Preservation Program.

B. Three members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.

C. The affirmative vote of three members shall be necessary for it to take action.

2.54.040 Duties.
A. Administer the Historic Resource Public Information and Recognition Program.

B. Take action regarding applications for historic resource designation, Historic District designation, and historic resource alteration permits.

C. Make recommendations to the Planning Commission on special use permit applications for designated historic resources in accordance with the criteria set forth in CMC Title 84.

D. Make recommendations to the City Council on possible conditions related to Mills Act Agreements for designated historic resources.

E. Maintain the historic resource inventory that lists the designated historic resources, Historic Districts, and historic resource alteration permits issued for historic resources.

F. Develop guidelines to assist the Commission when reviewing historic resource designation and alteration permit requests.

G. Prepare reports and recommendations to the City Council regarding activities of governmental and private agencies impacting upon historical resources and Historic Districts within the City.

H. Investigate and make recommendations to the City Council on the use of various Federal, State, local, or private funding sources and mechanisms available to promote historic resource preservation in the City.

I. Make recommendations regarding conducting studies, retaining consultants, and staffing as the Commission deems desirable or necessary to the City Council. (Ord. 2018 §§ 12, 13, 2010; Ord. 1956 § 1, 2004)

Chapter 2.58
LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
Sections:

2.58.010    Library Board of Trustees established.

2.58.020    Membership.

2.58.030    Meetings.

2.58.040    Duties.

2.58.010 Library Board of Trustees established.
There is hereby established the Library Board of Trustees. (Ord. 1794)

2.58.020 Membership.
A. The Library Board of Trustees shall consist of five members appointed by the City Council.

B. The members of the Library Board of Trustees shall be appointed for staggered, three-year terms.

2.58.030 Meetings.
A. The regular meetings of the Library Board of Trustees shall be held at the City’s Public Library or at City Hall at least once a month on a day and at an hour specified and fixed by resolution of the Board.

B. Special meetings may be called at any time by three trustees.

C. Three members of the Library Board of Trustees constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.

D. During the first meeting of the Library Board of Trustees in each calendar year, the Board shall select a president, a president pro tem and such other officers as the Board may desire.

2.58.040 Duties.
A. The Library Board of Trustees shall manage the City’s Public Library as provided by State law and this code.

B. The Board shall cause a proper record of its proceedings to be kept.

C. The Board shall report to the City Council and the State Librarian as required by the Education Code (Section 18927).

D. The Board shall exercise its powers to make and enforce rules and regulations, administer trusts, purchase personal property, purchase and utilize real property, request publications, obtain and loan and exchange books, administer funds and do and perform any and all other acts and things necessary or proper to carry out these powers in accordance with the Education Code (Chapter 5 of Part 11).

Chapter 2.59
LIBRARY
Sections:

2.59.010    Library established.

2.59.020    City Librarian.

2.59.030    Library employees.

2.59.010 Library established.
There is confirmed the existence of the City’s Public Library which shall be considered as having been established under the provisions of the Education Code (Section 18900 et seq.). (Ord. 1794)

2.59.020 City Librarian.
A. The Director of Library Services shall serve as the City Librarian. The Library Board of Trustees shall delegate the power to appoint and remove the Director of Library Services to the City Manager.

B. The Library Board of Trustees shall delegate the power to prescribe the Director of Library Services’ duties and powers to the City Manager. (Ord. 2089 § 5, 2019)

2.59.030 Library employees.
A. All Library employees shall be subject to appointment, removal, promotion and demotion by the Director of Library Services.

B. The compensation for all Library employees shall be fixed through classification by the City Council.

C. All Library employees shall be in the classified service as established by this code and are subject to the rules and regulations of the Civil Service Commission. (Ord. 2089 § 6, 2019)

Chapter 2.62
PARKS and RECREATION COMMISSION
Sections:

2.62.010    Parks and Recreation Commission established.

2.62.020    Membership.

2.62.030    Meetings.

2.62.040    Duties.

2.62.050    Form of Commission recommendations.

2.62.010 Parks and Recreation Commission established.
The Parks and Recreation Commission is hereby established. (Ord. 1794)

2.62.020 Membership.
A. The Commission shall consist of no less than five members appointed by the City Council.

B. Members of the Parks and Recreation Commission shall serve staggered, three-year terms.

C. If at any time it should be deemed advisable and for the best interest of the City, the City Council may appoint additional members, not to exceed seven in all, to serve on the Commission.

D. The City Council shall appoint one member of the student body of the Coronado High School to sit with the Commission. The student representative shall provide input into parks and recreation issues but shall not have a vote and shall not be considered a Commissioner for quorum purposes. The student representative shall serve for a single term of one year, commencing on October 1st, and expiring on September 30th.

2.62.030 Meetings.
A. The regular meetings of the Parks and Recreation Commission shall be held in the City Council Chambers of City Hall at least once a month on a day and at an hour specified by resolution of the Parks and Recreation Commission.

B. Three members of the Parks and Recreation Commission constitutes a quorum if there is a five-member panel, or four members of the Parks and Recreation Commission constitutes a quorum if there is a six- or seven-member panel. (Ord. 2044 § 1, 2014)

2.62.040 Duties.
A. The Commission shall investigate, consider, and recommend to the City Council plans and suggestions which tend to promote recreational activity for the people of the City.

B. The Commission shall consider the advisability of establishing, in the City, playgrounds, recreational centers, pleasure piers, parks, and amusement zones, and any and all other matters and things which shall promote and tend to provide activities of such character for the people of the City.

C. The Commission is authorized to hold hearings, and to do any and other things which shall be necessary to fully advise itself with respect to the needs of the City for parks and recreational activities.

2.62.050 Form of Commission recommendations.
A. All Commission recommendations shall be in writing, signed by the Chairperson and the Secretary of the Commission.

B. In the event that the Commission recommends the acquisition, construction or maintenance of projects requiring the expenditure of tax moneys, the recommendation shall require the affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of the members of the Commission before such recommendation shall be considered by the City Council.

Chapter 2.66
PLANNING COMMISSION
Sections:

2.66.010    Planning Commission established.

2.66.020    Membership.

2.66.030    Meetings.

2.66.040    Duties.

2.66.050    Appeal of final decision.

2.66.010 Planning Commission established.
There is hereby established the Planning Commission. (Ord. 1794)

2.66.020 Membership.
A. The Planning Commission shall consist of five members appointed by the City Council.

B. The members of the Planning Commission shall serve staggered, three-year terms. (Ord. 2035 §§ 2, 3, 2013; Ord. 1914)

2.66.030 Meetings.
A. The Planning Commission shall hold regular meetings in the City Council Chambers at City Hall, on the second and fourth Tuesdays of each month, commencing at 3:00 p.m.

B. Three members of the Planning Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.

2.66.040 Duties.
A. The Planning Commission shall perform such duties as may be specified by ordinance or resolution of the City Council or by the laws of the State of California.

B. Further, the Planning Commission shall study and report to the City Council upon any matter referred to it by the City Council and shall keep the City Council currently advised of all matters pending, and shall furnish any specific information, reports or materials which the City Council may request.

2.66.050 Appeal of final decision.
All final determinations of the Planning Commission shall be posted at City Hall and shall become final 11 days thereafter unless a timely appeal is filed to the City Council in accordance with the provisions of this code.

Chapter 2.70
SENIOR AFFAIRS COMMISSION
Sections:

2.70.010    Senior Affairs Commission established.

2.70.020    Membership.

2.70.030    Meetings.

2.70.040    Duties.

2.70.041    Purpose of Commission.

2.70.042    Objectives of Senior Affairs Commission.

2.70.044    Cooperation with groups and agencies.

2.70.046    Senior Affairs Commission’s functions are advisory.

2.70.048    Report.

2.70.049    Acceptance of gifts and grants.

2.70.050    Staff support.

2.70.010 Senior Affairs Commission established.
There is hereby established a Senior Affairs Commission. (Ord. 1794)

2.70.020 Membership.
A. The Senior Affairs Commission shall consist of five members appointed by the City Council.

B. Members of the Senior Affairs Commission shall be appointed for staggered, three-year terms.

C. To be eligible to serve on the Senior Affairs Commission, the person must have attained the age of 50 years.

2.70.030 Meetings.
A. The regular meetings of the Senior Affairs Commission shall be held at least once a month at a place and on a day and at an hour specified and fixed by resolution of the Senior Affairs Commission.

B. Three members of the Senior Affairs Commission constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.

2.70.040 Duties.
The duties of the Senior Affairs Commission are to:

A. Hold hearings on and in other ways study all aspects of the problems related to the development of programs for the benefit of senior citizens in the City;

B. Assist and guide by providing consultation to the City Council and other interested groups in the City for the development of programs to meet the needs of the senior citizens of the City;

C. Work closely with the departments and agencies of the City to the end that the resources of the City are used as effectively and as efficiently as possible on behalf of the City’s senior citizens; and

D. Act as a clearing house and information center on all aspects of senior citizen activities. The Senior Affairs Commission shall make this information available to the public.

2.70.041 Purpose of Commission.
The purpose of the Senior Affairs Commission is to investigate all aspects of activities involving senior citizens and to advise the City Council as to the proper role and participation in the development of programs for the benefit of the senior citizens of the City, and to promote the general welfare of the senior citizens of the City:

A. By identifying and studying the social, economic, cultural, and emotional needs of senior citizens in the City and creating citizen awareness of these needs;

B. By advising the City Council on all matters affecting senior citizens in the City;

C. By rendering advice and assistance to other City boards and commissions, to City departments, and to private and voluntary agencies on matters concerning senior citizens; and

D. By developing specific programs in areas in which it determines that the needs of senior citizens are not being met and will not be met by other organizations.

2.70.042 Objectives of Senior Affairs Commission.
The Senior Affairs Commission shall undertake investigations and studies for the purpose of making recommendations to the City Council concerning, but not limited to, the following:

A. Leisure time activities and recreational and social programs;

B. Development of part-time employment opportunities;

C. Personal counselling;

D. Programs for the understanding of the problems of senior citizens;

E. Formulation of general policies relating to the duties and functions of the Senior Affairs Commission.

2.70.044 Cooperation with groups and agencies.
The Senior Affairs Commission shall assist and cooperate with other City agencies and groups which have among their objectives the development or improvement of programs for the benefit of the senior citizens of the City.

2.70.046 Senior Affairs Commission’s functions are advisory.
The Senior Affairs Commission is advisory in character and the Commission shall not be delegated administrative authority or responsibility beyond that which the City Council may expressly authorize.

2.70.048 Report.
The Senior Affairs Commission shall prepare and give the City annually a written report of the activities.

2.70.049 Acceptance of gifts and grants.
Subject to the approval of the City Council, the Senior Affairs Commission may accept gifts and grants on behalf of the City, from any source to assist the Commission in the performance of the Commission’s functions.

2.70.050 Staff support.
The Director of Recreational Services or the Director’s designee shall provide such information and clerical assistance as are necessary to ensure effective functioning of the Senior Affairs Commission.

Chapter 2.74
CORONADO TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
(Repealed by Ord. 2092)

Title 3
ADMINISTRATION
Chapters:

3.02    General Administrative Provisions

3.60    Property – Unclaimed

3.64    Property – Surplus Supplies, Equipment and Other

3.68    Property – Inventory

Chapter 3.02
GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
Sections:

3.02.010    Bonds.

3.02.020    Oaths.

3.02.010 Bonds.
A. The City Council shall determine which officers of the City must post bonds for the faithful performance and discharge of their respective, official duties. (Gov. Code § 36518 et seq.)

B. Wherever bonds are required of officers of the City, the premiums on such bonds, when given by surety companies, shall be paid by the City. (Ord. 1794)

3.02.020 Oaths.
Before entering upon the officer’s duties, each City officer shall take and file with the City Clerk the constitutional oath of office. (Gov. Code § 36507)

Chapter 3.60
PROPERTY – UNCLAIMED
Sections:

3.60.010    Identification of owner.

3.60.020    Storage of property.

3.60.030    Urgency sale.

3.60.040    Conduct of sale.

3.60.050    Claim of owner.

3.60.060    Claim by finder.

3.60.070    Retention of property.

3.60.010 Identification of owner.
When personal property, other than evidence or contraband required for the administration of justice, comes into the possession of the Police Department, the Police Department shall notify the owner, if his identity is reasonably ascertainable, that the Police Department possesses the property and that the owner can claim such property. (Ord. 1794)

3.60.020 Storage of property.
Personal property described in CMC 3.60.010 shall be held by the Police Department for a period of at least 90 days, in accordance with California State Civil Code Sections 2080.2 and 2080.3. (Ord. 2056 § 2, 2016)

3.60.030 Urgency sale.
The Police Department may, without storing, conduct an urgency sale of property pursuant to Section 2080.5 of the California Civil Code in accordance with the sale procedures of this chapter.

3.60.040 Conduct of sale.
After the expiration of the required holding period or a determination that an urgency sale is authorized, the Director of Police Services shall cause a notice of sale to be published once in a newspaper of general circulation published in the County of San Diego. The notice shall be published at least seven days prior to the date fixed for sale. Title to the property shall vest in the highest bidder at the public auction upon receipt by the Police Department of the full amount of the highest bid and the cost of publication, if any, relating to the property. The proceeds of the sale shall be paid into the general fund. Any property remaining unsold after being offered at such public auction shall be destroyed or otherwise lawfully disposed of at the direction of the Director of Police Services. The notice of sale shall identify each item of property whose value is $50.00 or more.

3.60.050 Claim of owner.
At any time within seven days following the publication of notice of sale and before the time set for sale, an owner who appears and proves his ownership of the property and pays a reasonable storage charge fixed by the Director of Police Services and the cost of publications if any, relating to the property, shall receive possession of the property.

3.60.060 Claim by finder.
At the time and place set for sale, the finder of the property delivered to the Police Department may assert a claim to the property and upon paying a reasonable charge for storage as fixed by the Director of Police Services and the cost of publication, if any, relating to the property, title to the property shall vest in the person who found the property, unless the property was found in the course of employment by an employee of any public agency in which case the finder has no lawful claim.

3.60.070 Retention of property.
If the property is not claimed by the owner or finder, the Director of Police Services, upon his determination that the property is needed for public use, may order that the property be retained for public use by the City of Coronado and not sold.

Chapter 3.64
PROPERTY – SURPLUS SUPPLIES, EQUIPMENT AND OTHER
Sections:

3.64.010    Purpose.

3.64.020    Identification of unneeded property.

3.64.030    Redistribution of unneeded property.

3.64.040    Identification of surplus property.

3.64.050    Disposal of surplus property.

3.64.060    City personnel prohibition.

3.64.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide procedures for identifying, redistributing and disposing of surplus City property, other than real property. (Ord. 1801)

3.64.020 Identification of unneeded property.
Each City department shall submit periodic reports to the Director of Administrative Services indicating supplies, equipment or other personal property which the department no longer needs.

3.64.030 Redistribution of unneeded property.
The Director of Administrative Services shall determine whether supplies, equipment or other personal property identified by a City department as being unneeded can be used by some other City department.

3.64.040 Identification of surplus property.
A. Periodically, the Director of Administrative Services shall submit a report to the City Manager indicating supplies, equipment and personal property that are no longer needed by the City together with a written estimate of the market value thereof.

B. The City Manager shall review the report and declare as surplus property that property which is no longer needed by the City.

C. Wood cut from public property, which has a commercial value as firewood, is hereby deemed surplus property and shall be disposed of in a manner provided in this chapter.

3.64.050 Disposal of surplus property.
A. Surplus property may be used to exchange for or trade in to obtain new supplies, equipment or personal property.

B. If surplus property is worth less than $1,000, the City Manager is authorized to sell the property at its fair market value, without advertising or otherwise soliciting bids.

C. If surplus property is worth $1,000 or more, the City Manager shall dispose of the surplus property either by noticed auction or by advertising for bids. Surplus property shall be sold to the highest cash bidder.

D. Moneys received from the sale of surplus property shall be placed in the general funds of the City.

3.64.060 City personnel prohibition.
No City officer or employee, including officers or employees working under contract to the City, shall purchase surplus property sold in accordance with this chapter.

Chapter 3.68
PROPERTY – INVENTORY
Sections:

3.68.010    Time and scope of inventory.

3.68.020    Duty of City Manager.

3.68.010 Time and scope of inventory.
At least once in each fiscal year, and at such other times as by resolution the City Council may direct, an inventory shall be made of such personal property and equipment belonging to the City as is of a permanent nature and classification as capital investment. (Ord. 1794)

3.68.020 Duty of City Manager.
It shall be the duty of the City Manager to take, or cause to be taken, such inventory, and in so doing the City Manager shall set up, or cause to be set up, on the books of the City a complete list of all such personal property or equipment in such manner as shall make available at all times information concerning the complete list and character of such property and equipment.

Title 4
PERSONNEL
Chapters:

4.04    Civil Service System

Chapter 4.04
CIVIL SERVICE SYSTEM
Sections:

4.04.010    Definitions.

4.04.020    Adoption of Civil Service System.

4.04.030    Appropriation of funds.

4.04.040    Unclassified and classified services.

4.04.050    Application of chapter.

4.04.060    Civil service rules.

4.04.070    Civil service regulations.

4.04.080    Appointing authorities.

4.04.090    Rule – Abolition of position.

4.04.100    Rule – Seniority.

4.04.110    Rule – Restoration after promotion and rejection.

4.04.120    Fraud in employment.

4.04.130    Rule – Political activity.

4.04.140    Solicitation of contributions.

4.04.150    Rule – Discrimination prohibited.

4.04.160    Rule – Qualifications regarding age and retirement.

4.04.010 Definitions.
In this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise:

A. “Commission” means the Civil Service Commission of the City.

B. “Employee” means a person who is legally an incumbent of a position in the classified service or who is on authorized leave of absence from such a position. Employee includes “officer.”

C. “Position” means any specific office or employment, whether occupied or vacant, carrying certain responsibilities and calling for the performance of certain duties by one individual, either on a full-time or part-time basis.

D. “Rules” means rules adopted by the Commission and approved by the City Council. (Ord. 1794)

4.04.020 Adoption of Civil Service System.
In order to ensure reasonable, equitable and uniform standards for the administration of personnel affairs, this chapter adopts a Civil Service System for the City, pursuant to the provisions of the Government Code of the State of California. (Gov. Code § 45000 et seq.) (Ord. 861)

4.04.030 Appropriation of funds.
The City Council shall appropriate such funds as it may deem necessary in order to carry out the provisions of this chapter, and such funds shall be expended subject to the control of the City Council as is required for all expenditures of public funds or payment of demands against the City prescribed by the laws of the State of California and/or the ordinances of the City.

4.04.040 Unclassified and classified services.
All departments, offices, positions and employments in the service of the City shall be in the unclassified service or the classified service.

4.04.050 Application of chapter.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply solely to the positions in the classified service and the employees therein unless otherwise provided herein.

4.04.060 Civil service rules.
A. After a hearing before the Civil Service Commission, the City Council may adopt, amend or repeal rules governing the Civil Service System established pursuant to this code. Civil service rules adopted, amended or repealed by the City Council shall become effective immediately.

B. After a hearing, the Civil Service Commission may propose to the City Council the adoption, amendment or repeal of civil service rules governing the Civil Service System established pursuant to this code.

C. The City Council may, by resolution, provide that any of the rules and regulations provided for the classified services shall also apply to the employees in unclassified services.

D. Civil service rules shall address:

1. The certification of the highest eligible to an appointing authority;

2. The limitation of all appointments, including promotions, to persons so certified and for appointments made by means of transfer, demotion, and re-employment of former employees;

3. Probationary periods of six months or longer as a final test of employee fitness before acquisition of permanent status;

4. The prescription and definition of probationary and other kinds of nonpermanent status;

5. The methods and procedures for resignation, layoff, discharge, and other kinds of employee separation from the classified service;

6. The causes for, kinds of, and procedures for disciplinary action by an appointing authority against any subordinate who has permanent status;

7. The basic principles by which the Civil Service Commission shall be guided in classifying positions according to their duties and responsibilities;

8. The public recruitment of applicants, the process for examining the fitness of qualified applicants, and the process for establishing an eligibility list reflecting the relative fitness of applicants who pass the examination.

4.04.070 Civil service regulations.
A. The Civil Service Commission may adopt regulations to implement the administration and to further the purposes of the civil service rules enacted under the provisions of this code.

B. Civil service regulations are effective upon adoption by the Civil Service Commission, unless otherwise expressly provided.

4.04.080 Appointing authorities.
No person or official body in the City service shall have the power to appoint personnel to positions in the classified service unless specifically granted such power by ordinance or unless such power is delegated pursuant to ordinance and affirmed by resolution of the City Council. The power to appoint includes a corresponding power to discharge or to administer other disciplinary action pursuant to rule and a duty to direct or supervise, subordinate personnel to ensure efficient performance of duty.

4.04.090 Rule – Abolition of position.
The City Council may abolish any position in the classified service whenever it deems such action advisable in the interest of economy or because the necessity for such position no longer exists.

4.04.100 Rule – Seniority.
The appointing authority concerned shall observe the seniority rule in putting into effect a required reduction in personnel in any class of position pursuant to rules of the Commission.

4.04.110 Rule – Restoration after promotion and rejection.
Any employee who is promoted from a class of position in which he had permanent status and who is rejected by the appointing authority during probation shall be restored to permanent status in his former department and class of position unless he is also discharged from the service of the City in which case he shall have the same right to review by the Commission as is accorded employees with permanent status.

4.04.120 Fraud in employment.
In connection with any application for employment, civil service examination, or appointment, it shall be unlawful for any person:

A. To impersonate another;

B. To willfully make any false statement regarding any material fact;

C. To furnish or receive examination questions or other examination material in advance of examination in order to give advantage to a candidate;

D. To practice or attempt to practice any other deception or fraud; or

E. Knowingly to be in any manner instrumental in the accomplishment or attempt of accomplishment of any such acts.

4.04.130 Rule – Political activity.
A. No person holding a position in the classified service shall seek or accept election, nomination or appointment as an officer of a political club or organization, or take an active part in a County or municipal political campaign or serve as a member of a committee of such club or organizations or circle, or seek signatures to any petition provided for by any law, except as hereinafter provided, or act as a worker at the polls, or distribute badges or pamphlets, dodgers or handbills of any kind favoring or opposing any candidate for election, or for nomination to any public office; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent any such officer or employee from becoming or continuing to be a member of a political club or organization, or from attendance at a political meeting, or from enjoying entire freedom from all interference in casting his vote or from seeking or accepting election or appointment to an elective public office or to prevent any such officer or employee from seeking signature to any initiative or referendum petition directly affecting rates of pay, hours of work, retirement, civil service or other working conditions of such officer or employee, or from distributing badges or pamphlets, dodgers or handbills, or other participation in any campaign in connection with such petition, providing such activity is not carried on during hours of work, or when such officer or employee is dressed in the uniform, if any, required in any department of the City government.

B. Any willful violation thereof or violation through culpable negligence shall be sufficient grounds to authorize the discharge of any officer or employee.

4.04.140 Solicitation of contributions.
No person in either the classified or unclassified service shall directly or indirectly solicit or receive, or be in any manner concerned with soliciting or receiving, any assessment, subscription, contribution, or political service, whether voluntary or involuntary, for any political purpose whatever, from anyone on the eligible lists or holding any position in the classified service.

4.04.150 Rule – Discrimination prohibited.
No person in the classified service, or seeking admission thereto, shall be employed, promoted, demoted or discharged, or in any way favored or discriminated against because of his race, religion, political opinions or affiliations except opinions or affiliation with groups favoring overthrow of the government by force or violence.

4.04.160 Rule – Qualifications regarding age and retirement.
A. No civil service rule adopted pursuant to this code shall establish any minimum or maximum age limits for any civil service examination, and no rule shall declare that age shall be considered to be a minimum qualification for any City employee in the classified service. Any person possessing all the minimum qualifications for the position shall be eligible to take any civil service examination, regardless of his or her age, and neither the Commission, the City Council, nor any appointing power shall adopt any rule, either written or unwritten, prohibiting the employment of any person in the classified service solely because of his or her age; provided, that he or she is otherwise qualified for such employment.

B. This chapter shall not be construed to authorize the employment of any person in a particular City employment who has reached the retirement age for that particular employment prescribed by any City employees’ retirement system.

C. The employment of any person in any City employment while the person is receiving a retirement allowance under any City employees’ retirement system, by reason of prior City service, is hereby prohibited.

Title 8
FINANCES
Chapters:

8.02    Cost Recovery – Fee and Service Charge System

8.04    Purchase of Goods, Services, and/or Equipment Unrelated to a Public Works Project

8.05    City Manager Authority to Execute Contracts

8.06    Alternative Bid Procedures for Public Works Projects

8.07    Public Works Contracts Generally

8.08    Claims Against the City

8.20    Public Facilities Fees

Chapter 8.02
COST RECOVERY – FEE AND SERVICE CHARGE SYSTEM
Sections:

8.02.010    Purpose and intent.

8.02.020    Definitions.

8.02.030    General provisions – Applicability.

8.02.040    Cost recovery fees established.

8.02.050    Cost recovery fees – Periodic review.

8.02.060    Cost recovery fees – Collection.

8.02.070    Cost recovery fees – Effective date.

8.02.080    Protests.

8.02.090    Interpretation and conflict.

8.02.010 Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this chapter are:

A. To establish and codify a system of fees and deposits for the recovery of the costs of the City in providing certain services, products and regulatory activities.

B. To provide for the periodic review and collection of such fees and deposits. (Ord. 2026 § 2, 2011)

8.02.020 Definitions.
A. “Applicant” means the individual or entity requesting any service from the City.

B. “City” means the City of Coronado, San Diego County, California.

C. “City Clerk” means the City Clerk of the City of Coronado or his/her designee.

D. “City Council” means the City Council as the legislative body of the City.

E. “City Manager” means the City Manager of the City of Coronado or his/her designee.

F. “Cost recovery fee” means any fee or deposit established under this chapter to recover the costs of the City in providing a service.

G. “Service” means: (1) any activity provided by the City for the direct and measurable benefit of specific individuals, entities or properties; or (2) any activity provided by the City in response to the specific request of individuals or entities; or (3) any regulatory oversight provided by the City that can be reasonably attributed to activities affecting specific individuals, entities or properties. (Ord. 2026 § 2, 2011)

8.02.030 General provisions – Applicability.
A. Categories of Costs to Be Recovered. The following will be considered in establishing any cost recovery fee:

1. Direct Costs. Including, but not limited to, salaries, wages, overtime, fringe benefits, contract services and any other direct expense incurred in providing the service;

2. Indirect Costs. Including, but not limited to, maintenance and operation of City buildings, equipment and vehicles; communication expenses; computer costs; printing and reproduction; insurance; debt service; depreciation expenses and other indirect costs when distributed as a percentage of direct costs;

3. General Overhead. Including, but not limited to, the costs of the City, its City Council, its officials and departments distributed as a percentage of direct cost. (Ord. 2026 § 2, 2011)

8.02.040 Cost recovery fees established.
A. Established. Cost recovery fees shall be established by resolution and are applicable to all requests for any service to support the cost of providing the service requested. The cost recovery fees can be amended from time to time by resolution of the City Council. Said resolution shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk.

B. Schedule of Fees. When established or modified, the City Council shall, by resolution, set forth: (1) the list of services for which cost recovery fees are established; (2) the full cost to provide the service; and (3) the specific amount of the proposed cost recovery fee. The City Council may also approve by resolution the application of an automatic adjustment to said cost recovery fees based on the Annual Average Consumer Price Index for the San Diego Region for the prior calendar year so long as the adjustment does not exceed the reasonable cost for providing the service.

C. The cost recovery fees shall not exceed the reasonable costs incurred by the City in providing the services nor shall the cost recovery fees exceed any maximum limit prescribed by State law. (Ord. 2026 § 2, 2011)

8.02.050 Cost recovery fees – Periodic review.
At such time as deemed necessary, the City Manager may make or cause to be made a written report to the City Council on the City’s Cost Recovery Program. The report shall be considered by the City Council at a public hearing and shall include the following information:

A. The services for which cost recovery fees are charged or subsidized;

B. The full cost to provide the services;

C. The amount of the current cost recovery fee charged for each service;

D. Recommended modifications to the cost recovery fees to ensure that the fees continue to recover the reasonable and proportional share of costs of services provided. (Ord. 2026 § 2, 2011)

8.02.060 Cost recovery fees – Collection.
A. Fees of $10,000 or Less. Any cost recovery fee under $10,000 shall be paid by the applicant at the time of the request for services.

B. Fees of More Than $10,000. For any cost recovery fee exceeding $10,000, the City Manager or his designee may, at his/her sole discretion, agree to receive the payment of such fee on terms acceptable to the City to include interest on the balance as the costs giving rise to the cost recovery fees are incurred.

C. Collection Procedures. The City Manager, upon consultation with the Director of each City department affected by any cost recovery fee, is authorized and directed to issue administrative procedures consistent with this chapter to facilitate the provisions of this chapter, including those for the collection of the cost recovery fees. (Ord. 2026 § 2, 2011)

8.02.070 Cost recovery fees – Effective date.
A. Except as otherwise provided, cost recovery fees for services other than those that apply to the filing, accepting, reviewing, approving or issuing of an application, permit, or entitlement for a development project shall be effective no less than 30 days after the adoption of the resolution imposing the fee.

B. Cost recovery fees that apply to the filing, accepting, reviewing, approving or issuing of an application, permit, or entitlement for a development project will be effective no less than 60 days following their adoption. (Ord. 2026 § 2, 2011)

8.02.080 Protests.
A. Protest. An applicant may protest the imposition of any cost recovery fee only after paying such fee and by filing a written protest specifying the reasons for such protest with the City Manager within 10 calendar days of such payment. Within 10 calendar days of the filing of such protest, the City Manager shall determine whether the cost recovery fee or any part of it was incorrectly determined and/or inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter and so inform the applicant. (Ord. 2026 § 2, 2011)

8.02.090 Interpretation and conflict.
A. Liberal Construction. This chapter shall be liberally construed in order to effectuate its intent and purposes.

B. Conflict. To the extent of any conflict between other City ordinance, resolution or regulation and this chapter, this chapter shall control.

C. Validity. The failure of any person to receive a notice, resolution order or other matter shall not affect in any way whatsoever the validity of any proceeding taken pursuant to this chapter or prevent the City from proceeding with any hearing so noticed. (Ord. 2026 § 2, 2011)

Chapter 8.04
PURCHASE OF GOODS, SERVICES, AND/OR EQUIPMENT UNRELATED TO A PUBLIC WORKS PROJECT
Sections:

8.04.010    Purchase of goods, services, and/or equipment.

8.04.020    Officials and responsibilities.

8.04.030    Purchase order.

8.04.040    Basic purchase procedure – Less than $2,500.

8.04.050    Minor purchase procedure (informal bid) – $2,500 to $30,000.

8.04.060    Major purchase procedure (formal bid) – $30,000 or more.

8.04.070    Exemptions.

8.04.080    Professional services.

8.04.010 Purchase of goods, services, and/or equipment.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to establish cost effective procedures for purchasing materials, services, supplies, and equipment (collectively referred to as “goods, services, and/or equipment”) of the required quality and quantity, at the lowest price, in a transaction that best meets the needs of the City.

B. This chapter does not apply to purchases for a public works project, or to the purchase of real property, or to types of goods, services, and/or equipment whose purchase is regulated by State law.

C. “Services” shall not include those professional services referenced in CMC 8.04.080. (Ord. 2011 § 2, 2010)

8.04.020 Officials and responsibilities.
A. “Purchasing Officer” is the City Manager, who may designate, in writing, a City employee to act as the Purchasing Officer. The Purchasing Officer shall oversee the City’s purchasing activities to ensure conformity with the provisions of this chapter, coordinate the purchases of goods, services, and/or equipment commonly used by two or more City departments, and promulgate policies and procedures to implement this chapter.

B. “Purchasing Agent” is the Director of each City department, who may designate, in writing, a City employee or employees to act as the Purchasing Agents for the department. A Purchasing Agent is authorized to purchase goods, services, and/or equipment for that Agent’s department in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the City’s administrative procedures.

C. “Special Purchase Agent” is a City employee designated, in writing, by the City Manager to purchase specified supplies/equipment independently from the Purchasing Agent of a City department. A Special Purchase Agent shall comply with the procedures of this chapter and shall make periodic reports to the City Manager on the status of the purchase. (Ord. 2011 § 2, 2010)

8.04.030 Purchase order.
A. A purchase order is to be used in both the basic and general purchasing procedures when payment will be made incrementally or over more than one fiscal year. A purchase order shall contain a description of what goods, services, and/or equipment the Purchasing Agent is attempting to obtain, the quality and/or quantity of the items sought, any product specifications, and the price per item.

B. Except where specific authority is first obtained from the City Manager, a Purchasing Agent shall not purchase goods, services, and/or equipment unless there exists an unencumbered appropriation in the fund account against which the purchase is to be charged.

C. The Purchasing Agent shall ensure that sufficient documentation is submitted with the request for payment to demonstrate compliance with the procedures of this chapter and to justify the acquisition and acceptance of the goods, services, and/or equipment. (Ord. 2011 § 2, 2010)

8.04.040 Basic purchase procedure – Less than $2,500.
A. If the estimated aggregate price of the purchase of goods, services, and/or equipment is less than $2,500, a Purchasing Agent may, to achieve the purposes of this chapter:

1. Without seeking competitive proposals, select a vendor with an established reputation for selling items of the required quality, at the market price, in a transaction that best meets the needs of the City;

2. Issue a purchase order, if required; or use an authorized credit card; and

3. Complete the purchase transaction.

B. The Purchasing Agent shall submit the invoice to the Director of Administrative Services for placement on the warrant list. (Ord. 2011 § 2, 2010)

8.04.050 Minor purchase procedure (informal bid) – $2,500 to $30,000.
A. If the estimated aggregate price of the purchase of goods, services, and/or equipment is $2,500 or more, but less than $30,000, the Purchasing Agent shall:

1. Solicit proposals from qualified vendors;

2. Obtain at least three proposals;

3. Selection.

a. If the goods, services, and/or equipment specified in the request are of a generic quality and a vendor with particular attributes is not required to meet the needs of the City and the purposes of this chapter, then the Purchasing Agent shall select the vendor whose proposal offers to sell the supplies/equipment at the lowest price.

b. If vendor reliability, experience, availability, or expertise are a component of meeting the needs of the City and the purposes of this chapter, then the Purchasing Agent need not necessarily purchase from the vendor proposing the lowest price;

4. Issue a purchase order, if required;

5. Complete the purchase transaction; and

6. Submit the invoice to the Director of Administrative Services for placement on the warrant list.

B. The Purchasing Agent shall have the option to purchase goods, services, and/or equipment in an amount of $2,500 or more, but less than $30,000 utilizing the formal bidding procedure set forth in CMC 8.04.060.

C. The Purchasing Agent shall have the right to reject any and all bids for any reason or for no reason at all. (Ord. 2011 § 2, 2010)

8.04.060 Major purchase procedure (formal bid) – $30,000 or more.
If the estimated cost of the purchase is $30,000 or more, the Purchasing Officer shall ensure there exists an unencumbered appropriation in the fund account against which the purchase is to be charged and that the following requirements are met:

A. A request for proposals and a notice is prepared. The notice shall contain:

1. A general description of the goods, services, and/or equipment sought;

2. The location where the request for proposals, specifications, and blank proposals may be obtained;

3. The requirement that the proposal be in writing and that it be sealed;

4. The time and place for opening proposals; and

5. The security required, if any.

B. The notice is:

1. Published in a newspaper of general circulation within the City, at least once, 10 days prior to the deadline for submitting proposals; and, if directed by the City Council to achieve the purposes of this chapter, published in one or more additional publications, prior to the deadline for submitting proposals; and

2. Posted on the City’s website no less than 10 days prior to the deadline for submitting proposals; and

3. Any other notice the Purchasing Agent may deem appropriate to obtain bids for the goods, services, and/or equipment.

C. The Purchasing Officer may require a security deposit to be submitted as a condition for considering the proposal. The amount of the security deposit shall be sufficient to reimburse the City for costs incurred if the vendor is successful but fails to execute the contract. When a security deposit is required, the requirement shall be identified in the public notice(s) soliciting proposals. Vendors shall be entitled to return of such security deposit; provided, however, that the first-selected vendor shall forfeit its security deposit upon refusal or failure to execute a contract within five days after the notice of award of a contract has been mailed, unless the City is responsible for a delay. The City Council may, on refusal or failure of the first-selected vendor to execute the contract, award it to another vendor. If the City Council awards the contract to the second-selected vendor, the amount of the first-selected vendor’s security shall be applied to the City’s costs and then to the difference between the first-selected vendor’s proposed price and the price proposed by the second-selected vendor; and the remainder, if any, shall be returned to the first-selected vendor.

D. The proposals shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the notice.

E. After the proposals are opened, an agenda item will be submitted to the City Council with the Purchasing Officer’s recommendation regarding the award of the purchase contract.

F. Selection.

1. If the goods, services, and/or equipment specified in the formal bid are of a generic quality and a vendor with particular attributes is not required to meet the needs of the City and the purposes of this chapter, the City Council will award the contract to the vendor whose proposal offers to sell the goods, services, and/or equipment at the lowest price.

2. If vendor reliability, experience, availability, and/or expertise are a component of meeting the needs of the City and the purposes of this chapter, then the City Council need not necessarily award the contract to the vendor proposing the lowest price.

3. In either case, the City Council may reject all proposals presented.

G. If two or more proposals equally satisfy the purposes of this chapter, the City Council may direct the Purchasing Officer to further negotiate with the concerned vendors. Thereafter, the City Council may award the contract based on a negotiated proposal, or reject all proposals presented.

H. After the City Council awards the contract, the Purchasing Officer shall complete the purchase transaction.

I. After completion of the transaction, the Purchasing Officer shall submit the invoice to the Director of Administrative Services for placement on the warrant list. (Ord. 2011 § 2, 2010)

8.04.070 Exemptions.
A. Where otherwise required by this chapter, one or more procedures in this chapter may be waived, at the discretion of the Purchasing Officer, and the purchase carried forward, when:

1. A declared emergency within or outside the City of Coronado requires that the goods, services, and/or equipment be acquired from the nearest available vendor by a Purchasing Agent and/or immediate action is necessary to contain and control the emergency condition;

2. The goods, services, and/or equipment can be obtained from only one vendor;

3. The goods, services, and/or equipment may be acquired from or in cooperation with another governmental agency that is acquiring or has acquired goods, services, and/or equipment through a cooperative purchasing plan or program which accomplishes the purposes of this chapter in accordance with State law;

4. The goods, services, and/or equipment is obtained from an authorized “reverse auction” wherein no less than two bids are received from suppliers pursuant to a request for quotation, and the contract is awarded to the lowest bidder; or

5. Sufficient, satisfactory proposals are not received.

B. When a waiver is granted in accordance with this section, the Purchasing Officer shall make a written record, which contains the facts and findings required to support the waiver. The record shall be filed with the request for warrants. (Ord. 2011 § 2, 2010)

8.04.080 Professional services.
Contracts for special professional services of an accountant, architect, engineer, land surveyor, appraiser, construction manager, land use planner, environmental specialist, or other specialized consultant shall be subject to the provisions of this section. Whenever feasible at least three proposals or qualifications shall be received for the professional service needed. The City Manager may waive the requirements for solicitation of multiple proposals or qualifications if in the Manager’s opinion only one individual or firm can provide the professional service, or if the professional service constitutes an extension of professional services for a project for which a consultant has previously given professional services. The selection of the professional shall be based upon an analysis of demonstrated competence and professional qualifications necessary for the satisfactory performance of the services required as well as the cost of the service consistent with Government Code Section 4526. This section shall not apply to the selection of City Attorney or other similar positions. The City, upon the advice of the City Manager and the City Attorney, may select special counsel without following the procedures specified in this section. (Ord. 2011 § 2, 2010)

Chapter 8.05
CITY MANAGER AUTHORITY TO EXECUTE CONTRACTS
Sections:

8.05.010    Execution of contracts for goods, supplies, and/or equipment.

8.05.020    Execution of services contracts.

8.05.030    Change orders, amendments, extensions.

8.05.010 Execution of contracts for goods, supplies, and/or equipment.
A. For the purchase of any goods, supplies and/or equipment, which have been solicited in compliance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 8.04 CMC, the City Manager shall have the authority to approve and execute contracts for which the cost to the City is $30,000 or less.

B. The awarding of contracts for amounts above the aforementioned thresholds authorized for the City Manager set forth in this section shall require prior approval by the City Council. (Ord. 2008 § 1, 2010)

8.05.020 Execution of services contracts.
A. For the purpose of this section, “professional services” shall be defined as those types of services typically provided by persons holding licenses or certifications regulated by the State of California including, without limitation, attorneys, engineers, architects, real estate appraisers, relocation consultants, construction management, and other such services requiring special skill or training. “Professional services” shall not include work requiring a contractor’s license issued by the State of California.

B. For the purchase of any services contract, not involving the hiring of professional services as described in subsection A of this section, which has been solicited in compliance with the applicable procedures set forth in Chapter 8.04 CMC and California law, the City Manager shall have the authority to approve and execute contracts for which the cost to the City is $30,000 or less.

C. For the purchase of any professional services contract, which has been solicited in compliance with the applicable procedures set forth in Chapter 8.04 CMC and California law, the City Manager shall have the authority to approve and execute contracts for which the cost to the City is $30,000 or less.

D. The awarding of contracts for amounts above the aforementioned thresholds authorized for the City Manager set forth in this section shall require prior approval by the City Council. (Ord. 2008 § 1, 2010)

8.05.030 Change orders, amendments, extensions.
The City Manager is authorized to execute change orders, amendments or extensions to existing agreements within the authority granted in CMC 8.05.010 and 8.05.020. (Ord. 2008 § 1, 2010)

Chapter 8.06
ALTERNATIVE BID PROCEDURES FOR PUBLIC WORKS PROJECTS
Sections:

8.06.010    Purpose.

8.06.020    Informal bid procedures.

8.06.030    Contractors list.

8.06.040    Notice inviting informal bids.

8.06.050    Award of contracts.

8.06.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the following sections is to establish alternative bid procedures for public works projects, as provided for by the California Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act. (Ord. 1993 § 1, 2008)

8.06.020 Informal bid procedures.
Public projects, as defined by the Act and in accordance with the limits listed in Section 22032 of the Public Contract Code, may be let to contract by informal procedures as set forth in Section 22032, et seq., of the Public Contract Code. (Ord. 1993 § 1, 2008)

8.06.030 Contractors list.
A list of contractors shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of Section 22034 of the Public Contract Code and criteria promulgated from time to time by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission. (Ord. 1993 § 1, 2008)

8.06.040 Notice inviting informal bids.
Where a public project is to be performed which is subject to the provisions of this chapter, a notice inviting informal bids shall be mailed to all contractors for the category of work to be bid, as shown on the list developed in accordance with CMC 8.06.030, and to all construction trade journals as specified by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission in accordance with Section 22036 of the Public Contract Code. Additional contractors and/or construction trade journals may be notified at the discretion of the department soliciting bids; provided, however:

A. If there is no list of qualified contractors maintained by the City for the particular category of work to be performed, the notice inviting bids shall be sent only to the construction trade journals specified by the Commission.

B. If the product or service is proprietary in nature such that it can be obtained only from a certain contractor or contractors, the notice inviting informal bids may be sent exclusively to such contractor or contractors. (Ord. 1993 § 1, 2008)

8.06.050 Award of contracts.
The City’s City Manager and/or his designee are authorized to award informal contracts pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1993 § 1, 2008)

Chapter 8.07
PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTS GENERALLY
Sections:

8.07.010    Bid procedures in public works contracts.

8.07.020    Change orders for public works contracts – City Manager authority.

8.07.010 Bid procedures in public works contracts.
Public works projects not subject to the alternative bid procedures as set forth in Chapter 8.06 CMC shall be let to contract through a competitive bid process designed to select the lowest responsive and responsible bidder. The procedures to be followed shall at all times comply with applicable laws. (Ord. 2011 § 3, 2010)

8.07.020 Change orders for public works contracts – City Manager authority.
A. The City Manager, or his/her designee, is hereby authorized to approve and execute individual change orders where the aggregate amount of all change orders does not exceed $10,000 or 10 percent (whichever is greater) of the total contract price as originally awarded.

B. Any change orders that exceed the amounts authorized by this section shall be executed by the City Manager, or his/her designee, only upon the approval of the City Council.

1. However, if the cost of delaying the work (considering both direct and indirect costs) exceeds $5,000, the City Manager is authorized to execute a single change order up to the full amount of the City Manager’s authority pursuant to CMC 8.05.030. The amount of this change order shall be in addition to the amounts authorized by subsection A of this section, and this change order is only authorized if there are sufficient funds in the allocated project budget. The City Manager shall report the change order to the City Council at its next regularly scheduled meeting.

C. The City Manager, or his/her designee, shall not approve any change orders unless there exists an unencumbered appropriation in the fund account against which the change order is to be charged and the change order does not materially change the scope of work. (Ord. 2037 § 1, 2013; Ord. 2011 § 3, 2010)

Chapter 8.08
CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY
Sections:

8.08.010    Payroll certification.

8.08.020    Bills other than payroll.

8.08.030    Form.

8.08.040    Filing of claims.

8.08.050    Time limit for damage claim.

8.08.060    Verification.

8.08.010 Payroll certification.
The regular payroll of all officers and employees of the City, including such temporary employees as may be hired for specific purposes by the City Manager under general authorization of the Council shall, before payments, be duly certified:

A. By the appropriate department director (that the labor was actually performed by the employee at the rate of pay specified);

B. By the City Manager (that the employment was duly authorized); and

C. By the Director of Administrative Services (that such employment and payment conform to the budget ordinance or other authorization of the Council) and shall thereupon be payable as provided by law; but all such payments shall in due course be examined and approved by the Auditing Committee of the Council. (Ord. 1794)

8.08.020 Bills other than payroll.
All other demands, bills and claims against the City arising out of contract, including bills for labor, material and supplies furnished, shall, before payment, be audited and approved by the Auditing Committee, and payment thereof authorized by the Council with such exceptions as approved by the Council and as provided by law and ordinance; provided, that where contracts duly executed by the City call for specific payments on specified dates, such payments shall become payable on such dates after proper certification by appropriate City officials as set forth in CMC 8.08.010, and subject to final audit by the Auditing Committee and approved by the Council.

8.08.030 Form.
All such demands, bills, and claims against the City arising out of contract, except the payroll, shall be accompanied by a requisition/purchase order or a request for a warrant to the Administrative Services, bearing a date, price and a brief description of the article furnished and the work or labor performed, and shall be signed by the person ordering the same and shall be approved by the City Manager and the Director of Administrative Services. A register of audited demands shall be submitted to the City Council approval or rejection and shall have attached thereto the affidavit of the Director of Administrative Services certifying as to the accuracy of the demands and the availability of the funds for the payment thereof. The register shall be signed by the Auditing Committee. (Ord. 1354)

8.08.040 Filing of claims.
All claims shall be filed with the Director of Administrative Services except claims for damages.

8.08.050 Time limit for damage claim.
No claim for damages against the City shall ever be allowed or paid unless there has been first filed with the City Clerk and presented to the Council a claim therefor within six months after the occurrence from which the damages arose.

8.08.060 Verification.
All such claims for damages shall be first verified by the claimant before an officer authorized to administer oaths.

Chapter 8.20
PUBLIC FACILITIES FEES
Sections:

8.20.010    Purpose.

8.20.020    Establishment of public facilities fees.

8.20.030    Fees imposed.

8.20.040    Exemption from fees.

8.20.050    Appeals.

8.20.060    Use of fee revenues.

8.20.070    Reporting.

8.20.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a system to fund capital facilities that would allow the City to accommodate additional development without lowering the level of public service. Public facilities fees allow new development to mitigate at least a portion of its impacts on the City’s capital facilities.

8.20.020 Establishment of public facilities fees.
A. The City Council may establish public facilities fees on new construction.

B. To establish the public facilities fees, the City Council shall, after a duly noticed public hearing, adopt a resolution that sets forth the amount of the fees.

C. The amount of each public facility fee shall be supported by a written report to be presented at the public hearing.

D. The City Council may approve a public facility fee only if:

1. The type of facilities to be funded has been identified;

2. A reasonable relationship exists between the use of the fee and the type of construction on which the fee is imposed;

3. A reasonable relationship exists between the need for the public facilities and the type of construction on which the fee is imposed; and

4. A reasonable relationship exists between the amount of the fee imposed and the cost of the public facilities attributable to the type of construction.

E. A public facility fee may be established for the following:

1. Parks and park and recreation facilities;

2. Public buildings;

3. Police and fire facilities;

4. Public works yards;

5. Transportation facilities, including streets, intersections, bikeways, pedestrian ways and public transportation facilities including vehicles;

6. Storm drainage facilities;

7. Equipment used in the provision of public services, including Library materials;

8. Land acquired as the site for any such facilities; and

9. Administration of the public facilities fee program.

8.20.030 Fees imposed.
A. The public facilities fee shall be charged and paid no later than the time of issuance of a building permit for construction. The Director of Community Development, or his or her designee, shall determine the amount of the fee the developer must pay in accordance with the provisions set forth in this chapter and implementing resolution(s).

B. To the extent permitted by law, the public facilities fees as determined by the resolution shall be paid prior to the occupancy of any building built by any entity that is not required to obtain a building permit from the City of Coronado.

C. The Director of Community Development is authorized to develop regulations and guidelines appropriate for the effective implementation and administration of this chapter.

8.20.040 Exemption from fees.
A public facilities fee shall not be imposed on any of the following development:

A. Any residential addition of less than 500 square feet. However, if a fee was not imposed on that property for this reason at the time of a prior addition within the last five years, and if the property ownership (as defined by the County Assessor for the purposes of Article XIII-A of the California Constitution) has not changed, then a fee shall be charged on the portion of the sum of such additions that is 500 square feet or greater.

B. Any replacement or reconstruction of floor area destroyed or demolished; provided, that the building permit is obtained within five years of demolition.

8.20.050 Appeals.
A determination of the amount of the public facilities fee on a particular development may be appealed to the City Council in accordance with the provisions of this Municipal Code (Chapter 1.12 CMC).

8.20.060 Use of fee revenues.
The revenues generated by the public facilities fees shall be placed in separate accounts established by the Director of Administrative Services. These revenues, together with any interest earnings on these accounts, shall be used only for the purposes for which the fees are imposed, identified below:

A. To pay for design and construction of public facilities (including expenses directly associated with such facilities), or portions of the cost of such facilities, which provide capacity to mitigate the public facilities impacts of new development;

B. To reimburse the City for its expenditures (from other than grants or gifts) for a development’s fair share of those capital improvements already constructed by the City;

C. To reimburse developers for expenditures in constructing such facilities, except that a developer shall be entitled to reimbursement only if such construction and the extent of reimbursement has been approved by the City as the means by which the City, in its sole discretion, chooses to provide additional capacity; and

D. To pay for and/or to reimburse the costs of program development and ongoing administration of the public facilities program.

8.20.070 Reporting.
A. Within 60 days of the close of each fiscal year, the Director of Administrative Services shall make available to the public a report for each account of the public facilities fees which: (1) states the balance of funds in the accounts, (2) sets forth disbursements from the accounts since the prior report, (3) identifies commitments made for future disbursements from the accounts, (4) determines whether any funds have been held for five or more years and if so indicate whether or not they have been committed, and (5) states the amount of any refunds made during the year.

B. The above report shall also review the basis for the fee, including the determination of the amounts charged, and information as to any changes in the information on which the fee amounts are based that would indicate the amounts should be adjusted. This review shall include information as to inflation or deflation in the cost of providing needed facilities.

C. The Director of Administrative Services shall present this report to the City Council for review at the next regularly scheduled public meeting not less than 15 days after the availability of the report.

Title 12
BUSINESS TAX
Code reviser’s note: As of January 2019, Title 12 is currently not applicable. Please see CMC Title 13, Business Certificates.

Chapters:

12.04    General Provisions

12.08    Definitions

12.12    Procedures

12.16    Tax Based Upon Business Volume

12.20    General Business Tax

12.24    Special Business Tax

12.28    Display of Certificate

12.32    Enforcement of Business Tax

Chapter 12.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

12.04.010    Purpose.

12.04.020    Scope.

12.04.030    Exemption – Charitable.

12.04.040    Exemption – General.

12.04.050    Exemption – Dwelling unit.

12.04.060    Effect on other ordinances.

12.04.070    License Tax Collector.

12.04.080    Separate/multiple licenses.

12.04.090    Issuance of identification stickers.

12.04.100    Confidential information.

12.04.110    Appointment of tax.

12.04.120    Effect of administrative mistakes.

12.04.130    License nontransferable.

12.04.010 Purpose.
This title is enacted solely to raise revenue for municipal purposes through the licensing of the transaction and carrying on of business within the City, and to provide a penalty for the violation thereof and is not intended for regulation. (Gov. Code § 37101 and Business and Professions Code § 1600 et seq.) (Ord. 1791; Ord. 1509)

12.04.020 Scope.
Unless otherwise expressly exempted, this title applies to all manner of commercial activities, to include without limitation professions, trades, occupations and callings, whether or not carried on for profit.

12.04.030 Exemption – Charitable.
A. There shall be specifically exempt from the payment of any license tax those institutions or organizations which are conducted, managed or carried on wholly for the benefit of charitable purposes or from which no profit is derived either directly or indirectly, either as wages or gratuities or otherwise by an individual, firm or corporation; provided, that the exemption from payment of a license tax as required by this title shall not waive compliance with any and all other ordinances and regulations applicable to such exempt institution or organization.

B. There is further exempt from payment of any license tax any entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture whenever the receipts of such activity are to be appropriated to any church or school or to any religious or benevolent or charitable purpose and no salaries, wages or fees are paid in connection therewith.

C. Further, no license tax shall be required in connection with any entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture by any religious, charitable, fraternal, educational, military, State, County or municipal organization or association when the receipts of any such activity are to be appropriated for the purposes and objective for which such association or organization was formed and from which no profit is derived, either directly or indirectly by any individual, firm or corporation; provided, that the provisions of this code and all other ordinances and regulations of the City shall be complied with.

D. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to exempt any person, firm, organization or association from complying with the provisions of any ordinance of the City requiring a permit or approval from the City Council or from any officer to conduct, manage or carry on business activity.

12.04.040 Exemption – General.
Nothing in this title shall be deemed or constructed to apply to any person contacting and carrying on any business exempt by virtue of the Constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or the State of California from payment of such taxes as are herein prescribed.

12.04.050 Exemption – Dwelling unit.
A. A facility licensed under the California Community Care Facilities Act (Health and Safety Code Section 1500, et seq.) to provide care for six or fewer persons, exclusive of members of the household.

B. (Reserved).

12.04.060 Effect on other ordinances.
Persons required to pay a license tax for transacting and carrying on any business under the provisions of this title shall not be relieved from the payment of any other license tax or permit fee for the privilege of doing such business required under any other ordinance of this City, and shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of other ordinances.

12.04.070 License Tax Collector.
The City Manager shall designate, from time to time, a License Tax Collector who shall be responsible for the administration of this title. The License Tax Collector may make rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this title as may be necessary or desirable to aid in the enforcement of the provisions of this title.

12.04.080 Separate/multiple licenses.
A. A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or location of the business transacted and carried on.

B. A separate license must be obtained for each separate type of business, under different ownership, carried on at the same location.

C. If two separate types of businesses are carried on at the same location under one ownership, only the greater license tax shall be paid and the lesser license tax is hereby waived.

12.04.090 Issuance of identification stickers.
Whenever a tax imposed under the provisions of this title is measured by the number of vehicles, devices, machines, or other pieces of equipment used, or whenever the license tax is measured by the gross receipts from the operation of such items, the License Tax Collector shall issue only one license; provided, that the License Tax Collector shall issue for each tax period for which the license tax has been paid one identification sticker, tag, plate, or symbol for each item included in the measure of the tax or used in a business where the tax is measured by the gross receipts from such items.

12.04.100 Confidential information.
No person having access to or charge over the information and records obtained in the course of administrating this title shall disclose or release or allow the examination by any unauthorized third person of such information and records, in whole or in part, in abstract or particulars; except such information may be used in administering this title. Authorization allowing access to the information may be obtained from the City Manager or in accordance with a lawful order of court.

12.04.110 Appointment of tax.
A. None of the license taxes provided for in this title shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of the equal protection and due process clauses of the Constitution of the United States and the State of California.

B. A person who transacts business within the City from a fixed place of business or a fixed route shall pay the full license tax specified in this title, regardless of whether such person also conducts business outside the City.

C. A person who transacts business within the City but not from a fixed place of business or fixed route shall pay a portion of the license tax specified in this title computed on the ratio of the gross receipts attributed to business conducted within the City compared to the businesses’ total gross receipts.

12.04.120 Effect of administrative mistakes.
In no case shall any mistake made in the administering of this title prevent or prejudice any collection for the City of the amount actually due, together, with costs of collection, including reasonable attorney’s fees as fixed by the court. Nor shall any such mistake prevent or prejudice the prosecution of any person for the violation of any provisions of this title.

12.04.130 License nontransferable.
No license issued in accordance with this title shall be transferable; except, upon application and the paying of a $1.00 transfer fee, a license may be amended if:

A. The licensee intends to move the business to a location not designated in the license at which it may lawfully be conducted; or

B. The licensee intends to transfer the ownership of the business under circumstances such that the ownership shall be substantially similar after the transfer.

Chapter 12.08
DEFINITIONS
Sections:

12.08.010    Purpose.

12.08.015    Apartment complex.

12.08.020    Apartment house.

12.08.030    Business.

12.08.040    Commercial activity.

12.08.050    Contractor.

12.08.060    Delivery route.

12.08.070    Fixed place of business or established place of business.

12.08.080    Gross receipts.

12.08.090    Hotel.

12.08.100    Peddler.

12.08.110    Person.

12.08.120    Sale.

12.08.130    Solicitor.

12.08.140    Sworn statement.

12.08.010 Purpose.
For the purpose of imposing a business license tax, the definitions contained in this chapter shall apply, unless expressly provided otherwise.

12.08.015 Apartment complex.
An “apartment complex” business is a building or a group of buildings on one lot under single ownership, with at least one building containing three or more dwelling units which are offered for lease or rent. (Ord. 1569)

12.08.020 Apartment house.
“Apartment house” means any structure more than one story in height, or any portion of any such structure occupied, or designed, built or rented for occupation, as a home by three or more families, each living in a separate apartment and cooking within the structure.

12.08.030 Business.
“Business” includes professions, trades and occupations, and all and every kind of calling whether or not carried on for profit.

12.08.040 Commercial activity.
“Commercial activity” includes professions, trades and occupations, and all and every kind of calling whether or not carried on for profit.

12.08.050 Contractor.
“Contractor” is a person, firm, or copartnership, corporation, association or other organization, or any combination of any thereof, who for a fixed sum, price, fee, percentage, or other compensation other than wages undertakes with another for the construction, alteration, repair, addition to, or improvement of, any building, highway, road, railroad, excavation or other structure, project, development or improvement other than to personally, or any part thereof; provided, that the term “contractor” shall include subcontractors, but shall not include anyone who merely furnishes materials or supplies without fabricating into or consuming the same in the performance of the work of the contractor or as herein defined; provided further, that any owner providing materials and constructing building by day labor shall not be included with the term “contractor.”

12.08.060 Delivery route.
“Delivery route” means a delivery of articles of food by a person over a definite route of travel, serving regular customers and which route has been established for at least one year.

12.08.070 Fixed place of business or established place of business.
“Fixed place of business” or “established place of business” shall indicate a permanent store, office, or place where business is legally and regularly transacted from month to month in such a manner as a business of that nature is generally conducted and where circumstances show an intention to become an established and continuous part of the regular and legitimate business life of the City.

12.08.080 Gross receipts.
“Gross receipts” shall include the total amounts actually received or receivable for the performance of any act or service, of whatever nature it may be, for which a charge is made or credit allowed, whether or not such act or service is done as part of or in connection with the sale of materials, goods, wares or merchandise. Included in “gross receipts” shall be all receipts, cash, credits, and property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses whatsoever. Excluded from “gross receipts” shall be the following:

A. Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales;

B. Credit allowed on property accepted as part of the purchase price and which property may later be sold;

C. Any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer to the purchaser;

D. Such part of the sale price of property returned by purchasers upon recession of the contract of sale as is refunded either in case or by credit;

E. Amounts collected for others where the businesses acting as an agent or trustee to the extent that such amounts are paid to those for whom collected, provided the agent or trustee has furnished the collector with the names and addresses of the others and the amounts paid to them;

F. Receipts of refundable deposits, except that refundable deposits forfeited and taken into income of the business shall not be excluded.

12.08.090 Hotel.
“Hotel” means any structure, or any portion of a structure, including any lodging house, rooming house, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, public club, or private club, containing six or more guest rooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designated for occupancy, by six or more guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise. It does not include any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison, detention, or other building in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint.

12.08.100 Peddler.
“Peddler” means every person not having a regularly established place of business in the City and who travels from place to place or has a stand upon any public street, alley or other public place, doorway of any room or building, unenclosed or vacant lot or parcel of land, who sells or offers for sale any goods, wares or merchandise in his possession.

12.08.110 Person.
“Person” includes all domestic and foreign associations, corporations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, business or common law trusts, societies and individuals transacting and carrying on commercial activity in the City, other than as an employee.

12.08.120 Sale.
“Sale” includes the transfer, in any manner or by any means whatsoever, of title to property for a consideration; the serving, supplying or furnishing for a consideration of any property; and a transaction whereby the possession of property is transferred and the seller retains title as security for the payment of the price shall likewise be deemed a sale. The foregoing definition shall not be deemed to exclude any transaction which is, or which in effect, results in a sale within the contemplation of law.

12.08.130 Solicitor.
“Solicitor” means all persons, both principal or agent, who go from house to house, or to only one house, or upon any street, sidewalk, alley, plaza, or in any park or public place in the City, soliciting either by sample or otherwise the sale of goods, wares, merchandise, services, magazines, periodicals, or other publications, or subscriptions for the same, regularly published newspapers excepted, for themselves, or for firms which do or do not have an established place of business in the City or who offer to or distribute to any person any coupon, certificate, ticket or card which is redeemable in goods, wares, merchandise or services.

12.08.140 Sworn statement.
“Sworn statement” means an affidavit sworn to before a person authorized to take oaths, or a declaration or certification made under penalty of perjury.

Chapter 12.12
PROCEDURES
Sections:

12.12.010    Application.

12.12.020    Proof of other authority.

12.12.030    Term of license.

12.12.040    Determination of tax.

12.12.050    Payment of tax.

12.12.060    License tax deemed a debt.

12.12.070    Contents of license.

12.12.080    Replacement license.

12.12.090    License renewal.

12.12.100    Denial, suspension or revocation of license.

12.12.110    Claim of exemption.

12.12.120    Adjustment of burden on interstate commerce.

12.12.130    Appeal.

12.12.010 Application.
A person applying for a business license shall furnish to the License Tax Collector a sworn statement, upon a form provided by the Collector, setting forth without limitation the following information:

A. The exact nature of kind of business for which a license is requested;

B. The place where such business is to be carried on, and if the same is not to be carried on at any permanent place of business a description of the route and the places of residence of the owners of the business;

C. In the event that the application is made for the issuance of a license to a person doing business under a fictitious name, the application shall set forth the names and places of residence of those owning said business;

D. In the event that the application is made for the issuance of a license to a corporation or a partnership, the application shall set forth the names and places of residence of the officers or partners thereof;

E. In all cases where the amount of license tax to be paid is measured by gross receipts, number of tickets sold, proportion of intracity business or number of admissions, the application shall set forth such information as may be therein required and as may be necessary to determine the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant;

F. Any further information which the License Tax Collector may require to allow the issuance of the type of license applied for.

12.12.020 Proof of other authority.
A. The applicant must submit with his application proof of obtaining such other City permits, approvals and certificates as are necessary for the conduct of the applicant’s business.

B. If the applicant’s business requires a license, approval or permit from some public or private entity or person, other than the City, then proof thereof must be submitted at the time of filing the application for the business license.

12.12.030 Term of license.
A. No license shall be issued for any period of time other than that which is provided in this title.

B. All licenses issued on an annual basis shall expire on December 31st of the year in which such license is issued. An applicant for an annual license issued during January, February or March shall pay the full license tax. An applicant for an annual license issued during April, May or June shall pay three-fourths of the full license tax. An applicant for an annual license issued during July, August or September shall pay one-half of the full license tax. An applicant for an annual license issued during October, November or December shall pay one-fourth of the full license tax.

C. An applicant for a daily license shall pay the full license tax specified herein, in advance.

D. A monthly license shall expire the last day of the calendar month during which the license is issued. The applicant for a monthly license shall pay the full fee when issued.

E. Quarterly licenses shall expire on the last day of March, June, September or December of the quarter in which such license is issued. An applicant for a quarterly license shall pay the full license tax whenever issued.

12.12.040 Determination of tax.
A. The License Tax Collector shall determine the amount of the license tax or estimated license tax to be paid.

B. If the License Tax Collector is not satisfied with the information supplied in statements or applications filed, and after the License Tax Collector has demanded additional information from the applicant, the License Tax Collector may determine the amount of license tax due by means of such information as the License Tax Collector may be able to obtain.

C. When the License Tax Collector makes a determination, the License Tax Collector shall give a notice of the amount to the applicant by either serving it personally or by depositing the notice in the United States Post Office at the City of Coronado, California, postage prepaid, addressed to the person applying for the license at the address noted on the application.

D. In the event that an annual, quarterly or monthly license is applied for during the term for such license, as described in CMC 12.12.030, then the license tax or established license tax otherwise due shall be reduced in proportion remaining on such term.

12.12.050 Payment of tax.
All persons who are required to be licensed by this title shall see that the proper tax as required is paid to the License Tax Collector, in advance of the issuance of the license. All license taxes shall be paid in the lawful money of the United States at the Office of the License Tax Collector. There shall be no refund of a license tax paid.

12.12.060 License tax deemed a debt.
The amount of any license tax and penalty imposed by the provisions of this title shall be deemed a debt to the City. An action may be commenced in the name of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any delinquent license tax and penalties, with costs of suit, including reasonable attorney’s fees, to be fixed by the court.

12.12.070 Contents of license.
The business license issued by the License Tax Collector shall contain without limitation the following information:

A. The name of the person to whom the license is issued;

B. The business licensed;

C. The place where such business is to be transacted and carried on;

D. The date of expiration of such license;

E. A statement to the effect that the license authorizes the licensee to transact and carry on only the business licensed thereby at the location or in the manner designated in such license;

F. A statement of the amount of the license tax paid; and

G. Such other information as may be necessary for the enforcement and administration of this title.

12.12.080 Replacement license.
A replacement license may be issued by the License Tax Collector to replace any license previously issued hereunder, which has been lost or destroyed. The licensee shall file a statement justifying the issuance of a replacement license together with a replacement fee of $1.00.

12.12.090 License renewal.
An application for the renewal of an existing business license shall be treated as an application for a new license; except, no license shall be issued to any person who at the time of applying therefor is indebted to the City for any delinquent license taxes, unless such person with the consent of the License Tax Collector enters into a written agreement with the City through the License Tax Collector to pay such delinquent taxes plus seven percent simple annual interest upon the unpaid balance, in monthly installments or more often extending over a period of not to exceed one year. The execution of such agreement shall not prevent the prior accrual of penalties on unpaid balances at the rate provided hereinabove, but no penalty shall accrue on account of taxes included in the agreement and full performance thereof.

12.12.100 Denial, suspension or revocation of license.
The issuance of a business license in accordance with this title shall be denied, suspended or revoked upon one or more of the following grounds:

A. The application has not been made as prescribed; or

B. The prescribed tax has not been paid; or

C. The applicant is indebted to the City for a delinquent license tax or penalty; or

D. The activity for which the license is sought is contrary to local, State or Federal law.

12.12.110 Claim of exemption.
A. Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to the provisions of this title shall file a sworn statement with the License Tax Collector stating the facts upon which the exemption is claimed. In the absence of such statement substantiating the claim, such persons shall be liable for the payment of the license tax imposed by this title.

B. The License Tax Collector shall, upon a property showing contained in a sworn statement, issue a license to such person claiming an exemption under this section without payment to the City of the license tax.

C. Upon giving proper notice and a reasonable opportunity for response to the licensee, the License Tax Collector may revoke any license exemption granted in accordance with this title upon finding that the licensee is not entitled to the exemption as provided.

12.12.120 Adjustment of burden on interstate commerce.
A. In any case where a license tax is believed by the licensee or applicant for a license to place an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of such constitutional clauses, the licensee or applicant may apply to the License Tax Collector by a sworn, written statement for an adjustment of the tax setting forth the reasons therefor.

B. Such application must be made within six months after the subject license tax became due.

C. The License Tax Collector shall give notice of the amount assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office at the City of Coronado, California, postage prepaid, addressed to the person so assessed at the address shown in the application.

12.12.130 Appeal.
A. A licensee or applicant for license may appeal to the City Manager any action taken by the License Tax Collector under this title by filing a sworn statement within 10 days of such action setting forth the grounds for the appeal.

B. After giving notice and a reasonable opportunity for response to the licensee/applicant, the City Manager may affirm, overrule or modify the action of the License Tax Collector, giving notice of such action to the licensee/applicant either personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office at the City of Coronado, California, postage prepaid, addressed to the licensee/applicant at the address shown in the application.

C. A licensee or applicant for licensee may appeal to the City Council any action taken by the City Manager under the authority of this title by filing a sworn statement and request for hearing with the City Clerk within 10 days of notice of the action by the City Manager.

D. Upon giving notice and a reasonable opportunity for hearing to the licensee/applicant, the City Council may overrule, affirm or modify the action taken by the City Manager.

E. The City Council shall give notice of its action by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office at the City of Coronado, California, postage prepaid, addressed to the licensee/applicant at the address shown in the application.

Chapter 12.16
TAX BASED UPON BUSINESS VOLUME
Sections:

12.16.010    Purpose.

12.16.020    Applicant’s estimate of basis.

12.16.030    Determination of estimated license tax.

12.16.040    End of term adjustment.

12.16.050    Penalty for underestimate by applicant.

12.16.060    Amended estimate.

12.16.010 Purpose.
A. This chapter is intended to set out the procedures to be used when the license tax is based upon the amount of gross receipts, the number of tickets sold, the proportions of intracity business or the number of admissions granted after a business license is issued in accordance with this title.

B. The applicant shall pay an estimated license tax in advance of the issuance of the business license. At the end of the term of the license, the actual license tax shall be determined with an adjustment being made in accordance with this chapter.

12.16.020 Applicant’s estimate of basis.
Where the amount of the license tax is based upon the amount of gross receipts, the number of tickets sold, the proportion of intracity business or the number of admissions granted, the applicant shall include with the application an estimate of such basis for the period covered by the license for which application is made.

12.16.030 Determination of estimated license tax.
The determination by the License Tax Collector of the estimated license tax may be based upon the gross receipts, tickets sold, proportion of intracity business or number of admissions granted during the period preceding the issuance of the license for which the application is made.

12.16.040 End of term adjustment.
A. At the end of the license period, or upon the sooner cessation of business, the applicant/licensee shall file with the License Tax Collector a declaration under oath stating the gross receipts, tickets sold, proportion of intracity business or admissions granted during the license term.

B. At the end of the term of the license, the License Tax Collector shall determine the license tax then owing.

C. If the amount of the payment of the estimated license tax is less than the license tax computed at the end of the term, then the difference shall be due from the licensee immediately upon notice to the licensee of such determination.

D. If the amount of the estimated license tax is less than the license tax determined at the end of the term, then an adjustment may be made by cash refund to the licensee or adjustment of the estimated license tax for a subsequent license, as requested by the licensee. A cash refund shall be made at the end of the calendar year during which the license was issued.

12.16.050 Penalty for underestimate by applicant.
In the event that the actual gross receipts, tickets sold, proportion of intracity business or admissions granted exceeds the applicant’s estimate by more than 30 percent, then the licensee shall be liable for the amount of the license tax computed at the end of the term with a credit for the amount of the estimated tax paid plus an amount equal to 50 percent of the amount of the license tax computed at the end of the term.

12.16.060 Amended estimate.
A. A licensee may amend his estimate of basis filed in accordance with this chapter once during the term of the license to increase the amount of the estimated basis.

B. The amended estimate must be filed with the License Tax Collector prior to the expiration of one-half of the license term.

C. The amended estimate shall be accompanied by a payment of any increase in the estimated license tax based upon the amended estimate.

Chapter 12.20
GENERAL BUSINESS TAX
Sections:

12.20.010    General tax.

12.20.020    Procedure.

12.20.030    List.

12.20.010 General tax.
Every person conducting or carrying on a commercial activity within the City requiring a business license and for which a business license tax is not otherwise specified in this title shall pay an annual business license tax based upon gross receipts determined by reference to the following schedule:

Gross Receipts

Fee

Less than $15,000

$25.00

$15,000 but less than $50,000

$50.00

$50,000 or more

$87.00

12.20.020 Procedure.
The general license tax based upon gross receipts shall be administered in accordance with the provisions of this title.

12.20.030 List.
The License Tax Collector may maintain a list which includes, without limitation, businesses which fall within the general license tax provision of this title.

Chapter 12.24
SPECIAL BUSINESS TAX
Sections:

12.24.010    Wrestling, boxing, dance halls, ballrooms, etc.

12.24.020    Bowling, pool, cards, etc.

12.24.030    Vending machines.

12.24.040    Weighing and stamp vending machines.

12.24.050    Mechanical musical instruments.

12.24.060    Pinball, amusement machines with replay feature.

12.24.080    Laundry or cleaning and dyeing routes having an established location outside the City.

12.24.090    Wholesale business located outside the City.

12.24.100    Contractors.

12.24.110    Bankrupt stock.

12.24.120    Hotels, motels, courts and apartment hotels.

12.24.130    Printed advertising.

12.24.140    Advertising vehicles.

12.24.150    Taxicab, sightseeing.

12.24.160    Vehicles let without drivers.

12.24.170    Vehicles let with drivers.

12.24.180    Driving schools.

12.24.190    Junk dealers.

12.24.200    Pawnbrokers.

12.24.210    Solicitors.

12.24.220    Searchlights.

12.24.230    Auctioneer.

12.24.240    Class A auction.

12.24.250    Class B auction.

12.24.260    Class C auction.

12.24.270    Class A dance.

12.24.280    Class B dance.

12.24.290    Transient business.

12.24.300    Peddling.

12.24.310    Food delivery.

12.24.010 Wrestling, boxing, dance halls, ballrooms, etc.
Every person conducting, managing, carrying on or operating a wrestling match, dance hall, ballroom, or other place of public entertainment for which an admission fee is charged, collected or received, shall pay a license tax of $0.01 for each ticket sold, payable monthly on or before the tenth day of the succeeding month.

12.24.020 Bowling, pool, cards, etc.
A. Bowling Alleys. For bowling alleys, skee ball alleys and box ball alleys the license tax is $5.00 per quarter per alley.

B. Pool Tables. For pool or billiards tables the license tax is $5.00 per quarter per table.

C. Card Tables. For card tables the license tax is $5.00 per quarter per table.

D. Shuffleboards. For each shuffleboard the license tax is $5.00 per quarter.

E. Shooting Galleries. For conducting a shooting gallery the license tax shall be $5.00 per lane per quarter.

12.24.030 Vending machines.
For every person owning, leasing or controlling vending machines with vend tobacco, cigars, cigarettes or other forms of tobacco, candy or other types of merchandise, the license tax shall be as follows: Machines operated by the deposit of a coin or coins of the value of $0.05 or less, deposited in any slot, crevice or other openings, the sum of $3.00 per year per machine; by the deposit of a coin or coins in excess of $0.05, the sum of $5.00 per year per machine.

12.24.040 Weighing and stamp vending machines.
For every person owning, leasing or controlling a weighing or stamp vending machine for hire, the license tax shall be the sum of $3.00 per year per machine.

12.24.050 Mechanical musical instruments.
For every person maintaining or operating or permitting to be maintained or operated upon his premises, which premises are open to the public, any mechanical musical instrument or other apparatus or device designed or constructed for the purpose of producing or reproducing any musical tones, the operation of which is permitted, controlled or made possible by the deposit or placing of any coin, plate, disc, slug or key into any crevice or opening, the license tax shall be the sum of $15.00 per year per machine.

12.24.060 Pinball, amusement machines with replay feature.
For each pinball and other coin-operated game of amusement having a replay feature, conducted, managed, carried on or controlled in the City, and available or open to the general public, the license tax shall be the sum of $25.00 per quarter per machine.

12.24.080 Laundry or cleaning and dyeing routes having an established location outside the City.
Every person owning or operating a route for a laundry, cleaning or dyeing service and not having a fixed place of business within the City shall pay an annual license tax of $150.00 per truck operated within the City.

12.24.090 Wholesale business located outside the City.
Every person, firm or corporation, owning, operating or conducting any wholesale business outside the City, and who carries on or engages in the business of selling or delivering to retailers the goods, wares, merchandise or services of said business on the City, directly or indirectly, individually or by agent, representative or otherwise, shall pay an annual license tax of $68.00.

12.24.100 Contractors.
Every person carrying on the business of contractor shall pay an annual license tax of $58.00. (Ord. 1613)

12.24.110 Bankrupt stock.
For conducting a sale of goods, wares, or merchandise purchased of any bankrupt estate in the City, and offered for resale by a purchaser thereof, the license tax shall be the sum of $58.00 per day, payable in advance; provided, that the foregoing provisions of this section shall not apply to judicial sales or to sales made by executors or administrators of the estates of deceased persons, or to sales made upon execution, or by virtue of any process issued by any court of competent jurisdiction, nor to any sale made by any public officer in his official capacity, required to be made under the laws of the United States or of the State of California, or under any ordinance of the City.

12.24.120 Hotels, motels, courts and apartment hotels.
A. Every person conducting, managing or carrying on the business of hotels, motels, courts or apartment hotels shall pay an annual license tax in the amount of $46.00 or $3.00 per rental unit, whichever sum is greater.

B. None of the businesses mentioned in subsection A of this section shall pay any license tax for conducting, as a part of their business, dining rooms, cigar stands, soda fountains, dormitories, or annexes operated in connection therewith.

C. The tax provided for in this section shall apply to each separate hotel, motel, court or apartment hotel.

12.24.130 Printed advertising.
Every person conducting the business of and/or distributing posters, dodgers or printed advertising of any kind shall pay a quarterly license tax of $114.00.

12.24.140 Advertising vehicles.
Every person conducting, managing or carrying on the business of advertising by means of any vehicle containing amplifiers, phonograph loudspeaker, microphones, broadcasting radio, or a device for public address, and/or carrying advertising signs and which is used for announcing or advertising in the City shall pay a daily license tax of $24.00.

12.24.150 Taxicab, sightseeing.
Every person conducting, managing or carrying on the business of running or operating any taxicab or sightseeing automobiles with drivers shall pay an annual license tax of $112.00 per vehicle. Notwithstanding CMC 12.12.050, that portion of license tax corresponding to any full quarter of the year that any taxicab or sightseeing automobile is eliminated from use may be refunded. (Ord. 1970 § 1, 2005)

12.24.160 Vehicles let without drivers.
Every person conducting, managing or carrying on the business of letting the use of any motor vehicle without a driver shall pay an annual license tax of $54.00 per vehicle.

12.24.170 Vehicles let with drivers.
Every person conducting, managing or carrying on the business of letting the use of any limousine with a driver for the same shall pay an annual license tax of $54.00 per vehicle.

12.24.180 Driving schools.
Every person conducting a school teaching driving of motor vehicles shall pay an annual license tax of $46.00.

12.24.190 Junk dealers.
Junk dealers shall pay an annual license tax of $577.00.

12.24.200 Pawnbrokers.
Pawnbrokers shall pay a quarterly license tax of $114.00.

12.24.210 Solicitors.
Every person engaged in the business of a solicitor shall pay a monthly license tax of $12.00. The fact that a solicitor is employed by a business already licensed under this title shall not reduce the amount of applicability of the license tax on a solicitor.

12.24.220 Searchlights.
Every person who conducts the business of advertising by means of a searchlight or searchlights shall pay a daily license tax of $24.00.

12.24.230 Auctioneer.
Every person conducting, managing or carrying on the business of an auctioneer shall pay an annual license tax of $75.00.

12.24.240 Class A auction.
Every person conducting, managing or carrying on a class A auction shall pay a monthly license tax of $75.00.

12.24.250 Class B auction.
Every person conducting, managing or carrying on a class B auction shall pay a daily license tax of $10.00.

12.24.260 Class C auction.
Every person conducting, managing or carrying on a class C auction shall pay a monthly license tax of $75.00.

12.24.270 Class A dance.
Every person conducting a class A dance within the City shall pay a quarterly licensing tax of $75.00 per quarter or $300.00 per year.

12.24.280 Class B dance.
Every person conducting a class B dance within the City shall pay a quarterly licensing tax of $50.00 or $200.00 per year.

12.24.290 Transient business.
Every person conducting, managing, carrying on or operating a business as a transient shall pay a monthly license tax of $100.00 for the first month or fraction thereof and $80.00 per month, or fraction thereof, for every month thereafter, plus, in all cases, $1.00 per month for each $100.00 of retail inventory value of goods, wares, and merchandise held by the transient merchant to be sold or exhibited within the City.

12.24.300 Peddling.
Every person who conducts the business of peddling shall pay a quarterly license tax of $79.00 for each person and vehicle utilized in such activity. The license fee is waived for disabled veterans, commercial travelers clearing wholesale, and those engaged in taking orders for goods to be shipped through interstate commerce.

12.24.310 Food delivery.
Any person maintaining a regular route of established deliveries of food products shall pay an annual license tax of $114.00 per person or vehicle.

Chapter 12.28
DISPLAY OF CERTIFICATE
Sections:

12.28.010    Posting of license.

12.28.020    Carrying license.

12.28.030    Display of identifying stickers.

12.28.040    Exhibiting licenses on request.

12.28.050    Display after revocation.

12.28.060    Late application – Penalty.

12.28.070    Enforcement officer.

12.28.080    Director of Police Services.

12.28.090    Inspectors.

12.28.100    Investigation of applicant.

12.28.010 Posting of license.
Every licensee transacting and carrying on a business at a fixed place of business within the City shall keep the license posted, while in force, in some conspicuous place upon the premises where the business is carried on.

12.28.020 Carrying license.
Any licensee transacting and carrying on business but not operating at a fixed place of business within the City shall keep the license upon his person at all times while transacting and carrying on the business for which it is issued.

12.28.030 Display of identifying stickers.
Whenever identifying stickers, tags, plates or other symbols have been issued for each vehicle, device, machine or other piece of equipment included in the measure of the license tax, the person to whom such stickers, tags, plates or symbols have been issued shall keep firmly affixed upon each vehicle, device, machine or piece of equipment the identifying sticker, tag, plate, or symbol which has been issued therefor at such locations as are designated by the License Tax Collector. Such sticker, tag, plate or symbol shall not be removed from any vehicle, device, machine or piece of equipment kept in use during the period for which the sticker, tag, plate or symbol is used.

12.28.040 Exhibiting licenses on request.
A licensee shall produce and exhibit the license whenever requested to do so by any officer or employee of the City authorized to issue licenses, inspect premises or collect license taxes.

12.28.050 Display after revocation.
It is unlawful for any person to conduct a commercial activity under any license which has been suspended or revoked. No license or evidence thereof shall be exhibited or kept in a conspicuous place by any licensee when the license tax or estimated license tax for such license is delinquent or the license has been revoked or the license has expired.

12.28.060 Late application – Penalty.
In any case where the applicant has failed for a period of 30 days to obtain a business license required by this title, there shall be added to and collected, a penalty equal to 10 percent of the tax for each additional 30-day period or fraction thereof after the expiration of the 30-day period until such applicant obtains a business license.

12.28.070 Enforcement officer.
A. It shall be the duty of the License Tax Collector to enforce the provisions of this title and the Director of Police Services shall render such assistance in the enforcement hereof as from time to time may be required by the License Tax Collector.

B. The License Tax Collector shall identify persons owing delinquent license taxes and proceed to collect the same.

12.28.080 Director of Police Services.
The Director of Police Services and any authorized officer or employee of the City shall make investigations in connection with this title and shall have the right to enter, free of charge or restraint, during business hours, any place or commercial activity for which a license is required under this title or for which a license has been issued, and demand the exhibition of such license, examine the same, ascertain the tax due in connection therewith and collect any tax due, and otherwise enforce any provision of this title.

12.28.090 Inspectors.
The Director of Police Services and all police officers authorized by the Director shall have the powers to make arrests for the violation of any of the provisions of this title and together with the License Tax Collector recommend that complaints be filed in a court of competent jurisdiction.

12.28.100 Investigation of applicant.
The License Tax Collector may direct that an investigation be conducted of any applicant and the applicant’s contemplated business prior to the issuing of any license.

Chapter 12.32
ENFORCEMENT OF BUSINESS TAX
Sections:

12.32.010    License required – Penalty.

12.32.020    Continuing violation.

12.32.030    Effect of conviction.

12.32.040    Evidence of conducting commercial activity.

12.32.050    Penalty for nonpayment.

12.32.010 License required – Penalty.
A. Any person who transacts or carries on any commercial activity within the City without first having procured a license from the City in accordance with this title to include paying the license tax thereon or who knowingly and intentionally misrepresents to any officer or employee of this City any material fact in procuring such license or regarding the operation of the business in accordance with such license shall be deemed guilty of an infraction.

B. This title shall not be construed to require any person to obtain a license prior to doing business within the City if such requirement conflicts with applicable statutes of the United States or the State of California.

12.32.020 Continuing violation.
The carrying on of a commercial activity without having first procured a license, including payment of the license tax thereon, or conducting a commercial activity in light of a material misrepresentation of fact knowingly made to an officer or employee of the City regarding such commercial activity shall constitute a separate violation of this title for each and every day that the same is so carried on.

12.32.030 Effect of conviction.
A. A conviction and punishment of any person for conducting a commercial activity in violation of this title shall not excuse or exempt such person from the payment of any license tax and penalty due and unpaid at the time of such conviction.

B. A conviction shall be prima facie evidence in any action to collect any tax or penalty that such tax and penalty are due under this title.

C. A conviction shall be prima facie evidence toward a revocation of an existing license and the denial of an application for license.

D. Nothing in this section shall prevent a criminal prosecution for any violation of the provisions of this title.

12.32.040 Evidence of conducting commercial activity.
When any person shall by use of signs, circulars, cards, telephone books or newspapers advertise, hold out, or represent that he is in business in the City, or when any person holds an active license or permit issued by a governmental agency indicating that he is in business in the City, and such person fails to deny by sworn statement given to the License Tax Collector that he is conducting a business in the City, after being requested to do so by the License Tax Collector, then these facts shall be considered prima facie evidence that such person is conducting a commercial activity within the City.

12.32.050 Penalty for nonpayment.
A. Daily Licenses. Any daily license tax unpaid, in part or in whole, when due, will have the balance due doubled every three months until paid.

B. Monthly and Quarterly Licenses. Any monthly or quarterly license tax unpaid, in part or in whole, when due, shall have added thereto a penalty equal to 25 percent of the amount thereof every six months until paid in full.

C. Annual License. Any annual license unpaid, in part or in whole, when due, shall, 30 days thereafter, have added thereto a penalty equal to 10 percent of the amount thereof every three months until paid in full.

Title 13
BUSINESS CERTIFICATES
Chapters:

13.10    General Provisions

Chapter 13.10
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

13.10.010    Purpose.

13.10.020    Scope.

13.10.030    Definitions.

13.10.040    Business certificate – Required.

13.10.050    Business certificate – Fee.

13.10.060    Business certificate – Proof of other authority.

13.10.070    Business certificate – Evidence of doing business.

13.10.080    Business certificate – Exemptions.

13.10.090    Business certificate – Exemption to fees.

13.10.100    Business certificate – General application procedures.

13.10.110    Business certificate – Issuance and renewal.

13.10.120    Business certificate – Term.

13.10.130    Business certificate – Production at request.

13.10.140    Business certificate – Nontransferable and nonrefundable.

13.10.150    Business certificate – Duplicate.

13.10.160    Business certificate – Denial.

13.10.170    Right to revoke.

13.10.180    Grounds for denial or revocation.

13.10.190    Business certificate – Appeal of denial.

13.10.200    Withholding a business certificate.

13.10.210    Constitutional apportionment.

13.10.220    Violations and penalties.

13.10.010 Purpose.
A. This title is enacted to protect the public interest, health, welfare and safety by establishing a regulatory mechanism where the City may review all new and existing businesses operating in the City, ownership and management of specific types of businesses, maintain an accurate record of businesses conducting business in the City, and to ensure all businesses are made aware of and conform to all City zoning, fire and public safety ordinances, rules and regulations by requiring them to register and procure a business certificate from the City.

B. This title is also intended to streamline the business certificate, home occupation permit and business occupancy permit processes into one business certificate registration system.

C. This title is also intended to protect the interests of legitimate businesses in the City from unfair competition with businesses operating in violation of Federal, State and local laws.

D. This title is not intended to impose any form of taxation on the business community nor to collect in fees more money than is necessary to recover the administrative costs. This title is not designed to raise revenue, nor is it a substitute for land use regulations. (Ord. 2074 § 2, 2018)

13.10.020 Scope.
Unless otherwise expressly exempted, this title applies to all manner of commercial activities to include, without limitation, professions, trades, occupations and callings, whether or not carried on for profit. This includes, but is not limited to, apartment complexes, apartment houses, contractors, delivery route operators, hotels, peddlers, and solicitors. (Ord. 2074 § 2, 2018)

13.10.030 Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this title, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

A. “Applicant” means a person who has applied for, but not obtained, a business certificate or renewal required by this title.

B. “Application” means a written request made to the City by the applicant for a business certificate or renewal required by this title.

C. “Business” means professions, trades and occupations, and all and every kind of calling, whether or not carried on for profit. For purposes of this title, a business does not include the renting of two or fewer residential dwelling units.

D. “Business certificate” means a certificate issued pursuant to this title by which each business owner having a business, or doing business in the City, is required to provide general information to the City.

E. “City” means the City of Coronado.

F. “Commercial activity” means professions, trades and occupations, and all and every kind of calling, whether or not carried on for profit.

G. “Director” means a person designated by the City Manager who shall be responsible for the administration of this title. The Director may make rules, regulations, procedures and guidelines consistent with the provisions of this title as may be necessary or desirable to aid in the enforcement of the provisions of this title.

H. “Fixed place of business” or “established place of business” means a permanent store, office, or place where business is legally and regularly transacted from month to month in such a manner as a business of that nature is generally conducted and where circumstances show an intention to become an established and continuous part of the regular and legitimate business life of the City.

I. “Peddler” means every person not having a regularly established place of business in the City and who travels from place to place or has a stand upon any public street, alley or other public place, doorway of any room or building, unenclosed or vacant lot or parcel of land, who sells or offers for sale any goods, wares, or merchandise in his possession.

J. “Person” means all domestic and foreign associations, corporations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, business or common law trusts, and societies and individuals transacting and carrying on commercial activity in the City, other than as an employee.

K. “Sale” includes the transfer, in any manner or by any means whatsoever, of title to property for a consideration; the serving, supplying or furnishing for a consideration of any property; and a transaction whereby the possession of property is transferred and the seller retains title as security for the payment of the price shall likewise be deemed a sale. The foregoing definition shall not be deemed to exclude any transaction which is, or which in effect, results in a sale within the contemplation of law.

L. “Solicitor” means all persons, both principal or agent, who go from house to house, or to only one house, or upon any street, sidewalk, alley, plaza, or in any park or public place in the City, soliciting either by sample or otherwise the sale of goods, wares, merchandise, services, magazines, periodicals, or other publications, or subscriptions for the same, regularly published newspapers excepted, for themselves, or for firms which do or do not have an established place of business in the City or who offer to or distribute to any person any coupon, certificate, ticket, or card which is redeemable in goods, wares, merchandise, or services.

M. “Sworn statement” means an affidavit sworn to before a person authorized to take oaths, or a declaration or certification made under penalty of perjury. (Ord. 2074 § 2, 2018)

13.10.040 Business certificate – Required.
A. No person shall conduct any business in the City without first having obtained a business certificate, paid the applicable business certificate fee and complied with any and all applicable provisions of this code.

B. A separate business certificate shall be obtained for each business location and for each separate type of business at the same location. Each certificate shall authorize the holder to transact and carry on only the business certified at a given location.

C. A new business certificate shall be required whenever:

1. There is a change of business name;

2. There is a change of business ownership;

3. There is a change of physical location; or

4. There is a change of the type or nature of business. (Ord. 2074 § 2, 2018)

13.10.050 Business certificate – Fee.
A. At the time of application for a business certificate, the applicant shall pay a fee for the processing and issuing of the certificate in an amount established by City Council resolution.

B. When a business license fee is imposed upon any business pursuant to this title and such business is conducted at one or more fixed places of business and one or more branch establishments, the fee shall be computed as if each fixed place of business and branch establishment is separate and independent.

C. The business license fee is not a revenue-raising device, but shall bear a reasonable relationship to the costs incurred by the City in reviewing, processing and acting upon the application. (Ord. 2074 § 2, 2018)

13.10.060 Business certificate – Proof of other authority.
A. The applicant may be required to submit proof of obtaining such other Federal, State, County or City permits, approvals and licenses as are necessary for the conduct of the applicant’s business.

B. If the applicant’s business requires a license, approval or permit from some public or private entity or person, then proof thereof may be required at the time of filing the application for the business certificate. (Ord. 2074 § 2, 2018)

13.10.070 Business certificate – Evidence of doing business.
When a person by use of signs, circulars, cards, telephone book, newspapers, or other form of advertisements holds out, or represents that such person is conducting business in the City, or when a person holds an active license or permit issued by a government agency indicating that such person is in business in the City, then these facts shall be considered prima facie evidence that such person is conducting a business in the City for purposes of this title. (Ord. 2074 § 2, 2018)

13.10.080 Business certificate – Exemptions.
A. Civic groups, service clubs or social organizations, persons renting two or fewer residential dwelling units, casual workers such as babysitters, tutors, music teachers and the like shall be exempt from the requirement to obtain a business certificate.

B. Businesses which are exempt from the payment of fees or taxes to a municipal corporation by operation of the Constitution or statutes of the State of California or the United States shall be exempt from the requirement to obtain a business certificate. (Ord. 2074 § 2, 2018)

13.10.090 Business certificate – Exemption to fees.
A. Charitable organizations meeting the conditions listed below are subject to the requirement to obtain a permit but shall be exempt from the payment of the certificate fee; provided, that the exemption from payment of a business certificate fee shall not waive compliance with any and all other ordinances and regulations applicable to such exempt institution or organization. The payment of the certificate fee will not be required to conduct, manage or carry on any business, occupation or activity from any institution or organization which is conducted, managed or carried on wholly for the benefit of charitable purposes or from which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by any individual, firm or corporation.

B. There is further exemption from payment of any business certificate fee for any entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture whenever the gross receipts of such activity are to be appropriated to any church or school or to any religious or benevolent or charitable purpose and no salaries, wages or fees are paid in connection therewith; provided, that the provisions of this code and all other ordinances and regulations of the City shall be complied with.

C. Further, no business license registration fee shall be required in connection with any entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture by any religious, charitable, fraternal, educational, military, State, County, or municipal organization or association when the receipts of any such activity are to be appropriated for the purposes and objective for which such association or organization was formed and from which no profit is derived, either directly or indirectly, by any individual, firm or corporation; provided, that the provisions of this code and all other ordinances and regulations of the City shall be complied with.

D. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to exempt any person, firm, organization, or association from complying with the provisions of any ordinance of the City requiring a permit or approval from the City Council or from any officer to conduct, manage, or carry on business activity. (Ord. 2074 § 2, 2018)

13.10.100 Business certificate – General application procedures.
A. Applications for a business certificate shall be filed with the City and shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Completion of an application on the form designated by the City and signed by the applicant under penalty of perjury;

2. Applications for new business certificates and business certificate renewals shall be filed a minimum of 30 days prior to the date required for issuance of the certificate;

3. Payment of the applicable filing fee; and

4. Such other information as may be required for the City.

B. The City shall formulate and publish “The City of Coronado Business Certificate Guidelines.” The Director shall have the authority to change, update, and revise the guidelines as necessary in order to implement the provisions of this title.

C. A business certificate application may be reviewed by any City department or any governmental agency to determine if the business operations and premises to be occupied meet the requirements of Federal, State or local laws. The Director may also refer to any governmental agency any information submitted by any person subject to the provisions of this title in connection with the conduct of a business regulated, or supervised, or otherwise the concern of any such agency, including agencies concerned with health regulations, zoning conformance, fire safety, police considerations, or any other safeguard of the public interest. Failure to comply with conditions required by other agency review shall result in revocation of the certificate once it is granted. (Ord. 2074 § 2, 2018)

13.10.110 Business certificate – Issuance and renewal.
A. No certificate shall be issued until an application for a business certificate has been completed and filed with the City, all business certificate fees are paid, and all City officers or departments required to investigate or review the application or inspect the premises or facilities to be occupied or used have approved of such issuance.

B. Except as otherwise provided in this title, when an applicant submits a timely business certificate renewal application and pays the renewal processing fee as set by resolution of the City Council, the City shall renew the business certificate, to be effective upon the expiration of the old business certificate.

C. All certificates shall be renewed not later than 30 days after expiration. Renewal is the obligation of the business certificate holder. (Ord. 2074 § 2, 2018)

13.10.120 Business certificate – Term.
All business certificates shall be issued for the calendar year or portion remaining in the calendar year. All business certificates shall be required to be renewed on or before January 1st of each calendar year. (Ord. 2074 § 2, 2018)

13.10.130 Business certificate – Production at request.
Any person engaging in business, whether or not at a fixed location or branch establishment in the City, shall have in their possession and be able to produce a copy of said business certificate if requested to do so by a City of Coronado employee in the course of their official duties. (Ord. 2074 § 2, 2018)

13.10.140 Business certificate – Nontransferable and nonrefundable.
A. No business certificate applied for or issued pursuant to this title shall be transferable or refundable.

B. The assignment of or attempt to assign any business certificate pursuant to this title is unlawful and any such assignment or attempt to assign a business certificate shall render the certificate null and void. (Ord. 2074 § 2, 2018)

13.10.150 Business certificate – Duplicate.
A duplicate business certificate may be issued by the City to replace any business certificate previously issued under this title which has been lost or destroyed, upon the certificate holder filing a sworn statement attesting to such fact and, at the time of filing such statement, paying a duplicate business certificate fee as determined by the Administrative Services Director. (Ord. 2074 § 2, 2018)

13.10.160 Business certificate – Denial.
Any person denied a business certificate shall be fully advised, in writing, of the grounds for such a denial. (Ord. 2074 § 2, 2018)

13.10.170 Right to revoke.
A. Every certificate granted under this title is granted and accepted by all parties with the express understanding that the City Council may revoke the certificate if it is in the best interest of the health, welfare and safety of the public to do so and grounds for such revocation exist.

B. Before a certificate may be revoked, the City Council must hold a public hearing with the notice of the time and place of the public hearing and the reason or reasons for the hearing given to the certificate holder. (Ord. 2074 § 2, 2018)

13.10.180 Grounds for denial or revocation.
A certificate required by this title may be denied or revoked, pursuant to this title, upon one or more of the following grounds:

A. Proper application as prescribed in this title has not been made or information submitted is inaccurate or incomplete;

B. The fee for such certificate has not been paid;

C. Delinquent certificate fees have not been paid;

D. The conduct of the business is contrary to local, State or Federal law;

E. Information provided on the application is proved false. (Ord. 2074 § 2, 2018)

13.10.190 Business certificate – Appeal of denial.
A. Any person aggrieved by the decision of an administrative officer or agency with respect to the issuance or refusal to issue a certificate may appeal that decision to the City Manager within 30 days of the date of the denial or the date of issuance of the certificate. The appeal must be in writing and filed with the City Clerk. Following the filing of an appeal, the City Manager or designee must notify the appellant of a time and place for a hearing to review the appeal.

B. If the person is not satisfied with the decision of the City Manager, the person may appeal to the City Council within 30 calendar days of receipt of the notice of the City Manager’s decision by filing a written appeal with the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall fix a time and place for hearing the appeal within 30 calendar days of the filing of the appeal if possible and provide the appellant with sufficient notice by serving the appellant personally or by sending the notice by registered mail addressed to the appellant at the last known address. The City Council shall have the authority to determine all questions raised on appeal. (Ord. 2074 § 2, 2018)

13.10.200 Withholding a business certificate.
The City shall withhold a business certificate from any person when there are pending violations of this code against such person and/or business applying for a business certificate, or when a debt is owed to the City as a result of a violation of this code. (Ord. 2074 § 2, 2018)

13.10.210 Constitutional apportionment.
A. None of the fees imposed by this title shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of the equal protection and due process clauses of the Constitutions of the United States and the State of California.

B. In any case where a fee imposed by this title is believed by a certificate holder or applicant for a certificate to place an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of such constitutional clauses, the applicant may apply to the City Council for an adjustment of the fee. Such application may be made before, at, or within six months after payment of the prescribed fee. The decision of the City Council shall be final. (Ord. 2074 § 2, 2018)

13.10.220 Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who fails to apply for and receive a certificate prior to the start of business, or has not applied for the renewal of an existing certificate prior to the expiration of the certificate, is in violation of this title and shall be assessed an administrative penalty fee as follows:

1. 31 days to 60 days overdue, a penalty of $50.00 shall be assessed;

2. 61 to 90 days overdue, a penalty of $100.00 shall be assessed; and

3. 91 days or more overdue, a penalty of $200.00 shall be assessed.

B. If a person fails to file for a certificate as provided in this title within 30 calendar days after being informed to do so, or fails to pay the business certificate fee or violates any of the other provisions of this title, or knowingly or intentionally misrepresents any material facts to any officer or employee of the City in procuring the certificate provided in this title, or continues to operate a business after the business registration certificate has been revoked, the person is deemed to be in violation of this title.

C. Where the conduct constituting a violation is of an ongoing and continuing nature, each day of such conduct is a separate and distinct violation.

D. In addition to the administrative penalty fee authorized under this title, the City retains the ability to exercise the enforcement provisions provided in Chapter 1.08 CMC. (Ord. 2074 § 2, 2018)

Title 16
TAXES
Chapters:

16.12    Transient Occupancy Tax

16.14    Coronado Tourism Improvement District

16.20    Real Property Transfer Tax

16.24    Sales and Use Tax

Chapter 16.12
TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
Sections:

16.12.010    Purpose and intent.

16.12.020    Definitions.

16.12.030    Imposition.

16.12.040    Exemptions.

16.12.050    Operator’s duties.

16.12.060    Registration.

16.12.070    Reporting and remitting.

16.12.075    Suspension of operator’s obligation.

16.12.080    Original delinquency.

16.12.090    Continued delinquency.

16.12.100    Fraud.

16.12.110    Interest.

16.12.120    Penalties merged with tax.

16.12.130    Penalties during pendency of hearing or appeal.

16.12.140    Collection.

16.12.150    Appeal.

16.12.160    Records.

16.12.170    Refunds.

16.12.180    Claims.

16.12.190    Refunds to transient.

16.12.200    Actions to collect.

16.12.210    Disposition of revenues.

16.12.220    Deduction as compensation for accounting.

16.12.230    Penalty for violations.

16.12.010 Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of the City Council that there be imposed on transient occupants of hotel rooms in the City a tax, the proceeds of which may, at the discretion of the City Council, be used for promotional, cultural, beautification or recreational purposes, including but not limited to capital improvements. (Ord. 1794; Ord. 1330)

16.12.020 Definitions.
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter:

A. “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

B. “Hotel” means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. “Hotel” does not mean any hospital, convalescent home or sanitarium.

C. “Occupancy” means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room or rooms or portion thereof in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes.

D. “Transient” means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of 25 consecutive days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of 25 days has expired, unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter may be considered.

E. “Rent” means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.

F. “Operator” means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both. (Ord. 1630)

16.12.030 Imposition.
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of 10 percent of the rent owed by the transient to the City, which is extinguished only by payment to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient’s ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the City Treasurer may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the City Treasurer. (Ord. 2034 § 1, 2012; Ord. 1844; Ord. 1630; Ord. 1330)

16.12.040 Exemptions.
No tax shall be imposed:

A. Upon any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the City to impose the tax herein provided.

B. Upon any Federal or State of California officer or employee when on official business.

C. Upon any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of Federal law or international treaty.

D. Where the rent is at the rate of $2.00 a day or less.

No exemption claimed under subsection A, B, or C of this section shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the City Treasurer. All claims of exemption under subsection D of this section shall be made in the manner prescribed by the City Treasurer.

16.12.050 Operator’s duties.
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided.

16.12.060 Registration.
Within 30 days after commencing business, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register such hotel with the City Treasurer and obtain from him a “transient occupancy registration certificate” to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. The certificate shall, among other things, state the following:

A. The name of the operator.

B. The address of the hotel.

C. The date upon which the certificate was issued.

D. “This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of this Division by registering with the City Treasurer for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax to the City Treasurer. This certificate does not constitute a permit.”

16.12.070 Reporting and remitting.
Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the City Treasurer, make a return to the City Treasurer, on forms provided by him, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the City Treasurer. The City Treasurer may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he deems it necessary in order to ensure collection of the tax and he may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the City until payment thereof is made to the City Treasurer. All returns and payments submitted by the City Treasurer shall be treated as confidential and shall not be released by him except upon order of a court of competent jurisdiction or to any officer or agent of the United States or the State of California. (Ord. 1557)

16.12.075 Suspension of operator’s obligation.
A. If, after due diligence, the operator is unable to collect the tax from the transient, the operator’s obligation to collect and remit the tax due from the transient is suspended until collection can be reasonably accomplished.

B. Any moneys received by the operator from the transient shall first be applied to the tax due under this chapter.

C. In order to obtain the suspension of obligations created in this section, the operator shall submit to the City, in writing, the transient’s name, address and any other information about the transient in the possession of the operator. In addition, the operator shall describe the due diligence exercised by the operator to obtain the tax due under this chapter. (Ord. 1630)

16.12.080 Original delinquency.
Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of 10 percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.

16.12.090 Continued delinquency.
Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of 30 days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of 10 percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of tax and the 10 percent penalty first imposed.

16.12.100 Fraud.
If the City Treasurer determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in CMC 16.12.080 and 16.12.090.

16.12.110 Interest.
In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date of which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

16.12.120 Penalties merged with tax.
Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this chapter shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid.

16.12.130 Penalties during pendency of hearing or appeal.
No penalty provided under the terms of this chapter shall be imposed during the pendency of any hearing which is provided for in CMC 16.12.140 nor during the pendency of any appeal to the City Council which is provided for in CMC 16.12.150.

16.12.140 Collection.
If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect the tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of such tax or any portion therefor required by this chapter, the City Treasurer shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the City Treasurer shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the City Treasurer shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States Mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known place of address. Such operator may within 10 days after the serving or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the City Treasurer for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the City Treasurer shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the City Treasurer shall give not less than five days’ written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in said notice why said amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing, the City Treasurer shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after 15 days unless an appeal is taken as provided in CMC 16.12.150.

16.12.150 Appeal.
Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the City Treasurer with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within 15 days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The Council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the City Clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator at his last known place of address. The findings of the Council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the matter prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice.

16.12.160 Records.
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the City of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the City which records the City Treasurer shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times.

16.12.170 Refunds.
Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in CMC 16.12.180 and 16.12.190, provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific ground upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the City Treasurer within three years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the City Treasurer.

16.12.180 Claims.
An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the City Treasurer that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator.

16.12.190 Refunds to transient.
A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City by filing a claim in the manner provided in CMC 16.12.170, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the City Treasurer, or when the transient having paid the tax to the operator establishes to the satisfaction of the City Treasurer that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax.

No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this chapter unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto.

16.12.200 Actions to collect.
Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed owed by the transient to the City. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the City shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the City. Any person owing money to the City under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the City of Coronado for the recovery of such amount.

16.12.210 Disposition of revenues.
Revenues collected by the City under this chapter and remaining after payment of the annual costs incurred in the administration and enforcement thereof may at the discretion of the City Council be used, in whole or in part, for any purpose including but not limited to promotional, cultural, beautification, recreational, capital improvements, or may be deposited into the general fund. (Ord. 1370)

16.12.220 Deduction as compensation for accounting.
For the purpose of compensating the operator in accounting for and remitting the tax levied by this chapter, each operator shall be allowed two percent of the amount of tax due and accounted for and remitted to the City Treasurer in the form of a deduction in submitting his report and paying the amount due to him, provided the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment.

16.12.230 Penalty for violations.
A. Any person who fails to pay a tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction.

B. Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required in this chapter, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the City Treasurer, or who renders a false or fraudulent return of claim, is guilty of an infraction.

C. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due that is required by this chapter to be made, is guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 1400)

Chapter 16.14
CORONADO TOURISM IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT
Sections:

16.14.010    Intent and purpose.

16.14.020    Establishment of the district.

16.14.030    Imposition of assessment.

16.14.040    Levy of assessment.

16.14.050    Collection and reporting of assessment.

16.14.060    Penalty for delinquent payment.

16.14.070    Advisory board.

16.14.080    Annual report and review of assessments.

16.14.090    Use of assessment proceeds.

16.14.100    Modification or disestablishment.

16.14.010 Intent and purpose.
This chapter shall be known as the “Coronado Tourism Improvement District.” This chapter recognizes the importance of the tourism industry to the economic well-being of the City. The purpose for the formation of the district is to provide stable revenue to defray the costs of marketing and promotions services, activities and programs that will specifically benefit the hotel businesses and the tourist-serving businesses in the district.

It is the intent of this chapter to provide a supplemental source of funding for the marketing and promotion of tourism in the district and it is not intended to supplant any other existing sources of revenue that may be used by the City for the marketing and promotion of tourism. Therefore, the City Council finds and declares that the establishment of the district will help promote the public health, morals, safety and welfare of the City, as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2050 § 1, 2015; Ord. 2013 § 1, 2010)

16.14.020 Establishment of the district.
Pursuant to the Parking and Business Improvement Area Law of 1989, California Streets and Highways Code Section 36500 et seq., (the Act) a business improvement district area designated as the Coronado Tourism Improvement District I and II (the CTID) is hereby created and established. All hotels in the district established by this chapter shall be subject to any amendments made hereafter to the Act or to other applicable laws. The boundaries of the CTID are the boundaries of the City of Coronado. (Ord. 2050 § 1, 2015; Ord. 2013 § 1, 2010)

16.14.030 Imposition of assessment.
The City Council hereby levies, imposes and orders the collection of two separate one-half percent assessments to be imposed upon certain hotels within the CTID, which shall be calculated pursuant to CMC 16.14.040. The current one-half percent levy began on July 15, 2010. The new one-half percent assessment shall begin on August 1, 2015. (Ord. 2050 § 1, 2015; Ord. 2013 § 1, 2010)

16.14.040 Levy of assessment.
The CTID will include all hotels consisting of 90 rooms or more, existing or future, within the boundaries of the CTID. The term “hotel” shall have the meaning defined in CMC 16.12.020(B). The assessments shall be levied based upon two separate one-half percent surcharges on the gross room revenues collected per occupied room per night for all transient occupancies as defined in CMC 16.12.020(C) and (D). The term “gross room revenues” shall be defined as “the total consideration received for occupancy of a room, or portion thereof, valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.” Gross room revenues shall exclude transient occupancy taxes, paid occupancies by exempt government employees on official business pursuant to CMC 16.12.040, and paid occupancies beyond the twenty-fifth day pursuant to CMC 16.12.020(D). New hotels consisting of 90 rooms or more within the CTID boundaries will not be exempt from the levy of assessment as authorized by Section 36531 of the California Streets and Highways Code. Pursuant to the City of Coronado’s transient occupancy tax ordinance, assessments pursuant to the CTID shall not be included in gross room rental revenue for the purpose of determining the amount of the transient occupancy tax. (Ord. 2050 § 1, 2015; Ord. 2013 § 1, 2010)

16.14.050 Collection and reporting of assessment.
A. The CTID assessments will be collected monthly by the assessed hotels based on two separate one-half percent surcharges on the gross room revenues per occupied room per night for the previous month. The amount of the CTID assessments, if passed on to each transient, shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent and other taxes charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. The payment of CTID assessments will be reported to the City in a separate remittance from regular transient occupancy taxes. The City will provide the assessed hotels the form for recording the CTID assessments. The proceeds from each separate CTID assessment will be recorded in a separate fund by the City.

B. Commencing upon the date the ordinance establishing the CTID is adopted by the City Council, a 90-day grace period will be afforded to the assessed hotels during which time the assessed hotels may waive the one-half percent surcharge on the gross room revenues for those convention or conference contracts in effect prior to the adoption of the ordinance. A summary report will be developed in consultation with the City Treasurer identifying the deferred assessment amounts during this period.

C. It shall be the duty of the assessed hotels to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all business records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such separate assessment for which the assessed hotel is liable for payment to the City. The City shall have the right to inspect such records at all reasonable times and to apply auditing procedures necessary to determine the amount of assessment due.

D. Pursuant to CMC 16.12.220, each assessed hotel will withhold two percent from the total amount due to the City Treasurer in the same manner and for the same purpose as regards to recovering administrative costs for TOT collection. (Ord. 2050 § 1, 2015; Ord. 2013 § 1, 2010)

16.14.060 Penalty for delinquent payment.
Any hotel that fails to remit any assessment imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of 10 percent of the assessment amount in addition to the assessment. Any additional collection costs incurred by the City or collection agent acting on behalf of the City shall be added to the assessment amount due. Such additional costs may include, but are not limited to, attorney fees, court costs, agent fees, and servicing fees. (Ord. 2050 § 1, 2015; Ord. 2013 § 1, 2010)

16.14.070 Advisory board.
A. The City Council shall appoint an Advisory Board pursuant to Section 36530 of the California Streets and Highways Code in order to make recommendations to the City Council on the expenditure of revenues derived from the levy of each separate assessment, on proposed improvements and activities, and on the method and basis of levying each separate assessment. The Advisory Board exists for the duration of the CTID. If the CTID is disestablished for any reason, the Advisory Board shall also be dissolved unless the City Council directs otherwise. The Advisory Board will elect a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson. The members of the Advisory Board shall be considered as non-paid volunteers. The Advisory Board shall meet no less than bi-monthly and shall be subject to the Ralph M. Brown Act (California Government Code Section 54950 et seq.). The Advisory Board shall keep records in compliance with the California Public Records Act, California Government Code Section 6250 et seq.

B. The CTID Advisory Board shall consist of nine members including a representative and alternate from the Hotel del Coronado, Glorietta Bay Inn, Loews Coronado Bay Resort, and Coronado Island Marriott Resort and Spa; a board representative and alternate from the Coronado Chamber of Commerce, Coronado MainStreet, Ltd., Coronado Historical Association/Visitor Center, and two at-large representatives. The City Council hereby makes a finding that CMC 2.30.030 does not apply with regard to representatives from the assessed hotels who serve on the Advisory Board. The representatives from the four assessed hotels and three community organizations will serve as standing members. The at-large members will serve a fixed term of three years in accordance with the City’s Ordinance No. 1546, provided the district is not disestablished before the passage of three years. Vacancies of at-large members will be filled in accordance with the Coronado Municipal Code. Each member of the Advisory Board will have equal voting weight on all matters before the Board. All Board decisions necessary to implement the annual report shall require four members of a quorum of the Board. (Ord. 2050 § 1, 2015; Ord. 2013 § 1, 2010)

16.14.080 Annual report and review of assessments.
The Advisory Board shall prepare an annual report for each separate one-half percent assessment in accordance with the requirements of Sections 36530 and 36533 of the California Streets and Highways Code. Upon approval of the annual report for each separate assessment, the City Council shall follow the procedures set forth in Section 36534 of the California Streets and Highways Code for the conduct of a public hearing on the assessments for the fiscal year referred to in the annual report. If written protests are received from hotels in the district paying 50 percent or more for each or either annual assessment, no further proceedings to continue the levy of assessments shall take place. The protests shall be weighted based upon the annual assessment for the prior year by each hotel. (Ord. 2050 § 1, 2015; Ord. 2013 § 1, 2010)

16.14.090 Use of assessment proceeds.
The Advisory Board shall prepare an annual report for each separate one-half percent assessment, specifying the expenses, services, activities, and programs to be funded by the assessment. Upon the City Council’s approval of the annual report, no portion of the revenues from the assessments within the district shall be used for any purpose other than for the purposes specified in the annual report, as approved by the City Council, or as modified by the City Council pursuant to compliance with Sections 36534 and 36535 of the California Streets and Highways Code. No portion of the revenues from the assessments within the district shall be used for activities outside of the district. (Ord. 2050 § 1, 2015; Ord. 2013 § 1, 2010)

16.14.100 Modification or disestablishment.
The City Council, by ordinance, may modify the provisions of this chapter and may disestablish the CTID or parts of the CTID, after adopting a resolution of intention to such effect. Such resolution shall describe the proposed change or changes, or indicate that it is proposed to disestablish the CTID, and shall state the time and place of a hearing to be held by the City Council to consider the proposed action. If the operators of hotels that pay 50 percent or more for each or either assessment in the district file a petition with the City Clerk of the City of Coronado requesting the City Council to adopt a resolution of intention to modify or disestablish the district, the City Council shall adopt such resolution and act upon it as required by law. Signatures on such petition shall be those of a duly authorized representative of the operators of hotels in the CTID. In the event the resolution proposes to modify any of the provisions of this chapter, including changes in the existing assessments or in the existing boundaries of the district, such proceedings shall terminate if written protest is made by the operators of hotels that pay 50 percent or more of the assessments in the district. (Ord. 2050 § 1, 2015; Ord. 2013 § 1, 2010)

Chapter 16.20
REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
Sections:

16.20.010    Short title.

16.20.020    Imposition.

16.20.030    Payment.

16.20.040    Application.

16.20.050    Governmental exemption.

16.20.060    Exemptions.

16.20.070    Securities and Exchange Commission.

16.20.080    Partnership transfers.

16.20.090    Administration.

16.20.100    Claims for refund.

16.20.110    Penalty for violation.

16.20.010 Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the “Real Property Transfer Tax Ordinance of the City of Coronado.” It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California. (Revenue and Taxation Code 11901 et seq.)

16.20.020 Imposition.
There is hereby imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the City shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining at the time of sale) exceeds $100.00, a tax at the rate of $0.275 for each $500.00 or fractional part thereof.

16.20.030 Payment.
Any tax imposed pursuant to CMC 16.20.020 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued.

16.20.040 Application.
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt.

16.20.050 Governmental exemption.
Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, is a party shall be exempt from any tax imposed pursuant to this part when the exempt agency is acquiring title.

16.20.060 Exemptions.
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of a reorganization or adjustment:

A. Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;

B. Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in Subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended;

C. Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in Subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or

D. Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is affected.

Subsections A through D, inclusive, of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change.

16.20.070 Securities and Exchange Commission.
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in Subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, but only if:

A. The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935;

B. Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed; or

C. Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order.

16.20.080 Partnership transfers.
In the case of realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of and interest in a partnership or otherwise, if:

A. Such partnership (or other partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954;

B. Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned;

C. If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination; and

D. Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of a termination described in CMC 16.20.070(C), and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination.

16.20.090 Administration.
The County Recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any County ordinance adopted pursuant thereto.

16.20.100 Claims for refund.
Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California.

16.20.110 Penalty for violation.
Any person failing to pay the tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 1400)

Chapter 16.24
SALES AND USE TAX
Sections:

16.24.010    Short title.

16.24.020    Rate.

16.24.030    Purpose.

16.24.040    Contract with State.

16.24.050    Sales tax.

16.24.060    Place of sale.

16.24.070    Use tax.

16.24.080    Adoption of provisions of State law.

16.24.090    Limitations on adoption of State law.

16.24.100    Permit not required.

16.24.110    Repealed.

16.24.115    Repealed.

16.24.120    State tax not taxable.

16.24.130    Receipts which have been subject to tax.

16.24.140    Operators of waterborne vessels – Sale of tangible personal property to.

16.24.150    Operators of waterborne vessels – Consumption of tangible personal property.

16.24.160    Operators of aircraft – Sale of tangible personal property to.

16.24.170    Operators of aircraft – Consumption of tangible personal property.

16.24.180    Application of provisions relating to exclusions and exemptions.

16.24.190    Amendments.

16.24.200    Enjoining collection forbidden.

16.24.210    Penalty for violation.

16.24.010 Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the “Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance of the City of Coronado.” (Gov. Code § 37101; City tax credit Revenue and Taxation Code § 7202(h) et seq.)

16.24.020 Rate.
The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be one percent.

16.24.030 Purpose.
The City Council hereby declares that the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

A. To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

B. To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the sales and use tax law of the State of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

C. To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State sales and use taxes.

D. To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting City sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter.

16.24.040 Contract with State.
Prior to the operative date this City shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of the provisions of this chapter; provided, that if this City shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

16.24.050 Sales tax.
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the City at the rate stated in CMC 16.24.020 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this City on and after the operative date.

16.24.060 Place of sale.
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out of State destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out of State destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the State sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the State or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization.

16.24.070 Use tax.
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use, or other consumption in this City of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in the City at the rate stated in CMC 16.24.020 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to State or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made.

16.24.080 Adoption of provisions of State law.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein.

16.24.090 Limitations on adoption of State law.
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this City shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word “State” is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the City, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the function incident to, the administration or operation of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the State under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the State under the said provisions of that Code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797, or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and substitution shall not be made for the word “State” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this State” in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203.

16.24.100 Permit not required.
If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required by this chapter.

16.24.110 Exclusions and exemptions.
Repealed by Ord. 1593.

16.24.115 Effective date of CMC 16.24.110.
Repealed by Ord. 1593.

16.24.120 State tax not taxable.
The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the State of California upon a retailer or consumer.

16.24.130 Receipts which have been subject to tax.
The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this State shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter.

16.24.140 Operators of waterborne vessels – Sale of tangible personal property to.1
There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the City in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes.

16.24.150 Operators of waterborne vessels – Consumption of tangible personal property.2
The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property of such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax.

16.24.160 Operators of aircraft – Sale of tangible personal property to.
There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the City in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government.

16.24.170 Operators of aircraft – Consumption of tangible personal property.
In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax.

16.24.180 Application of provisions relating to exclusions and exemptions.
CMC 16.24.140 and 16.24.150 are hereby made inoperative as of January 1, 1984. CMC 16.24.140 and 16.24.150 shall again become operative on the operative date of any act of the Legislature of the State of California which amends Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code or which repeals and re-enacts Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code to provide exemption from City sales and use taxes for operators of waterborne vessels in the same, or substantially the same, language as that existing in subdivision (i)(7) and (i)(8) of Section 7202 as those subdivisions read on October 1, 1983. (Ord. 1593)

16.24.190 Amendments.
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter.

16.24.200 Enjoining collection forbidden.
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the State or this City, or against any officer of the State or this City, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected.

16.24.210 Penalty for violation.
Any person who sells, stores, uses or consumes tangible personal property in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 1400)

1
Code reviser’s note: This section is currently inoperative. See CMC 16.24.180.


2
Code reviser’s note: This section is currently inoperative. See CMC 16.24.180.


Title 20
OPERATIONS PERMITS
Chapters:

20.02    Operations Permit – General Provisions

20.04    Commercial Filming

20.06    Retail Firearms Dealers

20.08    Home Occupations

20.12    Use of Public Property

20.16    Public Display of Fireworks

20.26    Newsracks

20.28    Health Regulated Activities

20.30    Special Events

20.36    Closing Out Sales

20.40    Paratransit Vehicles

20.41    Paratransit Drivers

20.42    Electric Personal Assistive Mobility Devices

20.44    Public Dances

20.46    For-Hire Bus Regulations

20.48    Massage Establishments

20.49    Massage Technicians

20.52    Pawnbrokers, Junk Dealers and Secondhand Goods Dealers

20.56    Charitable Solicitation

20.60    Casino Parties

20.70    Amusement Device Centers

20.74    Adult Entertainment Businesses

20.80    Drug Paraphernalia

20.84    Christmas Tree Lots

20.90    Community Antenna Television (CATV)

20.94    Compressed Natural Gas Dispensing

20.98    Liquid Petroleum Gas Dispensing

20.99    Sidewalk Vending

Chapter 20.02
OPERATIONS PERMIT – GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

20.02.010    Purpose.

20.02.020    Definitions.

20.02.030    Permit required.

20.02.040    Claim of exemption.

20.02.050    Fees.

20.02.060    Application.

20.02.070    Investigation.

20.02.080    Confidential information.

20.02.090    Approval for issuance.

20.02.100    Hearing on denial or conditional approval.

20.02.110    Preparation of permit.

20.02.120    Issuance of permit.

20.02.130    Term of permit.

20.02.140    Replacement permit.

20.02.150    Permit nontransferable.

20.02.160    Display of permit.

20.02.170    Revocation/additional conditions.

20.02.180    Grounds for revocation/additional conditions.

20.02.190    Emergency suspension.

20.02.200    Appeal.

20.02.210    Enforcement.

20.02.010 Purpose.
In addition to any other licenses or permits required by this code, an operations permit is required for those activities set forth in this title. The described activities require regulation by the City to protect and promote the health, safety and public peace of the community. It is the purpose of this chapter to provide a standard procedure for the administration of such operations permits. (Ord. 1795)

20.02.020 Definitions.
A. As used in this title, “Director” shall mean the Director of Administrative Services.

B. An “issuing authority” is the individual designated to exercise the specific authority relating to an operations permit in accordance with the general authority granted to all issuing authorities by this chapter.

C. “Notice to permittee” includes notice to a responsible employee or agent of the permittee conducting the activity.

D. “Person” includes an individual, associate, partnership or corporation.

20.02.030 Permit required.
A. It is unlawful for any person to commence, conduct, manage, participate in or sponsor any activity related by this title without an operations permit.

B. When an operations permit has been issued, it is unlawful for any person to conduct the identified activity:

1. When that permit is suspended, expired or revoked; or

2. Contrary to the provisions of the permit.

C. This title shall not be construed to require any person to obtain an operations permit if such requirement conflicts with the Constitutions or applicable statutes of the United States or the State of California.

20.02.040 Claim of exemption.
A. Any person claiming an exemption from the provisions of this title shall file a statement under penalty of perjury with the Department of Administrative Services stating the facts upon which the exemption is claimed.

B. The Director shall approve, disapprove or conditionally approve the claim of exemption and notify the applicant.

20.02.050 Fees.
Fees for this title may be established, from time to time, by the City Council, as follows:

A. An application fee based upon the costs of processing application, payable at the time of application.

B. A permit issuance fee based upon the costs of issuing the permit and enforcing the applicable provisions, payable as a condition to the issuance of the permit.

C. A permit replacement fee based upon the costs of replacing a lost or destroyed permit, payable at the time of application.

D. A permit renewal fee based upon the costs of processing the application, payable at the time of the application.

20.02.060 Application.
A. The Director and each issuing authority shall prepare and have available application forms calling for such information as is necessary to accomplish the purposes of this title.

B. Applications for initial, renewal and replacement permit shall be submitted under penalty of perjury to the Department of Administrative Services and referred to the appropriate issuing authority for action.

C. If the application is submitted by an agent, then the agent shall file (with the application) written evidence that the principal has authorized the agent to apply for the permit on the principal’s behalf.

D. If the application is not filed within the specified time, the Director of Administrative Services may still accept the application for processing; provided, that the application can be thoroughly analyzed for purposes of approving the issuance of the permit.

20.02.070 Investigation.
The issuing authority shall conduct an investigation for the purpose of reaching a determination as to whether to approve, conditionally approve or deny the application for permit. As part of the investigation, the issuing authority may conduct a background investigation and may publish notice in a local newspaper including the name of the applicant, the permit applied for, the proposed location of the activity and a date before which interested persons may file written statements, under penalty of perjury, with the issuing authority regarding the application.

20.02.080 Confidential information.
No person having access to or charge over the information or records obtained in the course of administering this title shall disclose or release or allow the examination by any unauthorized third person of such information and records, in whole or in part, in abstract or particulars. Authorization to access the information and records may be obtained from the City Manager or in accordance with a lawful court order.

20.02.090 Approval for issuance.
The issuing authority shall approve or conditionally approve the issuance of the permit unless one or more of the following conditions is found to exist:

A. The applicant or persons having a direct influence on the conduct of the activity are not qualified in terms of skill or experience to carry on the proposed activity, or have been convicted of an offense related to the conduct of the same or similar type of activity and has not shown a significant and material change in circumstances since the conviction.

B. The activity at the location proposed will endanger the public peace, health or safety.

C. The proposed manner for conducting the activity will endanger the public peace, health or safety; or will not comply with all the requirements, policies, standards or laws applicable to such activity; or adversely impact on the aesthetic quality of the community.

D. The applicant or any person connected or associated with the applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact:

1. In the application for permit;

2. In a report or record required to be filed with the City; or

3. In response to inquiries by the City.

E. The applicant has had the same or similar type of permit previously revoked or denied and has not shown a significant and material change in circumstances since the date of revocation or denial.

F. The applicant fails to meet the requirements for the issuance of the particular permit set forth in this title.

G. The applicant has not submitted (in a timely and complete manner) the application and all other documents required for the issuance of the permit.

H. The request for City personnel, property or equipment will require the diversion of City resources so as to inhibit the normal level of protection and service provided to the City.

I. The activity will interfere with the fire protection, police protection, ambulance service and other public services provided to the City.

20.02.100 Hearing on denial or conditional approval.
If the issuing authority denies or conditionally approves the issuance of the permit, the applicant shall be notified in writing and provided an opportunity to present further information to the issuing authority within two working days of receipt of such notice.

20.02.110 Preparation of permit.
A. If the application for permit is approved or conditionally approved for issuance, the issuing authority shall prepare a permit containing, without limitation, the following:

1. The name and address of the permittee to whom the permit is issued;

2. The name under which the activity is to be conducted;

3. A description of the activity permitted;

4. The location or locations where such activity is to be conducted;

5. The date of expiration of such permit;

6. The amount of the permit issuance fee;

7. A statement for signature by the permittee whereby the permittee agrees:

a. To abide by each and every term and condition imposed on the activity and further agrees to reimburse the City for all costs incurred, including attorney’s fees, in enforcing those terms and conditions against the permitted;

b. To hold the City of Coronado harmless and indemnify the City and each and every one of its employees and officials from and against all claims, demands, costs, losses, damages, injuries, litigation and liability arising out of or related to that activity for which the permit is issued;

c. To post evidence of liability insurance in favor of the City of Coronado, in an amount to be determined by the issuing authority equal to the anticipated maximum amount of potential liability that could arise out of the activity for which the permit is issued. The policy shall contain an express requirement that the insurance company notify the City 30 to 60 days prior to any termination, cancellation, suspension or expiration of the policy of insurance. In lieu of liability insurance, the permittee may post a bond with similar provisions.

B. Such additional conditions and restrictions as are necessary for the enforcement and administration of this title to protect the public peace, health and safety.

C. The issuing authority shall forward the completed permit to the Director.

20.02.120 Issuance of permit.
A. Upon receipt of the completed permit from the issuing authority, the Director shall issue the operations permit to the applicant when:

1. The prescribed issuance fee is paid;

2. The permittee has signed the permit; and

3. All other preconditions to the issuance of the permit have been satisfied.

B. On issuance of the permit, the Director shall notify:

1. All interested City department directors;

2. Any public entity that will be affected by the conduct authorized by the permit;

3. Any person requesting notification and who has paid to the City the costs involved in providing such notice.

20.02.130 Term of permit.
A. Unless otherwise prescribed, the term of an operations permit shall be concurrent with the term of business licenses required for such activity.

B. The issuing authority may establish a specific term for a permit to accomplish the purpose of this title.

20.02.140 Replacement permit.
Upon application by a permittee, a replacement permit may be issued by the Director to replace a permit which has been lost or destroyed.

20.02.150 Permit nontransferable.
A permit issued in accordance with this title shall be nontransferable.

20.02.160 Display of permit.
An issued permit shall be displayed in accordance with the provisions applicable to the display of business licenses as specified in CMC Title 12.

20.02.170 Revocation/additional conditions.
A. An operations permit may be revoked or additional conditions may be imposed by the issuing authority upon five working days’ written notice to the basis of the intended action and permittee setting forth the basis of the intended action and giving the opportunity to present responding information to the issuing authority.

B. After the five-day period, or the presentation of responding information, whichever shall first occur, the issuing authority shall determine whether to revoke the permit or impose additional conditions upon the permit and thereafter give written notice to the permittee and to the Director.

C. A revocation shall become effective two working days after notice, unless a timely appeal is made to the City Council.

20.02.180 Grounds for revocation/additional conditions.
After the issuance of the permit, the imposition of additional conditions or revocation may take place only upon one or more of the following grounds:

A. The applicant or any person connected or associated with the applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact:

1. In the application for permit;

2. In information required to be submitted to the City; or

3. In response to inquiries by the City.

B. License taxes required by the City have not been paid.

C. The conduct of the activity:

1. Has resulted in a conviction against any principal or employee of the activity;

2. Is contrary to local, State or Federal laws;

3. Constitutes a public nuisance; or

4. Is contrary to any condition or restriction previously established in the operations permit.

20.02.190 Emergency suspension.
A. When the conduct of the activity immediately threatens the public peace, health or safety, any City official responsible for enforcing this code may immediately suspend the operations permit by serving notice to the permittee.

B. The City official suspending the permit shall reinstate the permit when the threat is removed. The permittee may request that the City Manager determine whether an existing threat requires the continuation of the suspension.

C. A reinstatement of the permit after an emergency suspension shall not preclude an action to revoke the permit.

20.02.200 Appeal.
A. Except as otherwise provided, a permittee or applicant may appeal, in accordance with this section, any final determination taken under the authority of this title.

B. An appeal must be initiated by submitting a written statement (signed under penalty of perjury) to the Office of the City Manager within two working days of receipt of notice of the appealed determination. The statement shall set forth all facts and arguments upon which the appellant relies.

C. The City Manager shall review the record of the matter and determine whether to affirm, set aside or modify the determination and thereafter notify the appellant.

D. Within two working days of notice of the City Manager’s determination, the appellant may appeal the City Manager’s determination by orally requesting that the City Manager file the previously submitted statement with the City Clerk who shall set the matter for administrative hearing at the next available City Council meeting.

E. The action of the City Council shall be final as to all issues involved.

20.02.210 Enforcement.
A. The issuing authority, Director of Police Services and any other authorized officer or employee of the City may enforce the provisions of this title.

B. During hours of operation at the location for which an operations permit has been issued, the permittee shall allow authorized officers and employees of the City to enter the premises, free of charge or restraint, for the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this title.

C. Any person who violates a regulatory provision of this title, or who knowingly misrepresents to any officer or employee of the City any material fact either in procuring an operations permit or in reference to the activity for which the permit is issued, shall be guilty of an infraction.

D. Commencing, conducting, managing, participating in or sponsoring an activity in violation of this title or commencing, conducting, managing, participating in or sponsoring a permitted activity in light of a material misrepresentation of fact knowingly made to an officer or employee of the City regarding such activity shall constitute a separate violation of this title for each and every day that the activity is carried on.

Chapter 20.04
COMMERCIAL FILMING
Sections:

20.04.010    Purpose.

20.04.020    Definition.

20.04.030    General provisions.

20.04.040    Fees.

20.04.050    Application.

20.04.060    Approval for issuance.

20.04.070    Issuance of permit.

20.04.080    Cancellation.

20.04.010 Purpose.
This chapter establishes the procedures for regulating commercial filming on public property and commercial filming on private property which affects the public. The Executive Assistant to the City Manager shall serve as the liaison to all filming/photography applicants, and all affected City departments. (Ord. 1757; Ord. 1528)

20.04.020 Definition.
A. Affects the Public. Commercial filming will be deemed to “affect the public” when, by reason of the spectacle that such filming creates or the devices and conduct which it involves, such filming:

1. Disrupts the normal flow of vehicle or pedestrian traffic;

2. Is likely to cause five or more persons to congregate at any one time and place on public property; or

3. Exposes property or persons to the risk of physical damage.

20.04.030 General provisions.
A. Permit Required. No person shall conduct, manage, participate in or sponsor any commercial filming or photography on public property without a permit issued by the City Manager. No person shall conduct, manage, participate in or sponsor any commercial filming or photography on private property in a manner that is likely to affect the public without a permit issued by the City Manager. The City shall work cooperatively and responsively with the filming/photography industry and all other noncity agencies who have overlapping jurisdiction.

20.04.040 Fees.
Fees for this chapter shall be as follows:

A. A standard application fee of $50.00 for receiving and processing the commercial photography/filming permit application payable at the time of application; and

B. A permit issuance fee computed on an itemized basis to offset the cost of providing public services. This fee is payable as a condition to the issuance of the permit.

20.04.050 Application.
A. Timely Application. The applicant shall file an application for permit at least five days prior to filming for a “basic” permit, and 10 days prior to filming for a permit requiring road closures or traffic control. Permit application information may be given by the production company to the City by telephone or in person. The City may require an on-site meeting with the production company, if necessary.

B. Application by Agent. If the filming is to be conducted by or on behalf of an organization or person other than the organization or person applying for the permit, then the applicant shall file with the application written evidence that such organization or person has authorized the applicant to apply for such permit on its behalf.

C. Contents of Application. The application used shall be the standardized permit application form as prepared by the Department of Commerce – California Film Commission. The application shall include information relating to the following:

1. Dates and hours of operation;

2. Number of people involved;

3. Number and types of equipment;

4. Location of operation;

5. Statement of intent;

6. Liability insurance;

7. Description of activity;

8. Where applicable, CALTRANS and Port District approval.

20.04.060 Approval for issuance.
A. Approval of Application by City Manager. The City Manager shall approve or deny the application within five working days for a “basic” permit, and within 10 working days for a permit requiring road closure or traffic control.

B. Late Applications. If an application is filed late, the City Manager may still accept the application for processing; provided, that he/she determines that the event can be thoroughly analyzed for purposes of approving the issuance of a permit.

20.04.070 Issuance of permit.
A. Upon the determination of the City Manager that all conditions imposed upon the issuance of the permit have been satisfied to include payment of fees, the City Manager shall issue a business operations permit allowing the filming to be conducted in conformity with the restrictions and conditions set forth in the permit.

B. The production company is required to keep a copy of the permit on the filming site at all times during filming operations.

C. Unlimited permit “riders” (written attachments to the permit that accommodate minor changes) may be used. A permit may not, however, be extended or amended by a rider after the completion of the filming activity.

20.04.080 Cancellation.
An application for a filming permit may be canceled at any time prior to filming by the applicant. A cancellation fee shall not be charged if the production company cancels the filming. However, the production company shall be responsible for the standard application fee and any other costs incurred by the City in the planning and execution of the filming other than those incurred in the City Manager’s Office.

Chapter 20.06
RETAIL FIREARMS DEALERS
Sections:

20.06.010    Purpose.

20.06.020    Definition.

20.06.030    Issuing authority.

20.06.040    Application.

20.06.050    Fees, regulations.

20.06.060    Restrictions.

20.06.010 Purpose.
It is unlawful for any person to sell at retail any firearm within the City without first having obtained an operations permit in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 1783)

20.06.020 Definition.
“Seller of firearms” shall be any person who sells or offers for sale at retail any pistol, revolver, rifle, shotgun or other firearm which detonates or fires an explosive compound or other form of combustion in any manner and discharges or is capable of being altered so as to discharge a projectile.

20.06.030 Issuing authority.
A. The Director of Police Services is authorized to issue business operations permit: retail firearms dealer and to regulate activities thereunder.

B. The issuing authority shall administer this chapter in accordance with the regulations contained in the California Code of Regulations. (See Cal. Code. Regs. Ch. 1, Art. 2.)

20.06.040 Application.
An application for the operations permit required by this chapter shall be filed no later than 30 days prior to the proposed commencement date of the business operation.

20.06.050 Fees, regulations.
A. The operations permit shall be in a form prescribed by the Attorney General.

B. The term of the operations permit shall be for no more than one year from the date of issue.

C. Additional rules and regulations for the conduct of the business operation regulated by this chapter are set forth in the provisions of the California Penal Code (Part 4, Title 2, Chapter 1, Article 4, commencing with Section 12070).

D. A violation of this chapter may be prosecuted as a violation of the California Penal Code, punishable as a misdemeanor.

20.06.060 Restrictions.
A material safety data sheet through County Public Health will be required prior to the storage of any material which may be considered an explosive compound.

Chapter 20.08
HOME OCCUPATIONS
Sections:

20.08.010    Purpose.

20.08.020    Issuing authority.

20.08.030    Prohibition.

20.08.040    Investigation fee.

20.08.050    Permit fee.

20.08.060    Regulations.

20.08.010 Purpose.
Any person who conducts a commercial, professional or service activity from property located in a Residential Zone shall first obtain a home occupation permit together with any other licenses and permits required by this code. (Ord. 2022 § 1 (Att. A), 2011; Ord. 1512)

20.08.020 Issuing authority.
The Director of Community Development or designated appointee is authorized to issue a home occupation permit and to regulate activities thereunder. (Ord. 2022 § 1 (Att. A), 2011)

20.08.030 Prohibition.
A home occupation permit shall not be issued unless the commercial, professional or service activity is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the property for residential purposes. (Ord. 2022 § 1 (Att. A), 2011)

20.08.040 Investigation fee.
(Reserved). (Ord. 2022 § 1 (Att. A), 2011)

20.08.050 Permit fee.
(Reserved). (Ord. 2022 § 1 (Att. A), 2011)

20.08.060 Regulations.
A. A home occupation shall be clearly incidental to the use of a structure as a dwelling.

B. There shall be no storage or display of equipment, supplies or products in an accessory structure or outside the dwelling.

C. There shall be no sign of whatever nature identifying or advertising the home occupation on the premises visible from off the premises.

D. No person other than a resident of the dwelling shall be employed or subcontracted on the premises in the conduct of a home occupation.

E. No commercial vehicles in excess of three-quarter-ton capacity shall be used to deliver materials to or remove materials from the premises.

F. Not more than one vehicle of not more than three-quarter-ton capacity used in connection with the home occupation shall be kept on the premises.

G. Any trailer, wheeled equipment, or any vehicle displaying or advertising the home occupation shall not be visible from off the premises.

H. Existence of a home occupation shall not be visibly apparent from off the premises.

I. There shall be no external alteration of appearance of the dwelling on the site, in which the home occupation is conducted, which would reflect the existence of said home occupation.

J. No activity, equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odor, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the premises.

K. No equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible electrical interference in any radio or television receiver off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises.

L. Conduct of the home occupation shall not involve a need for additional on-street or off-street parking spaces.

M. Covered or uncovered off-street parking required for the residential use shall not be used for the conduct of home occupations.

N. Conduct of the home occupation shall not require the installation of additional plumbing or mechanical equipment within an existing dwelling. (Ord. 2022 § 1 (Att. A), 2011)

Chapter 20.12
USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY
Sections:

20.12.010    Purpose.

20.12.020    Issuing authority.

20.12.030    Investigation fee.

20.12.040    Permit fee.

20.12.050    Regulations.

20.12.010 Purpose.
A. It is unlawful for any person to use public property as a site for the conduct of a commercial activity without first having obtained a business operations permit: use of public property, together with any other licenses and permits required by this code. Uses of public property subject to the regulations of this chapter include, without limitation, the following:

1. The standing or parking of any vehicle, wagon, display or pushcart on a sidewalk, street or other public property from which commercial transactions are conducted;

2. Moving from place to place on sidewalks or streets for the purpose of conducting commercial transactions;

3. Remaining at a fixed site on public property to conduct commercial transactions.

B. The following commercial activities are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:

1. Newsracks;

2. Commercial filming;

3. Driving schools;

4. Paratransit permittees;

5. Persons delivering articles or services upon order of, or agreement with, a recipient purchaser;

6. Charitable solicitation;

7. Housemoves. (Ord. 1553; Ord. 1513)

20.12.020 Issuing authority.
The Director of Administrative Services is authorized to issue business operations permit: use of public property and to regulate activities related thereto. However, if the applicant wishes to establish a fixed site on public property for a period exceeding 30 minutes, then the issuing authority shall be the City Manager.

20.12.030 Investigation fee.
The investigation fee shall be set from time to time upon the recommendation of the City Manager approved by resolution of the City Council.

20.12.040 Permit fee.
The permit fee shall be set from time to time upon the recommendation of the City Manager approved by resolution of the City Council.

20.12.050 Regulations.
A. The permittee shall use only those locations designated in the permit.

B. The permittee shall not ring the bell, knock on the door or attempt to gain admittance to any property whereon a sign bearing the words “no peddlers or solicitors” or words of similar import indicating that peddlers or solicitors are not wanted on the premises is displayed to public view, unless previously and expressly invited to come upon the premises.

C. The permittee shall use the property only for the purpose specified in the permit. The permittee shall agree to hold the City of Coronado harmless and indemnify the City of Coronado from and against all claims, demands, costs, losses, damages, injuries, litigation and liability arising out of or related to the use of the public property by the permittee or permittee’s agents, employees or contractors.

D. The permittee shall give evidence of liability insurance in an amount determined by the issuing authority to be sufficient to deal with the maximum amount of potential liability related to permittee’s use of the public property and may include an additional bond to secure the permittee’s obligation to repair all public property damaged by the permittee.

Chapter 20.16
PUBLIC DISPLAY OF FIREWORKS
Sections:

20.16.010    Purpose.

20.16.020    Definitions.

20.16.030    Issuing authority.

20.16.040    Application.

20.16.050    Regulations.

20.16.010 Purpose.
A. It is unlawful for any person to commence, conduct, manage, participate in or sponsor a public display of fireworks without an operations permit: public display of fireworks.

B. Any person conducting a public display of fireworks within the City in violation of this chapter or the terms of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor in accordance with Section 13112, Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 1807; Ord. 1680)

20.16.020 Definitions.
A. “Commercial use of dangerous fireworks” is the use of any dangerous fireworks in the production of any television motion picture, theater or opera production, or any other business required to be licensed under CMC Title 12.

B. “Dangerous fireworks” includes all dangerous fireworks as defined in Section 12505, Health and Safety Code.

C. “Display of fireworks,” whether on public or private property, shall include any use of dangerous fireworks as defined in Section 12505, Health and Safety Code.

20.16.030 Issuing authority.
The Director of Fire Services is authorized to issue operations permit: display of fireworks.

20.16.040 Application.
The application shall be filed no later than 14 days prior to the proposed date of the public display of fireworks.

20.16.050 Regulations.
A. There is hereby adopted by reference, by the City for the purpose of prescribing rules and regulations for the public display of fireworks, the California Administrative Code, Title 19, Chapter 1, Subchapter 6, Article 15, Public Display, in its entirety.

B. No fireworks display shall be permitted after 10:00 p.m.

C. No concussion type, noncolor shells, for example, “salutes” or “report,” greater than three inches shall be used, except those shells which may be larger but do not have decibel readings about 137 decibels.

D. No permittee shall conduct more than three public displays of fireworks during any 30-day period.

E. The permittee shall provide notice of the time and date of the public display by publishing a notice using a one-eighth page advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation within the City. Notice shall be published no less than five days before the event.

F. The City Manager may vary the regulations of this chapter for events which are sponsored by the City or are conducted for the benefit of the general public.

G. The regulations of this chapter shall apply to public display of fireworks rather than other noise regulations contained in this code.

Chapter 20.26
NEWSRACKS
Sections:

20.26.010    Application.

20.26.010 Application.
The City Council will establish by resolution an administrative procedure to regulate the permitting, placement, appearance, and servicing of newsracks. (Ord. 2061 § 2, 2016)

Chapter 20.28
HEALTH REGULATED ACTIVITIES
Sections:

20.28.010    Purpose.

20.28.020    Adoption of code by reference.

20.28.030    Effective date.

20.28.040    Issuing authority.

20.28.050    Regulations.

20.28.060    Delinquent payments.

20.28.010 Purpose.
Any person who conducts a business or activity which is described in this chapter shall first obtain a health permit, together with any other licenses and permits required by this code. (Ord. 1551; Ord. 1517)

20.28.020 Adoption of code by reference.
There is hereby adopted, by reference, by the City of Coronado, for the purpose of prescribing rules and regulations for the protection of the public health and safety, the following portions of the San Diego County Code together with such secondary references as are included in those portions, effective as of the date set forth in CMC 20.28.030. The provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the City of Coronado to include, without limitation, the fees, regulatory provisions, and definitions, but excluding the procedural provisions beyond those specified for processing applications, conducting investigations, issuing permits and enforcing regulatory provisions:

A. Title 6, Division 1, Chapter 1, regulating the preparation and distribution of food.

B. Title 6, Division 2, Chapter 2, regulating food handlers.

C. Title 6, Division 1, Chapter 3, providing for the destruction of spoiled food.

D. Title 6, Division 6, Chapter 1, regarding applications, permits and fees.

E. Title 6, Division 6, Chapter 2, regulating camps and picnic grounds.

F. Title 6, Division 6, Chapter 4, regulating refrigeration plants.

G. Title 6, Division 6, Chapter 8, regulating reduction plants.

H. Title 6, Division 6, Chapter 9, providing for the enforcement of the State Housing Law.

I. Title 6, Division 6, Chapter 10, regulating apartments and hotels.

J. Title 6, Division 7, Chapter 1, regulating waste of water.

K. Title 6, Division 7, Chapter 2, regarding the pollution of waters.

L. Title 6, Division 7, Chapter 3, regarding public swimming pools.

M. Title 6, Division 7, Chapter 4, regulating wells.

N. Title 6, Division 8, Chapter 3, regarding septic tanks and seepage pits.

O. Title 6, Division 8, Chapter 5, regarding the management of solid waste.

P. Title 6, Division 8, Chapter 6, regarding septic tank and cesspool cleaners.

Q. Title 6, Division 8, Chapter 8, regarding disclosure of hazardous materials.

R. Title 6, Division 8, Chapter 9, regarding hazardous waste establishments.

S. Title 6, Division 8, Chapter 10, regarding the underground storage of hazardous substance.

T. Title 6, Division 9, Chapter 1, regarding condemnation of buildings.

U. Title 6, Division 5, Sections 65.102, 65.104 and 65.107 regarding health permit fees, renewals and fees.

V. Title 6, Division 1, Chapter 1, Sections 61.101 to 61.115, regulating grading of mobile food facilities that prepare food. (Ord. 2033 § 1, 2012; Ord. 1802; Ord. 1784; Ord. 1768; Ord. 1752; Ord. 1619)

20.28.030 Effective date.
The effective date of this chapter is July 1, 1996. (Ord. 1866; Ord. 1802; Ord. 1784; Ord. 1768; Ord. 1752; Ord. 1725; Ord. 1619; Ord. 1579; Ord. 1572)

20.28.040 Issuing authority.
The San Diego County Health Officer, together with the Department of Health Services for the County of San Diego, is hereby designated as the Health Officer for the City of Coronado with authority to enforce and observe the City of Coronado the following:

A. All orders, quarantine regulation, and rules and regulations issued by the State Department of Health Services under the provisions of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California.

B. All statutes of the State of California relating to public health.

C. Those portions of the San Diego County Code pertaining to public health and sanitation as are set forth in this chapter.

20.28.050 Regulations.
A. Each applicant for a permit required by this chapter shall apply to the Department of Administrative Services and shall provide such information as required by the Department of Administrative Services. Thereafter, the applicant shall be referred to the Department of Health Services, County of San Diego.

B. The Department of Health Services of the County of San Diego shall collect and retain for the benefit of the County of San Diego the fees and delinquent payment penalties imposed by this chapter.

20.28.060 Delinquent payments.
A. Any fee which is not paid by the last day of the month following the month in which it is due is 30 days delinquent, and on the first day of the next following month, if still unpaid, is 60 days delinquent.

B. In any case where a fee is 30 days delinquent, a penalty of $50.00 or an amount equal to 50 percent of the fee, whichever is less, shall be added to and collected with the required fee.

C. In any case where a fee is 60 days delinquent, a total penalty of $150.00 or 150 percent of the fee, whichever is less, will be added to and collected with the required fee.

D. The imposition of or payment of the penalty imposed by this section shall not prevent the imposition of any other penalty prescribed by this code or any ordinance nor prosecution for violation of this code or any ordinance.

E. The delinquent penalty fee may be waived by the Deputy Director of Environmental Health Services in case of error made by Environmental Health Services staff or when the applicant has not held a health permit during the past five years and was unaware that a health permit was required. (Ord. 1784; Ord. 1768; Ord. 1752)

Chapter 20.30
SPECIAL EVENTS
Sections:

20.30.010    Purpose.

20.30.020    Definitions.

20.30.030    Issuing authority.

20.30.040    Application.

20.30.050    Regulations.

20.30.010 Purpose.
It is unlawful for any person or group to commence, conduct, manage, participate in or sponsor a special event without first having obtained an operations permit: special event. (Ord. 1687)

20.30.020 Definitions.
A. A “special event” is any assembly, procession, march or other activity consisting of persons, animals, equipment, bicycles or vehicles, or any combination thereof, involving the use of public property as an activity site, including without limitation a beach, park, public street, sidewalk or alley, that will reasonably be expected to:

1. Require public services in excess of normal services provided to the site of the proposed event;

2. Place a burden upon City facilities greater than the normal, on-site activities;

3. Not comply with traffic regulations or otherwise interfere with the normal flow of traffic; or

4. Create an impact upon persons off-site more than the impact created by normal, on-site activity.

B. The three types of special events are:

1. “Major special event,” a special event that will involve more than 2,000 participants or spectators and which will likely have a significant effect on public services, City facilities, traffic circulation, or citizens who are not part of the event.

2. “Moderate special event,” a special event activity that involves 2,000 or fewer participants or spectators and which will likely have a significant effect on public services, City facilities, traffic circulation, or citizens who are not part of the event.

3. “Minor special event,” a special event that will affect, but not significantly, public services, City facilities, traffic circulation, or citizens who are not part of the event.

20.30.030 Issuing authority.
A. The City Council is authorized to issue an operations permit: special event for “major” and “moderate” special events.

B. The City Manager is authorized to issue an operations permit: special event for “minor” special events.

20.30.040 Application.
A. For a major special event, the applicant shall submit to the City Manager a letter of intent generally describing the proposed event for the following calendar year. The letter of intent should be submitted as early as possible, but not later than October 1st of the calendar year prior to the proposed event, in order to allow the City Manager sufficient time to evaluate the proposed event in order to make a recommendation to the City Council at its second regular meeting in October. No fewer than 60 days prior to the event the applicant shall file with the City Manager an application for permit on a form provided by the City.

B. For a moderate special event, the applicant shall submit to the City Manager, at least six months prior to the proposed event, a letter of intent generally describing the proposed event. No fewer than 30 days prior to the event the applicant shall file with the City Manager an application for permit on a form provided by the City.

C. For a minor special event, the applicant shall submit to the City Manager, at least 30 days prior to the proposed event, an application for permit on a form provided by the City. (Ord. 2012 § 2, 2010)

20.30.050 Regulations.
A. Unless otherwise approved as provided herein, operations permits shall be issued for no more than eight major special events during any calendar year. Requests for the approval of any major special events in excess of eight during any calendar year may be considered by the City Council on a case-by-case basis. Any major special events in excess of eight in any calendar year must be in compliance with this chapter and any applicable administrative policies of the City of Coronado, and shall be approved by resolution adopted by the City Council.

B. Operations permits shall be issued for no more than 15 moderate special events during any calendar year.

C. No person shall, without the consent of the permittee, join or participate in a permitted special event, nor in any manner interfere with its progress of orderly conduct.

D. A permit shall not be issued for a special event that would endanger public health, safety, or welfare, or if the special event is directed at solicitation of funds, sale of merchandise, or the sale of tickets to observers of the event.

E. The permittee shall reimburse the City for all costs incurred in providing public facilities and services for the special event. The City Council may waive all or part of the permittee’s obligation to reimburse the City based upon a consideration of the special event’s contribution to the community. (Ord. 2012 § 3, 2010)

Chapter 20.36
CLOSING OUT SALES
Sections:

20.36.010    Permit required.

20.36.020    Definition.

20.36.030    Application for permit.

20.36.040    Processing application.

20.36.050    Conditions on the permit.

20.36.060    Renewal of permit.

20.36.070    Cancellation of permit.

20.36.080    Records.

20.36.090    Exemptions.

20.36.100    Violation.

20.36.010 Permit required.
No person shall advertise or conduct a closing out sale or sell or offer for sale any goods, wares or merchandise at a sale represented to be a closing out sale without first obtaining a permit to conduct such closing out sale from the Director of Administrative Services after investigation by the Director of Police Services. If the sale is to be conducted at a public auction, then in addition to the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of CMC Title 12 shall apply. (Ord. 1519)

20.36.020 Definition.
Whenever used in this chapter, the term “closing out sale” shall mean any offer to sell to the public, or sale to the public, of goods, wares or merchandise upon the implied or expressed representation that such sale is in anticipation of the ceasing, discontinuance, or termination of a business, or that such sale is other than in the ordinary course of business. Without limiting the generality of the above, a closing out sale shall include any sale advertised or represented, either specifically or in substance, to be: “Adjustor’s sale,” “administrator’s sale,” “bankrupt sale,” “creditor’s sale,” “close out sale,” “executor’s sale,” “end of business sale,” “final sale,” “forced out of business sale,” “insolvent sale,” “inventory liquidation sale,” “inventory close out sale,” “inventory disposal sale,” “liquidation sale,” “lost lease sale,” “must vacate sale,” “quitting business sale,” “receiver’s sale,” “stock disposal,” “stock sell out,” “stock liquidation sale,” “termination sale,” “wind up sale,” or any other term tending to convey to the public that upon the disposal of the stock of goods on hand the business will cease and be discontinued.

20.36.030 Application for permit.
A. An application for a closing out sale permit shall be filed with the Director of Administrative Services by the person intending to conduct such sale, at least 20 days prior to the intended commencement thereof.

B. The application shall be deemed filed when accompanied by a payment of the permit fee of $25.00. When a closing out sale will involve a public auction and stock items of jewelry, then the application will be accompanied by a fee of $100.00.

C. The application for permit shall be in writing, signed and verified under oath, by the person who intends to conduct such sale, and each application shall set forth and contain the following information:

1. Full name and address of applicant.

2. Address of location where closing out sale is going to be conducted.

3. The date and hour when the closing out sale is going to be commenced.

4. The anticipated completion date of the closing out sale.

5. An inventory of all goods, wares and merchandise owned by the applicant which are intended to be sold at the closing out sale. Items will be described in sufficient detail so that their identity may be readily determined.

6. An inventory of all items held on consignment by the applicant which are intended to be sold at the closing out sale. No consigned goods may be sold at a closing out sale which have not been in the applicant’s possession for at least 30 days prior to the date of the application and located in the City of Coronado for at least 30 days prior to the date of the application.

7. In the event that the sale will be conducted at public auction, the name of the auctioneer who shall conduct the closing out sale.

8. A statement that no other items will be included in the closing out sale unless a supplemental inventory is provided to the City of Coronado prior to the inclusion of such items into the applicant’s existing inventory.

20.36.040 Processing application.
A. The Director of Administrative Services will refer the applicant to the Director of Police Services for investigation.

B. The Director of Police Services shall approve the permit application unless:

1. Contents of the application are untrue in any respect.

2. The proposed method of conducting the closing out sale will endanger the public health, safety or welfare.

C. The Director of Administrative Services will issue the permit so long as:

1. The Director of Police Services has approved the application.

2. The applicant signs a statement under oath as follows:

The privileges of this permit are accepted by the undersigned who agrees to comply with its conditions and all other provisions of Title 12 of the Coronado Municipal Code.

(Ord. 1791, 1992)

20.36.050 Conditions on the permit.
A. The permit shall specify the location of the closing out sale and authorize it to be conducted for a period of not more than 60 calendar days. The applicant may be required to file a statement executed under oath at the conclusion of the closing out sale to the effect that only those items listed in inventories submitted to the City were sold during the closing out sale.

B. There may be imposed such conditions as are necessary to preserve and protect the public health, safety and welfare.

C. The applicant may appeal to the City Manager and thereafter the City Council any one or more conditions which the applicant finds objectionable.

20.36.060 Renewal of permit.
A. The permit may be renewed by the Director of Administrative Services for a period not to exceed 30 days on the filing of an application filed under oath together with the payment of a renewal fee of $25.00.

B. The verified application shall identify those items remaining to be sold.

20.36.070 Cancellation of permit.
Any permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be immediately void and invalid upon the closing out sale not being conducted in accordance with law or if items not contained in an inventory filed with the City of Coronado are offered for sale or sold away from the location where the closing out sale is being conducted.

20.36.080 Records.
Every person conducting a closing out sale required to be permitted by this chapter shall record chronologically each sales transaction concurrently with each transaction, in book form, in English, indicating the date of sale and describing items sold. The record book shall be preserved for one year after the last entry is made therein and shall be available for inspection by any police officer of the City during normal business hours.

20.36.090 Exemptions.
The provisions of this section shall not apply in the case of:

A. Sales conducted by order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction.

B. Sales conducted by public officers such as marshals and sheriffs in accordance with their powers and duties.

20.36.100 Violation.
Any person, firm, or copartnership, corporation, association or other organization, or member of such organization or any manager, director or agent of such organization that participates in or aids or abets in the conduct of a closing out sale in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. The sale of an item at a closing out sale which is not identified on an inventory filed with the City of Coronado shall constitute a separate offense. The sale of any item as part of a closing out sale which is not conducted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.

Chapter 20.40
PARATRANSIT VEHICLES
Sections:

20.40.010    Purpose.

20.40.020    Issuing authority.

20.40.030    Definitions.

20.40.040    Regulations – Permit holder.

20.40.050    Regulations – Vehicle driver.

20.40.060    Regulations – Paratransit vehicles.

20.40.070    Application for operations permit, paratransit tag, and driver’s card.

20.40.080    Public liability.

20.40.090    Financial ownership and operating records – Reporting requirements.

20.40.100    Issuance of driver’s card.

20.40.110    Suspension and revocation of driver’s card.

20.40.120    Minimum vehicle standards and operating regulations.

20.40.130    Taxicab stands.

20.40.140    Taximeter.

20.40.150    Rates of fare.

20.40.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure the safe and orderly conduct of paratransit vehicle service within the City. (See Vehicle Code § 16500 et seq.) (Ord. 2086 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 1835; Ord. 1739; Ord. 1714; Ord. 1686; Ord. 1511)

20.40.020 Issuing authority.
A. The issuing authority for an operations permit: paratransit shall be the Director of Police Services.

B. In furtherance of an issued operations permit: paratransit, the issuing authority is authorized to issue:

1. Paratransit tags required for a paratransit vehicle to operate within the City; and

2. Driver’s cards required for persons driving paratransit vehicles within the City. (Ord. 2086 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018)

20.40.030 Definitions.
The following words and phrases, wherever used in this chapter, shall be construed as defined in this section, unless from the context a different meaning is intended, or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases:

“Cardholder” shall mean the person to whom a driver’s card has been issued in accordance with this chapter.

“Charter vehicle” shall mean every vehicle which:

1. Transports passengers or parcels or both over the public streets of the City;

2. Is routed at the direction of the hiring passenger;

3. Is made available for hire through telephone or other electronically transmitted request or prearranged in writing for hire;

4. Is not made available through “cruising”; and

5. Is hired by and at the service of a person for the benefit of himself or herself or a specified group.

“Compensation” shall mean anything of value to include, without limitation, money, payment, consideration, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or profit, paid to, accepted or received in exchange for transportation of a person or persons, whether paid upon solicitation, demand, or contract, or voluntarily or intended as gratuity or donation.

“Cruising” shall mean the movement over the public streets of a taxicab or low-speed vehicle (LSV) in search of prospective passengers; except the term does not include either the travel of a taxicab or LSV proceeding to answer a call for service received by telephone or radio from an intended passenger or the travel of such a vehicle, having discharged a passenger or passengers, returning to the owner’s place of business or to its established point of departure.

“Driver” shall mean a person driving a paratransit vehicle.

“Driver’s card” is the operations permit: paratransit, issued by the Police Department pursuant to this chapter, that allows a person to drive a paratransit vehicle within the City. The card shall bear the following information:

1. The number of the license of the driver;

2. The name and business address of the driver;

3. The name of the owner of the vehicle;

4. The name of the driver’s employer; and

5. A small photograph of the driver.

“Low-speed vehicle (LSV)” shall mean an electric, motorized vehicle having four wheels on the ground and an unladen weight of 1,800 pounds or less that is capable of propelling itself at a minimum speed of 20 miles per hour and a maximum speed of 25 miles per hour, on a paved level surface.

“Operator of a paratransit business” is the person or persons who own or otherwise direct the operation of one or more paratransit vehicles.

“Paratransit business” is the commercial use or operation of one or more paratransit vehicles.

“Paratransit tag” shall mean an identification tag issued by the City to be affixed to a specific paratransit vehicle permitted to operate within the City.

“Paratransit vehicle” shall mean every motor-propelled, passenger-carrying vehicle, which is operated for any compensation sought from passengers picked up or solicited for pick-up from any location within the City, irrespective of whether such operation extends beyond the City limits. Paratransit vehicles include, without limitation, taxicabs, low-speed vehicles (LSVs) and other vehicles for hire. “Paratransit vehicle” does not include any vehicle:

1. Properly licensed under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California;

2. Owned, operated, or contracted for by the Metropolitan Transit Development Board and being operated on a fixed, mass transit route;

3. When being used in an organized car pool not available to the public generally; or

4. When being used to transport students between home and school.

“Passenger” shall mean every occupant other than the driver of the paratransit vehicle.

“Permit holder” shall mean a person who has a valid operations permit: paratransit for the operation of a paratransit business.

“Substantially located” shall mean (1) where the primary business address of the paratransit business is located; and/or (2) the jurisdiction within a single county in which the total number of prearranged and non-prearranged trips that originate within the City’s jurisdiction account for the largest share of the taxicab company’s total number of trips over the previous calendar year, as determined annually. A taxicab company may be substantially located in more than one jurisdiction.

“Taxicab” shall mean every vehicle other than a charter vehicle, jitney, nonemergency vehicle, sightseeing vehicle or LSV which:

1. Carries not more than eight passengers excluding the driver;

2. Transports passengers over the public streets of the City;

3. Does not operate over a defined route;

4. Is routed at the direction of the hiring passenger; and

5. Is made available for hire through cruising, parking, telephone or other electronically transmitted request.

“Taxicab/LSV stand” and “cab stand” shall mean areas on public rights-of-way designated by City Council resolution for specific use of taxicab vehicles and/or low-speed vehicles (LSVs) that are accessible to the public and clearly identified as such by a yellow curb marked “taxi zone” and a sign indicating same.

“Taximeter” shall mean any instrument, appliance, device or machine by which the charge for hire of a passenger-carrying vehicle is calculated, either for distance traveled or time consumed, or a combination of both, and upon which such change is clearly visible and numerically indicated to the passenger(s).

“Valid” shall mean properly obtained and in effect.

“Vehicle for hire” shall mean every vehicle which:

1. Is operated for any fare or compensation and used for the transportation of passengers over the public streets of the City;

2. Is not operated over a defined route;

3. Is routed at the direction of the hiring passenger; and

4. Is hired by and at the service of a person for the benefit of himself or herself or a specified group. (Ord. 2086 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 1958 § 1, 2004)

20.40.040 Regulations – Permit holder.
A. No person or permit holder substantially located in the City shall engage in the operation of any paratransit business within the City except as authorized by a valid operations permit: paratransit and such other permits and licenses as are required by law. To obtain an operations permit: paratransit, the paratransit business must be substantially located within the jurisdiction of the City.

B. No person who is engaging in the operation of a paratransit business within the City shall employ a person to operate a paratransit vehicle unless such vehicle operator has a valid driver’s card.

C. Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, a taxicab company permitted by another jurisdiction located in the County of San Diego may provide prearranged trips in the City.

D. No person who is engaging in the operation of a paratransit business in the City shall use a paratransit vehicle for paratransit purposes unless such vehicle has a valid paratransit tag.

E. A person who is engaging in the operation of a paratransit business in the City shall:

1. Ensure that each paratransit driver employed by such person prepares a daily trip log required by this chapter;

2. Collect the daily trip log from each paratransit vehicle;

3. Maintain the log for a minimum of 12 months after the day logged;

4. Make the trip log available for inspection upon request of any City Peace Officer; and

5. Notify the issuing authority upon termination of any employee with a driver’s card.

F. A person who is engaging in the operation of a paratransit business in the City shall reimburse the City for the costs incurred to obtain fingerprint clearances and for a cardholder employed who operates a paratransit vehicle under the permit holder’s operations permit: paratransit.

G. The privilege of engaging in the business of operating a paratransit vehicle in the City is personal to the permit holder. The rights, requirements and responsibilities which attach to the permit remain with the holder at all times the paratransit vehicle is operated under the authority of the permit. These rights, requirements and responsibilities, which include, but are not limited to, the requirement of this chapter and title, will remain unaffected by any agreement or contractual arrangement between the permit holder and those persons who operate paratransit vehicles, irrespective of the form or characterization of the agreement under which the driver operates the paratransit vehicle.

H. The permit holder shall maintain a business address, a mailing address where he or she can accept mail directed to his or her company, and a business telephone in working order which must be answered during normal business hours, Monday through Friday, and during all hours of operation. The permit holder shall, in the case of any change in his or her business address, mailing address, or business telephone, notify the Administrative Services Department in writing of such change within 48 hours of the effective date of this change.

I. No permit holder shall employ as a paratransit vehicle driver any person who is not in possession of a valid driver’s card and whose privilege to operate a paratransit vehicle within the City has expired, or has been revoked, denied, suspended or prohibited. (Ord. 2086 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 1958 § 2, 2004)

20.40.050 Regulations – Vehicle driver.
A. No person shall drive a paratransit vehicle within the City unless:

1. The vehicle has a valid paratransit tag issued in furtherance of a valid operations permit: paratransit.

2. The driver is in possession of a valid driver’s card issued in furtherance of a valid operations permit: paratransit.

3. The driver’s valid driver’s card is displayed in plain view from the passenger compartment.

4. The driver complies with the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of the operations permit: paratransit pertaining to such operation.

5. The paratransit vehicle has a valid paratransit tag which complies with the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of the operations permit pertaining to such vehicle.

6. The paratransit vehicle and its operation comply with the California Vehicle Code.

7. The driver is in possession of a valid driver’s license issued by the State of California.

B. Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, a taxicab driver permitted by another jurisdiction in the County of San Diego may provide prearranged trips in the City.

C. No driver of a paratransit vehicle shall load or unload passengers in a traffic lane.

D. The driver of a paratransit vehicle shall carry, either on the person of the driver or in the paratransit vehicle, a map of the City which shall be displayed to any passenger upon request.

E. The driver of every paratransit vehicle shall disclose the fares, fees, or rates to the customer as required by CMC 20.40.150.

F. The driver of every paratransit vehicle shall offer each passenger, upon request, a receipt upon payment of the fare. The receipt shall accurately show the date, the starting and ending locations for the trip, the amount of the fare, the company name, the name and signature of the driver.

G. The driver of any paratransit vehicle shall promptly obey all lawful orders or instructions of any Peace Officer.

H. No driver of any paratransit vehicle shall transport any greater number of persons, including the driver, than the manufacturer’s rated seating capacity for the vehicle.

I. A driver of a paratransit vehicle employed to transport passengers to a definite point shall take the most direct route possible that will carry the passenger to his destination safely and expeditiously.

J. It shall be unlawful for the driver of a paratransit vehicle to refuse a prospective fare or to take any action to actively discourage a prospective fare on the basis of race, creed, color, age, sex, national origin, handicap, or any other reason, unless it shall be readily apparent that the prospective fare is a hazard to the driver or operator.

K. It shall be unlawful for the driver of a paratransit vehicle to refuse or discourage a prospective fare based upon the length of trip within the City.

L. No driver shall stop, park, or otherwise leave standing a paratransit vehicle within 15 feet of any fire hydrant.

M. No driver of a paratransit vehicle shall display an “Out-of-Service” sign while the driver is in the paratransit vehicle or the paratransit vehicle is located at a paratransit stand. This subsection shall not prohibit a driver of an out-of-service paratransit vehicle from displaying an “Out-of-Service” sign, provided the vehicle is parked in a lawful parking spot and the driver is not in the vehicle.

N. A paratransit driver may not seek passengers by driving or stopping upon any public street or other public place at such speed or frequency as to interfere with or impede traffic.

O. It is unlawful for the driver of a paratransit vehicle, having parked and left his or her paratransit vehicle, to solicit patronage among pedestrians on the sidewalk, or at any entertainment center, or other location of public gathering.

P. It is unlawful for a driver to allow a paratransit vehicle to remain standing in any established paratransit stand or passenger loading zone, unless the driver or operator remains within 12 feet of his or her paratransit vehicle, except when the driver or operator is actually engaged in assisting passengers to load or unload.

Q. Except for the purpose of actively loading or unloading prearranged passengers or freight, no paratransit driver shall cause a paratransit vehicle to be made available for hire through cruising, hailing, or parking a taxicab on any public street while the vehicle is in service or conducting business unless the paratransit vehicle is issued a paratransit tag by the City of Coronado. Such vehicles shall be identified by a window sticker issued by the City.

R. No driver shall park a paratransit vehicle on any public street for a period longer than three hours when such vehicle is not in service for conducting business.

S. It is unlawful for the driver of a paratransit vehicle to respond to a call for service dispatched to another driver.

T. The paratransit driver shall maintain a daily trip log within the paratransit vehicle which shall be available for inspection upon request of any Peace Officer. The trip log shall accurately show the driver’s name, paratransit number, date, time, beginning odometer reading, starting and ending locations, and fare for each trip provided. The driver shall furnish a copy of the daily trip log to the permit holder upon the request of the holder or to any Peace Officer.

U. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit business for a paratransit vehicle by making a contract or agreement with an owner of any hotel, apartment house, motel, inn, rental units, restaurant, or bar, or with the agent or employees of such owner, by which the owner, agent, or employee receives any type of payment or commission for recommending or directing any passenger to a specific paratransit vehicle or company. It shall be unlawful for any permit holder, association, or driver to have or make a contract or agreement with any owner of any hotel, apartment house, motel, inn, rental units, restaurant, or bar, or with the agents or employees of such owner, by which the license holder, association or driver receives any type of payment or commission for recommending or directing any passenger to an establishment operated by a specific owner.

V. It shall be unlawful for any driver of a paratransit vehicle to demand of a passenger a charge for hire which is greater than the rate specified in the operations permit: paratransit.

W. Upon good cause to believe that a driver of a paratransit vehicle is under the influence of any drug or controlled substance, any City police officer is authorized to demand that the driver immediately submit to a drug screen test. When so requested by the police officer, the driver shall immediately submit to the request. The driver’s failure to submit immediately to the request is sufficient grounds to revoke the driver’s card of the driver.

X. Repealed by Ord. 1958.

Y. Pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 21260, drivers of an LSV shall be restricted to streets within the City’s limit with a posted speed limit of 35 miles per hour. Drivers of an LSV operating on SR 75 shall be limited to Orange Avenue extending southwest to Glorietta Boulevard. (Ord. 2086 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 1958 § 3, 2004)

20.40.060 Regulations – Paratransit vehicles.
A. The permit holder shall ensure the interior and exterior of each paratransit vehicle shall be maintained in a safe and efficient operating condition, and meet California Vehicle Code requirements and the requirements of this chapter at all times when in operation.

Before a paratransit vehicle is placed in service and at least annually thereafter, the permit holder shall present the paratransit vehicle and its equipment for inspection by the City at a facility that is certified by the National Institute for Automotive Service Excellence or a facility registered with the Bureau of Automotive Repair who shall ascertain whether the vehicle complies with the provisions of this chapter and other standards as may be established by the Director of Police Services. The cost of inspections and certifications shall be paid by the permit holder. Certificates of annual inspections must be filed yearly with applications to renew the operations permit. Failure to produce the vehicle for inspection shall be cause for suspension and revocation of the permit for such vehicle.

B. The driver of a paratransit vehicle shall ensure that a valid paratransit tag and driver’s card are displayed in a location and manner prescribed by the issuing authority.

C. Every person who operates a paratransit business in the City shall ensure that each paratransit vehicle being operated by them:

1. Is equipped with a visible light on top of the vehicle that flashes which shall only be operated at the time of an emergency.

2. Has no window tinting, shades, or marking that could interfere with a clear view of the cab interior from the outside.

3. Has a working capability for radio service either by dispatch or cellular phone.

4. Has a fire extinguisher of the dry chemical or carbon dioxide type with an aggregate rating of at least five B/C units and a current inspection card affixed to it.

5. Has a minimum of three red emergency reflectors.

6. Has a first-aid kit containing medical items to adequately attend to minor medical problems.

7. Has, in a convenient place in the driver’s compartment, in full view of the passengers, a container for the driver’s card.

8. Is equipped and operated so that the vehicle can be dispatched by two-way radio communication or cellular phone via call forwarding in response to a telephone or other request for service by a prospective passenger. This requirement may be met by use of a mobile radio telephone service. The two-way communication radio must be turned on, and audible to the driver at all times, when the paratransit vehicle is in service. (Ord. 2086 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 1958 § 4, 2004)

20.40.070 Application for operations permit, paratransit tag, and driver’s card.
A. All paratransit businesses substantially located in the City must obtain an operations permit: paratransit from the City to operate. An operations permit: paratransit shall not be issued unless the applicant is substantially located in the City, has demonstrated with clear and convincing evidence that the applicant seeks to provide paratransit service within the City, and the total number of operations permits issued does not exceed 25 in the City.

B. The Director of Police Services shall periodically conduct a survey to determine the number of active and inactive permits that have been issued by the City. Permits that are found to be inactive shall be made available for use by requesting paratransit businesses.

C. The Director of Police Services may deem a permit as being “inactive” when:

1. The permit holder fails or refuses to provide reasonable evidence of continuous automobile liability insurance coverage, as required by this chapter, for a total of 90 days during any 12-month period, for each vehicle that is operated pursuant to this section; or

2. The permit holder fails or refuses to provide reasonable evidence that the permit has been assigned to a vehicle that has transported a minimum of 30 fares originating in the City of Coronado during any 90-day period;

3. In determining whether a permit should be deemed “inactive,” the Director of Police Services also may consider any evidence provided by the permit holder that a permitted vehicle was reasonably out of service as a result of a collision that required extensive repairs. (Ord. 2086 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 1958 § 5, 2004)

20.40.080 Public liability.
It shall be unlawful for a person to operate a paratransit business in the City without obtaining and maintaining in effect insurance coverage as specified in this section:

A. Commercial general liability insurance from a carrier authorized to be in business in the State of California in an insurable amount of not less than $1,000,000 for each occurrence for bodily injury, personal injury and property damage. If a commercial general liability insurance form or other form with a general aggregate limit is used, the general aggregate limit shall be at least twice the required occurrence limit.

B. Automobile insurance from a carrier authorized to be in business in the State of California in an insurable amount of not less than $300,000 combined single limit, $300,000 for bodily injury per accident, $100,000 for bodily injury per person, and $50,000 property damage.

C. Evidence of insurance coverage shall be provided to the City in the form of a certificate of insurance bearing authorized signatures and endorsements that names the City as an additional insured. Said certificates of insurance shall be submitted to the City’s Risk Manager.

D. The insurance policies shall provide that the policies shall not be canceled, terminated, changed or allowed to expire without 30 days’ prior written notice delivered to the City at the address shown on the certificate of insurance.

E. All insurance policies shall be issued by companies which hold a current policy holder’s alphabetic and financial size category rating of A VIII, according to the current Best’s Key Rating Guide, unless otherwise approved by the City’s Risk Manager.

F. Failure to procure or maintain required insurance shall constitute a material breach of this chapter under which the City shall immediately terminate the operations permit: paratransit issued to the permit holder. (Ord. 2086 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 1958 § 6, 2004)

20.40.090 Financial ownership and operating records – Reporting requirements.
A. Every holder of an operations permit: paratransit shall maintain:

1. Financial records in accordance with good accounting practices.

2. Ownership records.

3. Operating records in a form which shall be determined from time to time by the City.

B. Ownership and operating records shall be made available to the City upon demand during normal business hours. The permit holder is responsible for retaining and maintaining ownership and operating records. The permit holder shall retain operating records for a minimum of six months from the date the records are created.

C. For purposes of this section, ownership records shall include, but are not limited to, the following:

1. Copies of the articles of incorporation as filed with the Secretary of State of California.

2. Records identifying all corporate officers and members of the corporation’s board of directors. A corporation shall report any change in corporate officers or members of its board of directors to the City within 10 days of the effective date.

3. Copies of registration cards issued by the California Department of Motor Vehicles to the vehicle owner for all paratransit vehicles operated under the authority of a City operations permit.

D. For purposes of this section, operating records shall include, but are not limited to, the following:

1. Written dispatch records for paratransit businesses which operate their own radio dispatch service in which calls are dispatched via radio;

2. Copies of the daily trip logs maintained by paratransit drivers; and

3. A log maintained by the paratransit vehicle driver describing the trips made, time of day, point of origin, point of termination and fare changes. (Ord. 2086 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 1958 § 7, 2004)

20.40.100 Issuance of driver’s card.
A. A driver’s card shall not be issued to any of the following:

1. Any person under the age of 18 years.

2. Any person who has been convicted of a felony involving a crime of force or violence against any person, or for theft of property, operation of a motor vehicle, possession, sale, transportation or manufacturing of drugs or a controlled substance unless five years have elapsed since his or her discharge from a penal institution or satisfactory completion of probation or parole for such conviction and who has maintained a good record during the past five years. The Director of Police Services may consider exemptions at his or her discretion based upon recommendations of the applicant’s parole or probation officer.

3. Any person who has been convicted of an offense involving driving a motor vehicle under the influence of an intoxicating liquor, narcotic or controlled substance within three years of the time of application.

4. Any person who, within five years immediately preceding the processing of the application, has been convicted or determined by any administrative action to have been in violation of any statute, ordinance, or regulation reasonably and rationally related to the paratransit industry or any similar business operation which would have resulted in the suspension or revocation of the driver’s identification card in accordance with this chapter or this title.

5. Any person who is required to register as a sex or narcotic offender pursuant to the California Penal Code.

6. Any person who has provided false information of a material fact in their application to the City within the past five years.

7. Deleted by Ord. 1845.

8. Any person who has been convicted of three or more moving traffic violations related to operating a motor vehicle in any six-month period in the previous three years.

9. Any person whose driver’s license is currently suspended, revoked or restricted in any manner.

10. Any person for whom a current warrant of arrest has been issued.

B. The issuing authority shall establish a mandatory controlled substance and alcohol testing certification program pursuant to California Government Code Section 53075.5(b)(3) and which all cardholders and potential cardholders must participate in to receive and maintain a driver’s card. Self-employed independent drivers shall be responsible for compliance with, and shall pay all costs of, the program with regard to themselves. All paratransit businesses shall be responsible for compliance with, and shall pay all costs of, the program with respect to their employees and potential employees, except that an operator of a paratransit business may require employees who test positive to pay the costs of rehabilitation and of return-to-duty and follow up testing.

C. The permanent driver’s card shall expire 12 months from the date of application.

D. The issuing authority is authorized to issue a temporary driver’s card pending final action on an application. No temporary driver’s card shall be issued without the satisfactory completion of a local law enforcement agency record check of the applicant. Any temporary driver’s card so issued shall be valid for a period not to exceed 90 days or until the date of approval of a regular driver’s card. The issuance of a temporary driver’s card shall not authorize the operation of a paratransit vehicle following the denial of the application.

E. The issuing authority is authorized to establish a nonrefundable filing fee to be reimbursed for the costs of processing an application for a driver’s card.

F. Upon termination of employment, the driver shall return the driver’s card to the issuing authority. (Ord. 2086 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018)

20.40.110 Suspension and revocation of driver’s card.
A. The City may suspend or revoke a driver’s card in accordance with the procedures and reasons contained in this title and for the following reasons:

1. The City finds the cardholder’s past record to be unsatisfactory with respect to satisfying the provisions of this chapter.

2. The cardholder fails to comply with the applicable provisions of this chapter.

3. The cardholder fails to perform in accordance with those provisions of this chapter which govern driver conduct and/or operating regulations.

4. The cardholder received three or more moving violations related to operation of a motor vehicle in any six-month period in the previous three years.

5. The cardholder’s driver’s license has been suspended, revoked or restricted in any manner.

6. The cardholder has been convicted of reckless driving or driving while under the influence of intoxicating liquors, narcotics or controlled substances, and has not been rehabilitated.

7. The cardholder has been convicted of assault, battery, resisting arrest, any felony involving force or violence, or any crime reasonably and rationally related to the driver’s integrity or the ability to operate paratransit vehicle or transport passengers, and has not been rehabilitated.

8. The cardholder has ever been convicted of a crime that requires registration under the California Penal Code as a sex or narcotic offender.

9. The cardholder is found to possess or control an alcoholic beverage while in, or conducting any business associated with, a paratransit vehicle.

10. A cardholder exhibits observable symptoms of consumption or of being under the influence of any alcoholic beverage while operating or conducting business associated with the paratransit vehicle.

11. A cardholder is found to show observable symptoms of being under the influence of any drug or substance which may affect his/her ability to safely operate a motor vehicle while operating or conducting business associated with the paratransit vehicle.

12. The cardholder is the subject of an outstanding arrest warrant.

B. For purposes of this section, a plea of nolo contendere, or a forfeiture of bail, shall be considered a conviction if it occurred within the five years immediately preceding the date of application for a driver’s card.

C. The driver’s card shall become void upon the termination of the cardholder’s employment with the permit holder. (Ord. 2086 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018)

20.40.120 Minimum vehicle standards and operating regulations.
A. A permit holder shall make available to any Peace Officer or authorized City employee, for reasonable and periodic inspection, all paratransit vehicles operating under an operations permit: paratransit in order for the City to determine whether the vehicle is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.

B. Any paratransit vehicle which fails to meet the requirements of the California Vehicle Code or this chapter after inspection shall be immediately ordered out-of-service by the Director of Police Services or his/her designee if the paratransit vehicle is unsafe for service. When a vehicle is ordered out-of-service, the paratransit tag shall be immediately removed. However, ordering a vehicle out-of-service does not constitute a suspension or revocation of the permit. If the paratransit vehicle is not unsafe but is unsuitable or otherwise in violation of this chapter, the permit holder shall be issued a notice to correct said violation within 72 hours. Failure to correct such violation within the 72 hours shall then be cause to order the vehicle out-of-service at which time the paratransit tag shall be immediately removed.

1. The business operator and the driver of the subject vehicle shall immediately comply with such direction, but may thereafter file an appeal of the order with the issuing authority.

2. Before the vehicle may again be placed in service, the violation shall be corrected and documentation or other evidence indicating corrections must be submitted to the Police Department. (Ord. 2086 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 1958 § 8, 2004)

20.40.130 Taxicab stands.
A. The City Council may, by resolution, from time to time, designate taxicab/LSV stands which shall be designated “Taxis/LSVs Only,” and such stands shall be in operation 24 hours a day.

B. No taxicab or LSV shall remain in any established taxicab/LSV stands unless the taxicab and/or LSV is attended by the driver.

C. No vehicle, or paratransit vehicle other than a taxicab or LSV issued an operations permit: paratransit by the City of Coronado, shall park or stop in a designated taxicab/LSV stand and such vehicles shall be identified by a window sticker issued by the City. (Ord. 2086 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 1958 § 9, 2004)

20.40.140 Taximeter.
A. The operator of a paratransit business shall ensure that each taxi paratransit vehicle used in such business, other than a vehicle for hire as defined in this chapter, is equipped with a fully functional taximeter of a type approved by the issuing authority.

B. No paratransit taxi vehicle shall be operated until the taximeter thereon has been inspected, tested, approved and sealed by an authorized representative of the State of California, and thereafter so maintained in a fully operational, accurate manner.

C. The taximeter shall be located such that:

1. It can be easily discernible to a person outside the paratransit vehicle whether the taximeter is in operation or is not in operation; and

2. It is positioned so that its display of recorded time, distance and fare is well-lighted and easily readable by the passenger riding in such paratransit vehicle.

D. It shall be unlawful for any driver of a paratransit vehicle to display the flag or device attached to the taximeter in such a position as to denote that the vehicle is for hire, or is not employed, or to have the flag or other attached device in such a position as to prevent the taximeter from operating. It shall be unlawful for any driver to cause the taximeter to record when the vehicle is not actually employed, or to cause the taximeter to continue to record after the termination of each and every service.

E. Repealed by Ord. 1958. (Ord. 2086 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 1958 § 10, 2004)

20.40.150 Rates of fare.
A. Each permit holder operating a taxicab shall disclose fares, fees, or rates to the passenger. A permit holder operating a taxicab may satisfy this requirement by disclosing fares, fees, or rates on its Internet website, mobile telephone application, or telephone orders upon request by the passenger.

B. The permit holder operating a taxicab shall notify the passenger of the applicable rate prior to the passenger accepting the ride for walkup rides and street hails. The rate may be provided on the exterior of the vehicle, within an application of a mobile telephone, device or other Internet-connected device, or be clearly visible in either print or electronic form inside the taxicab.

C. Except as provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for any permit holder or driver of a paratransit vehicle to demand of a passenger a charge for hire which is greater than the rate disclosed by the permit holder to the passenger or the City’s maximum rate.

D. Each permit holder operating an LSV shall establish rates of fare based on a per grid block or per hour basis. Each LSV shall prominently post rates in dollars-per-grid block and dollars-per-hour basis and said rates shall be clearly displayed in the passenger compartment.

E. Each permit holder operating a taxicab shall set the taximeter for the rate that he/she will charge and have the taximeter sealed and inspected. The taximeter, when required, shall calculate fares upon the basis of a combination of mileage traveled and time elapsed. When operating with respect to fare indication, the fare-indicating mechanism shall be actuated by the mileage mechanism whenever the vehicle is in motion at such a speed that the rate of mileage revenue equals or exceeds the time rate, and may be actuated by the time mechanism whenever the vehicle speed is less than this, and when the vehicle is not in motion.

1. Waiting time shall include all time when a taxicab occupied or otherwise engaged by a passenger is not in motion or is traveling at a speed which is slow enough for the time rate to exceed the mileage rate. Waiting time will also include the time consumed while standing at the direction of the passenger or person who has engaged the taxicab.

2. It shall be the duty of every permit holder operating a taxicab to keep the taximeter in proper condition so that the taximeter will, at all times, correctly and accurately indicate the charge for the distance traveled and waiting time. The taximeter shall at all times record the charge for the distance traveled and waiting time.

3. The taximeter shall at all times be subject to inspection by any Peace Officer or authorized City employee. The Peace Officer, or authorized City employee, is hereby authorized to investigate or cause to be investigated the taximeter and, upon discovery of any inaccuracy in the taximeter, or if the taximeter is unsealed, to remove or cause to be removed the vehicle equipped with this taximeter from the streets of the City until the taximeter has been correctly adjusted and sealed. Prior to being returned to service, the vehicle and taximeter must be inspected by the Police Department.

F. The City Council may, by resolution, from time to time, set a maximum rate a paratransit business may establish. (Ord. 2086 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 1958 § 11, 2004)

Chapter 20.41
PARATRANSIT DRIVERS
Sections:

20.41.010    Purpose.

20.41.020    Definitions.

20.41.030    Issuing authority.

20.41.040    Reserved.

20.41.050    Regulations.

20.41.010 Purpose.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a paratransit vehicle permitted by the City unless such person has an operations permit: paratransit driver issued by the City. (Ord. 2086 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 1686)

20.41.020 Definitions.
A. The words and phrases set forth in CMC 20.40.030 are hereby incorporated by this reference as though set forth in this chapter.

B. “Cruising” shall mean the movement over the public streets of a paratransit vehicle in search of or to solicit prospective passengers. The term does not include the travel of a paratransit vehicle to provide a prearranged trip, or to discharge a passenger or passengers, or returning to the owner’s place of business of the owner of the paratransit vehicle.

C. “Driver” shall mean a person who operates the paratransit vehicle and includes a driver who also owns the paratransit vehicle. (Ord. 2086 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018)

20.41.030 Issuing authority.
The Director of Police Services is authorized to issue operations permit: paratransit driver to those drivers of vehicles properly issued an operations permit: paratransit by the City of Coronado. (Ord. 2086 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018)

20.41.040 Reserved.
(Ord. 2086 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018)

20.41.050 Regulations.
A. The permittee shall maintain a valid, unsuspended California State driver’s or chauffeur’s license during the period of the permit.

B. The permittee shall not be convicted of driving under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotics during the period of the permit, nor any crime involving pimping, pandering, prostitution, sexual assault, indecent exposure, annoying or molesting any minor, or possession, sales, or distribution of any controlled substance.

C. During the period of the permit, the permittee shall not have had three or more convictions of any of the offenses set forth in Sections 22350, 22351, 23153, 23152, 23103, and 12104 of the Vehicle Code of the State of California.

D. The permittee shall promptly obey all lawful orders or instructions of any police officer or firefighter within the City.

E. The permittee shall not accept into the paratransit vehicle a larger number of persons than the rated seating capacity of the paratransit vehicle.

F. The permittee shall take the most direct route possible when carrying a passenger to their destination with safety and traffic regulations.

G. The permittee shall not solicit potential passengers by driving in such a manner as to interfere with access to or egress from any public place. However, the permittee may solicit for passengers by driving through any public street or place, without stops other than those due to obstruction of traffic, or traffic regulations, and at such speed as not to interfere with or impede traffic, consistent with the traffic speed regulations.

H. The permittee shall not solicit passengers for any paratransit vehicle unless the permittee is sitting upon the driver’s seat of that vehicle.

I. No driver of any paratransit vehicle shall transport any passenger without charging the disclosed fee pursuant to CMC 20.40.150. (Ord. 2086 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018)

Chapter 20.42
ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES
Sections:

20.42.010    Purpose.

20.42.020    Definitions.

20.42.030    Issuing authority.

20.42.040    Regulations – EPAMD business.

20.42.050    Public liability.

20.42.060    Fees.

20.42.070    Enforcement.

20.42.010 Purpose.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an electric personal assistive mobility device (EPAMD) business within the Coronado City limits unless such person has been issued a business operations permit: EPAMD, by the City of Coronado. (Ord. 1998 § 1, 2008)

20.42.020 Definitions.
A. “EPAMD” shall mean an electric personal assistive mobility device (as defined by California Vehicle Code Section 313).

B. “EPAMD business” shall mean a proprietorship, partnership, corporation, and any other form of commercial enterprise whose purpose is the sale, rent, or lease of one or more electric personal assistive mobility devices. (Ord. 1998 § 1, 2008)

20.42.030 Issuing authority.
The Director of Administrative Services is authorized to issue a business operations permit: EPAMD. (Ord. 1998 § 1, 2008)

20.42.040 Regulations – EPAMD business.
A. No person shall engage in the operation of an EPAMD business within the City except as authorized by a valid business operations permit: EPAMD and such other permits and licenses as are required by law.

B. No person who is engaging in the operation of an EPAMD business shall allow use of, or lease, or rent an EPAMD to a customer unless the customer is also provided, and is required to wear, a safety helmet which meets the specifications of Vehicle Code Section 21212.

C. A person who is engaging in the operation of an EPAMD business shall require customers under the age of 16 years to be accompanied by a parent or guardian at all times.

D. No person who is engaging in the operation of an EPAMD business shall allow use of, or lease or rent an EPAMD to a customer under the influence of alcohol, drugs or controlled substances.

E. No person who is engaging in the operation of an EPAMD business within the City shall employ a person to operate an EPAMD unless such operator has a valid driver’s license or California identification card.

F. A person who is engaging in the operation of an EPAMD business in the City shall:

1. Limit their business operations to demonstrating, selling, leasing, and/or renting EPAMDs. Additionally, a person operating an EPAMD business may provide EPAMDs for the purpose of conducting escorted tours within the Coronado City limits.

2. Ensure that EPAMDs are equipped with proper safety mechanisms as set forth in California Vehicle Code Section 21281.

3. Provide on-site education and safety training to all customers.

4. Keep its EPAMD fleet clean and neat in appearance during operating hours.

5. Ensure their EPAMDs are clearly identified with company markings.

6. Not park or store their EPAMD fleet on City property or City rights-of-way, including but not limited to City streets, sidewalks, parkways, parks, or parking lots.

7. Require tour groups of two or more participants to travel in a single-file procession.

8. Both verbally and in writing, inform customers of the applicable rules and regulations for the operation of EPAMDs in the City of Coronado, so that they are fully informed of restrictions on the operations as described in Chapter 56.90 CMC. Operators of an EPAMD business shall satisfy the requirement of providing written information if the business has: (a) posted conspicuous signage at the business location, listing the restrictions contained in Chapter 56.90 CMC; and (b) required each person renting or operating an EPAMD to certify that the person has (i) received a copy of written information, (ii) read the written information, and (iii) understands the restrictions set forth in the document. Both the signage and the written information must be approved by the Director of Administrative Services or designee.

G. A person who is engaging in the operation of an EPAMD business on tidelands property (including the Coronado Ferry Landing) shall obtain all required permits from the San Diego Unified Port District.

H. No person who is engaging in the operation of an EPAMD business shall use Orange Avenue for the purpose of demonstrating an EPAMD to customers or allow customers to commence or terminate the operation of their EPAMD on Orange Avenue. (Ord. 2007 § 1, 2010; Ord. 1998 § 1, 2008)

20.42.050 Public liability.
A. It shall be unlawful for a person to operate an EPAMD business in the City without obtaining and maintaining in effect commercial general liability insurance coverage in the minimum amounts and forms as required by Administrative Procedure 5-13, or such other policy as may be in effect from time to time.

B. Failure to procure or maintain the required insurance shall constitute grounds for the City to immediately terminate the operations permit: EPAMD, issued to the permit holder. (Ord. 1998 § 1, 2008)

20.42.060 Fees.
In accordance with CMC 20.02.050, a person who is engaging in the operation of an EPAMD business in the City shall pay an annual permit fee as determined from time to time by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 1998 § 1, 2008)

20.42.070 Enforcement.
Any person engaging in the operation of an EPAMD business in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall have their business operations permit: EPAMD revoked by the issuing authority in accordance with Chapter 20.02 CMC. (Ord. 1998 § 1, 2008)

Chapter 20.44
PUBLIC DANCES
Sections:

20.44.010    Purpose.

20.44.020    Issuing authority.

20.44.030    Investigation fee.

20.44.040    Reserved.

20.44.050    Regulations.

20.44.010 Purpose.
Any person who carries on, maintains or conducts any public dance hall or public dance in the City shall first obtain a business operations permit: public dance, together with any other licenses and permits required by this code. (Ord. 1520)

20.44.020 Issuing authority.
The Director of Administrative Services is authorized to issue business operations permit: public dance and to regulate activities thereunder.

20.44.030 Investigation fee.
An application for permit shall be accompanied by an investigation fee in the sum of $10.00.

20.44.040 Reserved.
20.44.050 Regulations.
A. A class A permit shall be required where there is daily or nightly dancing.

B. A class B permit shall be required where there is dancing not to exceed three days or nights in any calendar week.

C. “Public dance hall” is any room, place or space, except a private residence or home, where dancing is carried on or permitted and is open to the public.

D. “Public dance” is any such dance held or given, or held for profit, in any place not a private residence or home.

E. Every permit issued hereunder shall authorize the conducting, operating or carrying on of the permitted business at but one single location and only upon the individual premises in the permit described and only one permit shall be required for the premises upon which a dance or dances are conducted. No permit issued thereunder shall be assignable or transferable.

F. No permit shall be issued until an investigation of the premises has been conducted to determine whether such premises are structurally safe and comply with all the laws of the State of California and the City of Coronado relating to building construction, sanitation and fire protection.

G. It is unlawful for the owner, proprietor, manager or person in charge of any place permitted under the provisions of this chapter, or of any employee of such place, to harbor, admit, receive or permit to be on or remain on or about such place, any intoxicated or boisterous person, or any person whose presence or conduct tends to corrupt the morals of any other persons present or whose conduct or presence tends to create a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.

H. It is unlawful for any employee in any capacity in or about any premises licensed under the provisions of this chapter to consume, in or about the licensed premises, any alcoholic beverage.

I. Except by special permission of the City Manager, it is unlawful to provide or permit any music, dancing or entertaining in or about any premises permitted under the provisions of this chapter between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.

J. It is the duty of every owner, lessee, proprietor, or occupant or manager of any hotel, hall, room, building, or place permitted under the provisions of this chapter to have present at all times, when dancing is carried on in such hotel, hall, room, building, or place, a qualified person or persons whose duty it shall be to see that the provisions of this chapter are lawfully carried out.

K. Any Peace Officer of the County, City of Coronado, or of the State of California, or any officer of the United States Government charged with the duty of enforcing the public laws of the United States Government, shall have free access at all times to any dance hall licensed under the provision of this chapter.

L. It is unlawful for any person to carry on, or conduct or assist in carrying on, maintaining or conducting any public dance hall or dance, in connection with any business or place wherein alcoholic beverages are sold or served, unless the following minimum square footage requirements are complied with:

1. Premises. The business premises wherein a public dance is conducted shall include an area of not less than 5,000 square feet.

2. Room – Floor. The room in which such public dance is conducted shall contain at least 2,000 square feet of said premises of which not less than 300 square feet shall be devoted exclusively to dancing. If in any case the City Manager, after an investigation as herein provided for the granting of the original permit, shall recommend that the floor spaces above provided shall be lessened, then, in that event, the Council may, in its discretion, determine and declare the area requirements shall be required. This section shall not be determined to prohibit the conduct or maintenance of a public dance in any room, place, or space where dancing is permitted.

Chapter 20.46
FOR-HIRE BUS REGULATIONS
Sections:

20.46.010    Purpose.

20.46.020    Definition – For-hire bus.

20.46.030    Prohibition.

20.46.040    Regulations – Basic bus route.

20.46.050    Regulations – Public safety deviations.

20.46.060    Regulations – General.

20.46.070    Regulations – No parking in Residential Zones.

20.46.080    Regulations – No discharge/pick-up of passengers in Residential Zones.

20.46.090    Operations permit: small bus.

20.46.100    Operations permit: special bus service.

20.46.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate the operation of “for-hire buses” so as to provide needed public transit and historical awareness within the City while affording maximum protection for the residential character, safety and environment of the City. (Ord. 1820)

20.46.020 Definition – For-hire bus.
A. For purposes of this chapter, “for-hire bus” is a motor vehicle, including without limitation a tour bus or jitney, which meets all of the following criteria:

1. Is a “bus” as defined by State law (Vehicle Code § 233);

2. Is a commercial vehicle as defined by State law (Vehicle Code § 260); and

3. Is designed, used or maintained to carry more than 27 passengers, including the driver.

B. For purposes of this chapter, “for-hire bus” does not include:

1. Vehicles which are being operated in accordance with the provisions of Sections 1031 through 1036 of the Public Utilities Code;

2. School buses as defined by State law (Vehicle Code § 545); or

3. School public activity bus while operating as a school pupil activity bus. (Vehicle Code § 546)

20.46.030 Prohibition.
Unless otherwise authorized in accordance with the provisions of this code, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated a for-hire bus on any street, alley or highway contrary to the provisions of this chapter. (Vehicle Code § 35701)

20.46.040 Regulations – Basic bus route.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive, operate or causing to be driven or operated, or otherwise control a for-hire bus on a public street or alley other than on the following basic bus route:

A. State Highway 282;

B. State Highway 75;

C. Glorietta Boulevard between State Highway 75 and Second Street, Second Street between Glorietta Boulevard and A Avenue, A Avenue between Second Street and First Street, First Street between A Avenue and Orange Avenue, and Orange Avenue between First Street and Third Street;

D. Isabella Avenue between Orange Avenue and Ocean Boulevard, and Ocean Boulevard between Isabella Avenue and R. H. Dana Place;

E. Churchill Place and R. H. Dana Place;

F. Coronado Bay Road; and

G. Strand Way between Avenida De Las Arenas and Pomona Avenue, Pomona Avenue between Strand Way and Glorietta Boulevard, and Glorietta Boulevard between Pomona Avenue and Fourth Street.

20.46.050 Regulations – Public safety deviations.
All for-hire buses may deviate from the routes authorized in this chapter in accordance with the following public safety exceptions:

A. When completing a change of direction in the following manner:

1. From southbound on State Highway 75, to Avenida De Las Arenas, then left onto Strand Way northbound, then left opposite Avenida Del Sol, returning to State Highway 75, northbound; or

2. From southbound on State Highway 75, to Coronado Cays Boulevard off-ramp, then left onto the on-ramp to State Highway 75, northbound, returning to State Highway 75, northbound.

B. When necessary to respond as a result of an emergency threatening the health, safety or property of bus passengers or other members of the public, so long as the deviation is by the most direct safe route of return to the authorized route.

C. When necessary to comply with the directions of an authorized traffic control person or device within the City.

20.46.060 Regulations – General.
It shall be unlawful for any person driving, operating or causing to be driven or operated, or who is otherwise in control of a for-hire bus:

A. To allow the motor of the for-hire bus to run while the for-hire bus is not moving except:

1. While the for-hire bus is in transit;

2. While passengers are actively boarding or disembarking the bus and then for a period of no longer than 10 minutes; or

3. When public safety requires;

B. To operate a sound amplification system on the for-hire bus that produces sound audible to the public at a point 50 feet or more from the for-hire bus;

C. To fail to display on the for-hire bus, in a manner open to public view, a permit, or copy thereof, required and issued in accordance with this chapter; or

D. To fail to present, on request of any enforcement officer of the City, a permit, or a copy thereof, required and issued in accordance with this chapter.

20.46.070 Regulations – No parking in Residential Zones.
Except in an emergency threatening the public safety or in accordance with a valid permit issued pursuant to this chapter, it is unlawful for any person driving, operating or causing to be driven or operated, or who is otherwise in control of a for-hire bus to park or cause to be parked the for-hire bus:

A. On property zoned for residential use; or

B. On either a public street or alley at a location that is immediately adjacent to property zoned for residential use.

20.46.080 Regulations – No discharge/pick-up of passengers in Residential Zones.
Except in an emergency threatening the public safety or in accordance with a valid permit issued pursuant to this chapter, it is unlawful for any person driving, operating or causing to be driven or operated, or who is otherwise in control of a for-hire bus to discharge or pick up passengers:

A. On property zoned for residential use; or

B. On either a public street or alley at a location that is immediately adjacent to property zoned for residential use.

20.46.090 Operations permit: small bus.
The City Council is authorized to issue operations permit: small bus, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 20.02 CMC and with the following provisions:

A. Filing of Application. The application for an operations permit: small bus shall be filed in the Office of the City Clerk and thereafter set for public hearing the City Council.

B. Required Findings. An operations permit: small bus may be issued only if, based on facts submitted during a noticed public hearing, the City Council finds each of the following:

1. The proposed bus service will provide one or more of the following:

a. Scheduled, intracity transport of individuals on a fixed route within the City; or

b. Transport of individuals to locations within the City to show the City’s historical and aesthetic attributes; and

2. The permitted for-hire bus has an overall length of 33 feet or less.

C. Route. In addition to the basic bus route, the operations permit: small bus may authorize the permittee to travel on such other streets as the City Council deems necessary to accomplish the purposes of this chapter.

D. Limitations on Deviations. Deviations from the basic bus route authorized the permit shall not include routes of travel or points of discharge or pick-up of passengers within a Residential Zone unless the City Council finds that the proposed activity will not unreasonably interfere with the quiet enjoyment of residential real property in the area, and will not involve the parking of vehicles by nonresident passengers in the area of discharge or pick-up.

E. Terms and Conditions. The City Council shall impose such terms and conditions on the permittee as are necessary to afford maximum protection for the residential character, safety and environment of the City, to include without limitation a condition that designates a permitted route.

20.46.100 Operations permit: special bus service.
An operations permit: special bus service may be issued by the City in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 20.02 CMC and with the following provisions:

A. Filing of Application. The application for an operations permit: special bus service shall be filed with the Department of Police Services.

B. Authority to Issue.

1. An operations permit: special bus service issued by the Director of Police Services may authorize a for-hire bus to deviate from the basic bus route on no more than three specified days within any six-month period.

2. Upon the recommendation of the Director of Police Services made at a noticed public hearing, the City Council may issue an operations permit: special bus service for more frequent deviations, but only if the City Council finds that more frequent service will be consistent with the purposes of this chapter.

C. Requirements. An operations permit: special bus service shall be issued only if the City finds that:

1. The service is necessary for the public convenience;

2. The service proposed cannot otherwise be feasibly provided; and

3. One or more of the following circumstances exists:

a. When necessary to travel to or from a specific facility (such as a hotel, motel, store, restaurant, theater, spa, golf course, beach, swimming pool, or some similar activity center) within the City for the purpose of discharging or picking up passengers who are utilizing and not merely viewing from the bus, the facility, so long as the deviation is by the most direct route between the facility and the basic bus route; or

b. When necessary to travel to or from a specific site within the City for the purpose of discharging or picking up passengers who are participating in or attending an event at the site, so long as the deviation is by the most direct route between the event site and the basic bus route; or

c. When necessary to travel to or from a single point within the City for the purpose of discharging or picking up a group of passengers who have chartered the bus for that purpose, so long as the deviation is by the most direct route between the single point of discharge/pick-up and the closest portion of the basic bus route; or

d. When necessary to transport individuals to locations within the City to show the City’s historical and aesthetic attributes.

D. Limitations on Deviations. The deviations from the basic bus route authorized by the permit shall not include routes of travel or points of discharge or pick-up of passengers within a Residential Zone unless the City finds that the proposed activity will not unreasonably interfere with the quiet enjoyment of residential real property in the area, and will not involve the parking of vehicles by nonresident passengers in the area of discharge or pick-up.

E. Terms and Conditions. The City shall impose such terms and conditions on the permittee as are necessary to afford maximum protection for the residential character, safety and environment of the City, to include without limitation a condition that designates a permitted route.

Chapter 20.48
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
Sections:

20.48.010    Purpose.

20.48.020    Issuing authority.

20.48.030    Definitions.

20.48.040    Investigation fee.

20.48.050    Permit fee.

20.48.060    Regulations.

20.48.065    Additional regulations.

20.48.010 Purpose.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on (or permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on) in or upon any premises within the City of Coronado the operation of a massage establishment, without first having obtained an operations permit: massage establishment, together with any other licenses and permits required by this code.

B. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following classes of individuals while engaged in the performance of the duties of their respective professions:

1. Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, or physical therapists who are duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the State of California;

2. Nurses registered under the laws of the State of California;

3. Barbers and beauticians who are duly licensed under the laws of the State of California while engaging in practices within the scope of their licenses;

4. Hospitals, nursing homes, sanitariums, or other health care facilities duly licensed by the State of California;

5. Accredited high schools, junior colleges, and colleges whose employees are acting within the scope of their employment;

6. Trainers of amateur, semiprofessional or professional athletes or athletic teams. (Ord. 1554)

20.48.020 Issuing authority.
The Director of Police Services is authorized to issue operations permit: massage establishment.

20.48.030 Definitions.
Unless the particular provision or the context otherwise requires, the definitions and provisions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning, and application of words and phrases used in this chapter.

A. “Employee” means any and all persons, other than a massage technician, who may render any service to the permittee, and who receives compensation directly from the permittee or his agent, and who have no physical contact with the customers or clients.

B. “Massage” means any method of treating the external parts of the body by means of pressure on or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, or stimulating the external parts of the body with the hands or other parts of the body, with or without the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliances; or with or without supplementary aids such as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations.

C. “Massage establishment” means any establishment having a fixed place of business where any person, firm, association, partnership or corporation engages in, conducts, or carries on, or permits to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, any business of giving massages.

D. “Massage technician” means any person who administers to another person, for any form of consideration, a massage.

E. “Out call massage service” means a massage establishment where a function of such business is to engage in or carry on massage, not at a fixed location but at a location designated by the customer or client.

F. “Recognized school of massage” means any school or institution of learning which teaches the theory, ethics, practice, profession, or work of massage, which school or institution has been approved pursuant to the California Education Code, and which requires a resident course of study of not less than 100 hours to be given in not less than six calendar months before the student shall be furnished with a diploma or a certificate of graduation. Schools offering a correspondence course not requiring attendance shall not be deemed a recognized school. The City of Coronado shall have a right to confirm that the applicant has actually attended class in a recognized school. (Ord. 1582)

20.48.040 Investigation fee.
The investigation fee shall be set from time to time upon the recommendation of the City Manager approved by resolution of the City Council.

20.48.050 Permit fee.
The permit fee shall be set from time to time upon the recommendation of the City Manager approved by resolution of the City Council.

20.48.060 Regulations.
A. No owner, manager, operator, responsible managing employee, or permittee in charge of or in control of a massage establishment shall employ or permit a person to act as a massage technician who is not in possession of a valid, unrevoked massage technician permit.

B. The possession of a valid massage establishment permit does not authorize the possessor to perform work as a massage technician. A massage technician permit is required.

C. Massage shall be provided only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.

D. A list of services available and the cost of such services shall be posted in an open, public place within the massage establishment. No owner, manager, operator, responsible managing employee, or permittee shall permit and no massage technician shall offer or perform any service other than those posted.

E. No massage establishment shall place, publish or distribute or cause to be placed, published or distributed any advertising matter that suggests that any service is available other than those services posted in accordance with subsection D of this section.

F. Every massage establishment shall prepare a concurrent written record of the date and hour of each massage, the name and address of each patron, the name of the massage technician administering the treatment, and the type of treatment administered. Such records shall be open to inspection only by officials charged with enforcement of this chapter and for no other purpose. The information furnished or secured as a result of any inspection shall be kept confidential. Any unauthorized disclosure or use of such records by any employee of the City of Coronado or the County of San Diego or the owner or employee of the massage establishment shall constitute a misdemeanor. Such records shall be maintained for a period of two years from the date of the entry.

G. Massage establishments shall provide to each patron, with request of the patron, clean, sanitary towels and linen or other covering for the surface upon which the massage is given. The towels, linen or other covering shall not be reused without first having been laundered and disinfected. Disposable towels and coverings shall not be reused.

H. If the massage establishment provides massages to both males and females, then separate massage rooms, dressing facilities, toilet facilities, bathing facilities, and locker facilities shall be provided to each sex and each room and facility will be clearly designed as being for a particular sex.

I. Based upon the maximum number of patrons for which the massage establishment can render on-site, simultaneous massages, there shall be:

1. A minimum of one shower or tub for each two persons;

2. A minimum of one separate locker capable of being locked for each patron;

3. Two toilets and two wash basins for every six male patrons;

4. Two toilets and two wash basins for every six female patrons.

J. Patrons of different sexes shall not be placed in same room, booth or cubicle.

K. All employees, including massage technicians, shall wear clean, nontransparent outer garments covering the body from knee to neck. A separate employee dressing room for each sex must be available on the premises with individual lockers for each employee.

L. A minimum of one separate wash basin shall be provided in each massage establishment for the use of employees, which basin shall provide soap or detergent, and hot and cold running water at all times, and shall be located within or as close as practicable to the area devoted to performing of massage services. Sanitary towels shall also be provided at each basin.

M. Each massage table shall be covered with a pad of durable, washable plastic or other waterproof material acceptable to the Health Department.

N. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms or cabinets, toilet rooms, shower and bath rooms, cabinet rooms, and pools shall be maintained in a thoroughly clean and disinfected condition. At least once each day the premises shall be cleaned with a disinfectant approved by the Health Department. Showers and bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned with a disinfectant approved by the Health Department after each use. All walls, ceilings, floors and other physical facilities for the establishment must be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.

O. Instruments utilized in performing massage shall not be used on more than one patron unless they have been sterilized, using approved sterilizing methods.

P. Adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing instruments used in performing the acts of massage shall be provided by the permittee.

Q. No massage shall be carried on within any cubicle, room, booth or any area within a massage establishment which is fitted with a door capable of being locked.

R. All exterior doors shall remain unlocked during business hours from the interior side.

S. Massage shall not be given unless the patron’s genitals are fully covered and female patrons are, in addition, wearing clothing fully covering their breasts.

T. No massage establishment shall open for business without at least one massage technician holding a current, unrevoked permit being on the premises at all times.

U. No person other than the person receiving a massage and a massage technician, who possesses a current and unrevoked permit, shall be within a room wherein a massage is being given.

V. No massage establishment shall operate as a school of massage, or use the same facilities as that of a school of massage.

W. No persons shall enter, be or remain in any part of a massage establishment or at a location where a massage is being given while in the possession of, consuming or using any alcoholic beverage or drugs except pursuant to a prescription for such drugs. The owner, operator, responsible managing employee, manager, or permittee shall not permit any such person to enter or remain upon such premises.

X. The City of Coronado Director of Police Services, Director of Community Development, and the San Diego County Health Officer or their authorized representatives shall be allowed to enter the massage establishment from time to time for the purpose of making reasonable inspections to observe and enforce compliance with applicable regulations, laws and the provisions of this chapter.

Y. The holder of a permit to operate or conduct a massage establishment shall notify the Director of Police Services, in writing, of the name and address of each person employed as a massage technician at such establishment within five business days of that person being employed.

Z. Hot and cold running water shall be provided at the massage establishment at all times.

20.48.065 Additional regulations.
A. Closed cabinets shall be provided for the storage of clean linens, towels and coverings. Receptacles for used towels, linens and other coverings shall be provided at the location where the massage is given.

B. If, during the term of a permit, the applicant has any change in information concerning his original application, he must so notify the Director of Police Services, in writing, within 30 days of such change.

C. The holder of a permit shall not permit a person in the permittee’s employ to violate the provisions of Chapter 20.49 CMC.

D. Any sign shall comply with the ordinances of the City of Coronado.

E. Lighting shall be provided in accordance with Article 220 of the National Electric Code, and in addition, at least one artificial light of not less than 40 watts shall be provided in each room or enclosure where massage services are performed.

F. Ventilation shall be provided in accordance with Section 1105 of the Uniform Building Code.

Chapter 20.49
MASSAGE TECHNICIANS
Sections:

20.49.010    Purpose.

20.49.020    Issuing authority.

20.49.030    Definitions.

20.49.040    Investigation fee.

20.49.050    Permit fee.

20.49.060    Regulations.

20.49.010 Purpose.
A. It is unlawful for any person to conduct or carry on the business of technician without holding a valid business operations permit: massage technician, together with any other licenses and permits required by this code.

B. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to any person listed in CMC 20.48.010(B). (Ord. 1555)

20.49.020 Issuing authority.
The Director of Police Services is authorized to issue operations permit: massage technician.

20.49.030 Definitions.
The definitions listed in CMC 20.48.030 are applicable to this chapter.

20.49.040 Investigation fee.
The investigation fee shall be set from time to time upon the recommendation of the City Manager approved by resolution of the City Council.

20.49.050 Permit fee.
The permit fee shall be set from time to time upon the recommendation of the City Manager approved by resolution of the City Council.

20.49.060 Regulations.
A. The applicant must possess a diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized school indicating a skill in massage.

B. It shall be unlawful for any massage technician to massage the genital area of any patron or the breasts of any female patron.

C. When on duty or at the massage establishment or at the location where a massage is being given, massage technicians and all other employees of the permittee shall be fully clothed from knee to neck in nontransparent clothing at all times and shall not expose their genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or in the case of female technicians, their breasts.

D. Massage technicians shall perform massage services only at the location or locations specified in the permit.

Chapter 20.52
PAWNBROKERS, JUNK DEALERS AND SECONDHAND GOODS DEALERS
Sections:

20.52.010    Purpose.

20.52.020    Pawnbroker.

20.52.030    Junk dealer.

20.52.040    Secondhand dealer.

20.52.050    Garage sale.

20.52.060    Multiple license requirements.

20.52.070    Records of reports.

20.52.080    Application for license.

20.52.090    Processing of application.

20.52.100    Renewal of license.

20.52.120    Enforcement.

20.52.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to supplement the statutory scheme enacted by the State of California to regulate the activities of pawnbrokers, junk dealers and secondhand dealers and to provide a permit procedure for the relating business activity. (Ord. 1511)

20.52.020 Pawnbroker.
Every individual, firm, partnership, association or corporation who commences or carries on a business of a pawnbroker as defined by the laws of the State of California shall:

A. Obtain a pawnbroker’s permit from the City of Coronado in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

B. Comply with such regulations as are imposed by the State of California.

20.52.030 Junk dealer.
Every individual, firm, partnership, association or corporation who commences or carries on a business of a junk dealer as defined by the laws of the State of California shall:

A. Obtain a junk dealer’s permit from the City of Coronado in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

B. Comply with such regulations as are imposed by the State of California.

20.52.040 Secondhand dealer.
Every individual, firm, partnership, association or corporation who commences or carries on a business of a secondhand dealer as defined by the laws of the State of California shall:

A. Obtain a secondhand dealer’s permit from the City of Coronado in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

B. Comply with such regulations as are imposed by the State of California.

20.52.050 Garage sale.
A. Every individual, firm, partnership, association or corporation who commences or carries on the business of a garage sale characterized by the holding out to the public for purchase secondhand personal property from the seller’s place of residence shall obtain a secondhand dealer’s permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

B. A garage sale characterized by the following shall be considered as a permitted, accessory use in a Residential Zone that shall not require a permit under the provisions of this chapter:

1. The sale involves only the personal property of the resident seller; and

2. The sale is conducted only between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. for no more than two consecutive days; and

3. The resident seller has not conducted a garage sale during the preceding six months; except that one additional sale may be conducted in conjunction with a change of residence of the resident seller.

20.52.060 Multiple license requirements.
When the primary aspect of a business is required to be licensed by another chapter of this code and a secondary aspect of such business involves the buying or selling of secondhand, tangible personal property in excess of 20 percent of the gross sales and purchases of goods or merchandise sold or purchased in the regular course of business, such business shall obtain a permit for its primary aspect and a secondhand business permit for the described secondary aspect. However, such business shall be exempt from the permit fee imposed by this chapter.

20.52.070 Records of reports.
Reports submitted to the Director of Police Services by a licensee under this chapter shall be maintained by the Director of Police Services for a period of two years from the date of receipt and thereafter destroyed unless otherwise required for the operation of the Police Department.

20.52.080 Application for license.
A. The applicant shall file with the Director of Administrative Services an application, executed under oath or affirmation, containing the following information:

1. Permanent home address and full local address of applicant.

2. A brief description of the nature of the business, the goods to be acquired and disposed of, and the process of acquisition.

3. A photograph of the applicant, taken within 60 days immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application. The picture shall be two inches by two inches, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner.

4. The fingerprints of the applicant.

5. A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any crime or misdemeanor involving property, and if so, the particular crimes or misdemeanors involved and the dates and places of such convictions.

B. To be accepted for filing, the application must be accompanied by a processing fee, the amount of which shall be established from time to time by the Director of Police Services to reflect the cost of administration and a deposit of the initial permit fee which shall be held pending the outcome of the application’s processing. The processing fee is nonrefundable.

20.52.090 Processing of application.
A. The application shall be referred by the Director of Administrative Services to the Director of Police Services for investigation. Except as otherwise provided, the application shall be submitted by the Director of Police Services to the Department of Justice for review.

B. In the event that the Director of Police Services, upon investigation, should determine that the issuance of such a permit to the applicant would be detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare of the City, either because of the moral character of the applicant or the creation of a policing problem as a result of the establishment of a secondhand goods business in a particular location, or showing that an increase in the number of secondhand goods business activity over and above the existing activity within the City would be detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare, those findings shall be prepared in writing and delivered to the applicant. The applicant may, upon receipt of such notice of denial, appeal the denial to the City Council within 10 days of the receipt of the denial by allowing the permit fee to remain on deposit and by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk of the City. The City Council shall set the matter of the denial for administrative hearing.

C. Upon approval of the Director of Police Services, the Director of Administrative Services shall issue the secondhand goods license.

20.52.100 Renewal of license.
A permit may be renewed prior to expiration by the payment of the current permit fee to the Director of Administrative Services.

20.52.120 Enforcement.
A. It shall be an infraction for any person to commence or carry on a business without first having obtained a permit required by this chapter. Each day that such business is carried on without a permit shall be a separate offense.

B. It shall be an infraction to conduct a business, an aspect of which is required to have a special secondhand dealer license, when such business has not been conducted in compliance with the reporting, recording and retaining provisions by this chapter.

Chapter 20.56
CHARITABLE SOLICITATION
Sections:

20.56.010    Purpose.

20.56.020    Issuing authority.

20.56.030    Fee.

20.56.040    Regulation.

20.56.010 Purpose.
Any person who conducts a solicitation or sales solicitation for charitable purposes as defined by Section 17510.2 of the Business and Professions Code shall first obtain an operations permit: charitable solicitation. (Ord. 1522)

20.56.020 Issuing authority.
The Director of Police Services is authorized to issue operations permit: charitable solicitation, and to regulate activities thereunder.

20.56.030 Fee.
No fee shall be charged for the issuance of the operations permit: charitable solicitation.

20.56.040 Regulation.
A. The permit shall be issued upon delivery to the Director of Police Services of an example of the card or printed material a seller or solicitor intends to utilize in complying with Section 17510.3 of the Business and Professions Code.

B. The seller or solicitor shall comply with the provisions of Section 17510 et seq. of the Business and Professions Code regulating charitable solicitations.

C. Commercial fundraisers shall demonstrate compliance with Government Code Section 12599.

D. This chapter shall take precedence over and supersedes any other provisions of this title which appear to regulate solicitations for charitable purposes as defined herein. (Ord. 1758)

Chapter 20.60
CASINO PARTIES
Sections:

20.60.010    Purpose.

20.60.020    Definitions.

20.60.030    Issuing authority.

20.60.040    Application.

20.60.050    Regulations.

20.60.010 Purpose.
It is unlawful for any person to commence, conduct, manage, participate in or sponsor a casino party unless such person is a member of a tax exempt organization acting on behalf of such tax exempt organization and such organization has first obtained an operations permit: casino party. (Ord. 1730)

20.60.020 Definitions.
A. “Casino party” shall mean any event at which the public is permitted or invited to play games of chance as are listed in Section 330 of the California Penal Code and which are played for neither money, an item representing value, or any other consideration.

B. “Chips” or “script” shall mean simulated paper currency or tokens having no face value.

C. “Gaming equipment supplier” shall mean any person or entity engaged in the business of leasing, renting, operating or otherwise providing specialized gaming tables, devices, equipment or supplies used in the activities regulated by this chapter.

D. “Supplier employee” shall mean any person who is present during the period of operation of a casino party and who is compensated for said presence by a gaming equipment supplier.

E. “Tax exempt organization” shall mean any organization exempted from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by provisions of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

20.60.030 Issuing authority.
The Director of Police Services is authorized to issue operations permit: casino party.

20.60.040 Application.
The application shall be filed no later than 30 days prior to the proposed date of the casino party.

20.60.050 Regulations.
A. Any police officer shall have free access to any casino party permitted by this chapter. The permittee shall have the casino party permit and a list of approved volunteers of the tax exempt organization and supplier employees who will operate the casino party available for inspection at all times during the event.

B. A casino party shall only be held at a fixed location easily accessible for inspection by the City.

C. No minor shall be allowed to participate in any casino party.

D. No casino party shall be conducted between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.

E. All casino parties shall be open to the public free of charge and no advance reservation shall be required for attendance.

F. All chips or script must be dispensed free of charge. It shall be unlawful for there to be any correlation between the amount of the chips or script dispensed and the amount of money donated by a prospective participant.

G. No cash or check may be used or displayed at any gaming table or device.

H. No chips or script may be redeemed for cash. Chips or script won an any of the games prohibited by California Penal Code Section 330 may not be exchanged for money or any item representing value which includes drawing or lottery tickets for prizes or merchandise. All prizes or merchandise must be awarded by means of a raffle or similar lottery. No single prize shall exceed $2,500 in fair market value, and the total fair market value of prizes awarded at any one casino party shall not exceed $5,000, and no cash prize shall be awarded.

I. All advertisements relating to a casino party shall indicate that no purchase or donation is necessary to participate and that the event is open to the general public.

J. The casino managers and all cashiers, volunteers, supervisors, persons assigned to operate any gaming tables and persons who participate in the promotion of any game during the operation of the casino party, must wear on his or her outside clothing, in plain view, at chest height, an identification insignia or badge specifying the full name and affiliation of such person.

Chapter 20.70
AMUSEMENT DEVICE CENTERS
Sections:

20.70.010    Purpose.

20.70.020    Issuing authority.

20.70.030    Reserved.

20.70.040    Reserved.

20.70.050    Regulations.

20.70.010 Purpose.
A. No person shall conduct a commercial activity within the City involving the use of five or more amusement devices without first having obtained an operations permit: amusement device center, together with any other licenses and permits required by this code.

B. For purposes of this chapter, an “amusement device” is defined as any machine, device or apparatus, the operation or use of which is permitted, controlled, allowed or made possible by the deposit or placing of any coin, plate, disc, slug or key into any slot, crevice or other opening or by the payment of any fee or fees, for the use as a game, contest, or amusement of any description, or which may be used for any such game, contest or amusement, and the use or possession of which is not prohibited by any law of the State of California.

20.70.020 Issuing authority.
The Director of Police Services is authorized to issue business operations permit: amusement device center, and to regulate activities related thereto.

20.70.030 Reserved.
20.70.040 Reserved.
20.70.050 Regulations.
At all times at which minors are admitted to the premises, there shall be an adult supervisor on the premises who is capable in terms of physical ability, emotional maturity, training, experience, equipment and authority of requiring patrons to use the premises in a lawful and orderly manner.

Chapter 20.74
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES
Sections:

20.74.010    Purpose.

20.74.020    Activity subject to regulation.

20.74.022    Other definitions.

20.74.030    Issuing authority.

20.74.040    Prohibition.

20.74.050    Operations permit regulations.

20.74.060    Application, notice and hearing.

20.74.010 Purpose.
A. It is the purpose of this chapter:

1. To regulate adult entertainment businesses so that they are conducted in a manner that prevents crime, maintains property values, prevents blight and avoids deterioration of the City’s neighborhoods;

2. To establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of adult entertainment businesses within the City; and

3. To regulate, but not prohibit, the display of nonobscene adult entertainment material.

B. Nothing in this chapter is intended to allow either obscene material or conduct which is punishable under State or Federal law. (Ord. 1843)

20.74.020 Activity subject to regulation.
A. For the purpose of applying the regulations of this chapter, an “adult entertainment business” is any commercial enterprise with a regular and substantial course of business activity involving the display of adult entertainment material to patrons. Categories of businesses include without limitation:

1. “Live Presentation” Category. An in-person display, by one or more living persons, for the observation by patrons, of adult entertainment material.

2. “Motion Picture Projection” Category. A display by motion picture projection, for the observation by patrons, of adult entertainment material.

3. “Video Presentation” Category. A display, by video, for the observation by patrons, of adult entertainment material.

B. For the purpose of applying the regulations of this chapter, “adult entertainment material” presents:

1. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the aureole;

2. Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered;

3. The fondling or other touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts;

4. Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of clothed or unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of sexual relationship, and any of the following depicted sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, sodomy, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty;

5. Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation;

6. Masturbation, actual or simulated; or

7. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in this subsection.

20.74.022 Other definitions.
For purposes of administering this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

A. “Private viewing area” is an area for the viewing of adult entertainment material which can accommodate no more than four patrons at one time.

B. “Within 300 feet” and “within 100 feet” refer to the distance measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from any point on the closest exterior structural wall of the structure containing the adult entertainment business to any point on the closest property line of a lot on which there is a use identified in a regulation contained in this chapter.

20.74.030 Issuing authority.
The City Council is authorized to issue an operations permit: adult entertainment business. The City Manager is conditionally authorized to issue an operations permit: adult entertainment business.

20.74.040 Prohibition.
It is unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to commence, conduct, manage, participate in or sponsor an adult entertainment business without a valid operations permit: adult entertainment business.

20.74.050 Operations permit regulations.
Any person, association, partnership or corporation that commences, conducts, manages, participates in, sponsors, operates, or is a responsible managing employee or permittee of an adult entertainment business shall comply with the following:

A. No owner, manager, operator, responsible managing employee or permittee shall have been convicted of a sex-related crime within five years preceding the permit being issued.

B. No owner, manager, operator, responsible managing employee or permittee shall be convicted of a sex-related crime at anytime during the term of the operations permit.

C. The adult entertainment business shall be contained within a structure which prevents a view of the adult entertainment material from any point upon the public right-of-way or other point where the general public is allowed to be.

D. The adult entertainment business shall not be located within a structure:

1. Any portion of which contains living quarters, a bed, mattress or other sleeping accommodations;

2. Which shares ingress or egress with any residential use, or transient occupancy use or living quarters.

E. No adult entertainment business shall be located:

1. Within any zone other than the Central Commercial Zone.

2. Within 100 feet of another adult entertainment business.

3. On a lot that is adjacent to a lot that is zoned Single-Family Residential.

4. Within 300 feet of any:

a. Elementary, junior high, or high school;

b. Church; or

c. Public park identified in the General Plan.

F. Every owner, manager, operator, responsible managing employee or permittee of an adult entertainment business shall prohibit the admission of minors into all portions of the structure occupied by the business.

G. The adult entertainment business shall have a sign, placed on the outside of the building, that conspicuously communicates the message “Minors Not Admitted” or equivalent language.

H. Location for Patrons Viewing Material.

1. The adult entertainment business shall not display adult entertainment material to patrons in a private viewing area.

2. Every owner, manager, operator, responsible managing employee or permittee of an adult entertainment business shall ensure that patrons on the premises only view adult entertainment material when the patron is located within the “viewing area” designated in the operations permit.

I. The adult entertainment business shall maintain a light level of one foot candle, measured at floor level, within the structure, at each point from which a patron can observe the display of adult entertainment material.

J. Every owner, manager, operator, responsible managing employee or permittee of an adult entertainment business shall prohibit patrons on the premises from presenting a live display of adult entertainment material.

K. When the adult entertainment business involves a live display of adult entertainment material:

1. While the adult entertainment material is being displayed live, the adult entertainment business shall have present in the area of its business operation no less than one security guard on duty for each 30-patron segment, or portion thereof, of the maximum allowable occupancy of the area. Each guard the adult entertainment business is required to provide shall be, while on duty:

a. In uniform and in possession of a valid security guard license issued by the State of California;

b. Equipped and able to maintain and restore peace in the business’s operational area; and

c. Responsible only for maintaining and restoring peace in the area of the business’s operation.

2. While adult entertainment material is being displayed live, the adult entertainment business:

a. Shall not allow a person engaged in the live display, such as a dancer, performer or model, to be closer than six feet to any patron; and

b. Shall require each person engaged in the live display, such as a dancer, performer or model, to be on a stage (1) raised no less that 12 inches above the floor level of the patrons’ viewing area; and (2) having a 36-inch high railing that provides a barrier between the stage and patrons.

3. Every owner, manager, operator, responsible managing employee or permittee of an adult entertainment business shall prohibit patrons on the premises from being on the stage.

L. Every owner, manager, operator, responsible managing employee or permittee of the adult entertainment business shall ensure that all of its on-duty employees, who are not participating in a live display of adult entertainment material in compliance with the regulations of this chapter, are not engaged in the live display of adult entertainment material.

M. Every owner, manager, operator, responsible managing employee or permittee of an adult entertainment business shall ensure that the adult entertainment business is in full compliance with all applicable City, State and Federal regulations.

20.74.060 Application, notice and hearing.
A. The applicant shall file in the Office of the City Manager, pursuant to this title, an application for an operations permit: adult entertainment business. (See Chapter 20.02 CMC).

B. Within seven days from the filing of a complete application, the City shall cause to be published a notice of a public hearing to be conducted at the first available regular meeting of the City Council no sooner than five days following the date of publication of notice, but in no event more than 21 days after the date of publication of notice. (See Chapter 1.16 CMC).

C. If a regular meeting of the City Council is not available for setting the public hearing within the timeframe of subsection B of this section, then the City Manager shall conduct the public hearing and render a decision on behalf of the City Council that, upon request, can be reconsidered by the City Council.

D. Unless the applicant and the City agree otherwise, the City’s decision on the application shall be publicly rendered on the day noticed for the commencement of the public hearing. Within three days of the City’s decision, the City shall mail to the applicant a notice of the City’s decision.

Chapter 20.80
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
Sections:

20.80.010    Purpose.

20.80.020    Issuing authority.

20.80.030    Reserved.

20.80.040    Reserved.

20.80.050    Regulations.

20.80.010 Purpose.
A. Any activity involving drug paraphernalia subject to Health and Safety Code Section 11364.5, as may hereinafter be amended, shall constitute a separate business.

B. No person shall conduct a drug paraphernalia business within the City without first having obtained a business operations permit: drug paraphernalia, together with any other licenses and permits required by this code.

C. Drug paraphernalia shall be defined by the provisions of Health and Safety Code Section 11364.5, as may hereinafter be amended. (Ord. 1502)

20.80.020 Issuing authority.
The Director of Police Services is authorized to issue business operations permit: drug paraphernalia and to regulate activities related thereto.

20.80.030 Reserved.
20.80.040 Reserved.
20.80.050 Regulations.
A. The permittee shall comply with all regulations contained in Health and Safety Code Section 11364.5, as may hereinafter be amended.

B. (Reserved).

Chapter 20.84
CHRISTMAS TREE LOTS
Sections:

20.84.010    Purpose.

20.84.020    Definition.

20.84.030    Issuing authority.

20.84.040    Application.

20.84.050    Regulations.

20.84.010 Purpose.
A. It is unlawful for any person to commence, conduct, manage, participate in or sponsor a Christmas tree lot without an operations permit: Christmas tree lot.

B. Any person operating a Christmas tree lot within the City in violation of this chapter or terms of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction in accordance with CMC 1.08.050(A). (Ord. 1807)

20.84.020 Definition.
A “Christmas tree lot,” whether on public or private property, shall include any area used for the purpose of storing, dispensing or selling of cut trees or ornamental bushes with or without flameproofing services.

20.84.030 Issuing authority.
The Director of Fire Services is authorized to issue operations permit: Christmas tree lot.

20.84.040 Application.
The application shall be filed no later than 14 days prior to the proposed date of the Christmas tree lot.

20.84.050 Regulations.
There is hereby adopted by reference, by the City for the purpose of prescribing rules and regulations for a Christmas tree lot, the 1991 Uniform Fire Code, Article 4, Permits, in its entirety.

Chapter 20.90
COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION FRANCHISE (CATV)
Sections:

Article I. Definitions

20.90.010    Definitions.

20.90.020    Franchise.

20.90.030    Grantee.

20.90.040    Street.

20.90.050    Property of grantee.

20.90.060    CATV.

20.90.070    Community antenna television system.

20.90.080    Subscriber.

20.90.090    Gross annual receipts.

Article II. Franchises

20.90.091    Exclusive use of telephone facilities.

20.90.100    Franchise to operate.

20.90.110    Uses permitted by grantee.

20.90.120    Charges.

20.90.130    Duration of franchise.

20.90.140    Franchise payments.

20.90.150    Financial statement.

20.90.160    Minimum charge.

20.90.170    Records.

20.90.180    Holding over after term.

20.90.190    Limitations of franchise.

20.90.200    No extra privileges or exemptions.

20.90.210    Privilege subordinate to lawful occupancy of public property.

20.90.220    Personal trust.

20.90.230    Prompt compliance.

20.90.240    Transfer of power.

20.90.250    Loss due to enforcement.

20.90.260    Compliance with code.

20.90.270    Use of others’ poles.

20.90.280    Franchise.

Article III. Rights of City

20.90.290    Not to impair rights of City.

20.90.300    Reservation of rights and powers.

20.90.310    Granting other franchises.

20.90.320    Construction standards.

20.90.330    Rights and powers of City not waived.

20.90.340    City officials.

Article IV. CATV – Permits, Installation and Service

20.90.350    Time to obtain permits and authorizations.

20.90.360    Time to commence construction.

20.90.370    Time to render service.

20.90.380    Failure to perform – Termination.

Article V. CATV Property

20.90.390    Director of Public Services approval.

20.90.400    Installation on public streets.

20.90.410    Underground utilities.

Article VI. Performance Bond

20.90.420    Discontinuance of system.

20.90.430    Property considered permanently abandoned.

20.90.440    Abandonment procedure.

20.90.450    Changes required by public improvements.

20.90.460    Failure to perform street work.

20.90.470    Bond – Amount – Terms.

20.90.480    Bond – Does not limit liability.

20.90.490    Indemnification of City.

20.90.500    Liability insurance.

Article VII. Administration and Operations

20.90.510    Inspection of property and records.

20.90.520    Reports.

20.90.530    Plans and records on file.

20.90.540    Maps on file.

20.90.550    Operational standards.

20.90.560    Filing, costs, location and service.

20.90.570    Reimbursement for publication expenses.

20.90.580    Office location.

20.90.590    Refusal of service.

20.90.600    Use of utility poles and facilities – Agreement.

20.90.610    Application for franchise.

20.90.620    Action on application.

20.90.630    Franchise conditions.

20.90.640    Franchise renewal.

20.90.650    Acceptance and effective date of franchise.

20.90.660    Filing acceptance of franchise.

Article VIII. Violations

20.90.670    Franchise required for distribution of signal.

20.90.680    Franchise required for construction.

20.90.690    Unauthorized connection.

20.90.700    Payment required.

20.90.710    Tampering with or injuring equipment.

20.90.720    Charging tenants of customers.

20.90.730    Penalty for violation.

Article I. Definitions

20.90.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations, and their derivation shall have the meaning given herein in addition to those definitions given in this code. (Gov. Code § 53066) (Ord. 1511)

20.90.020 Franchise.
“Franchise” means and includes any authorization granted hereunder in terms of a franchise, privilege, permit, license or otherwise to construct, operate and maintain a CATV system in the City. See Government Code Section 53066. Any such authorization, in whatever term granted, shall not mean and include any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the City in accordance with this code.

20.90.030 Grantee.
“Grantee” means the person, firm, or corporation to whom or which a franchise, as hereinabove defined, is granted by the Council under this chapter, and the lawful successor, transferee or assignee or the person, firm, or corporation.

20.90.040 Street.
“Street” means the surface of and the space above and below any public street, road, highway, freeway, land, path, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or drive, now or hereafter existing as such within the City.

20.90.050 Property of grantee.
“Property of grantee” means all property owned, installed or used by a grantee in the conduct of a CATV business in the City under the authority of a franchise granted pursuant to this title.

20.90.060 CATV.
“CATV” means a community antenna television system as defined in CMC 20.90.070.

20.90.070 Community antenna television system.
“Community antenna television system” means any facility which, in whole or in part, receives directly or indirectly over the air and amplifies or otherwise modifies the signals transmitting television of FM radio program broadcasted by one or more television or radio stations and distributes such signals by wire or cable to subscribing members of the public who pay for such service, but such term shall not include:

A. Any such facility which serves fewer than 50 subscribers; or

B. Any such facility which serves only the residents of one or more apartment dwellings under common ownership, control, or management, and commercial establishments located on the premises of such an apartment house; provided, however, that this term shall also include any such facility which in addition to the reception of television and FM radio broadcast signals originates program material and provides other communications services and facilities for subscribing members of the public.

20.90.080 Subscriber.
“Subscriber” means any person or entity receiving for any purpose the CATV service of a grantee.

20.90.090 Gross annual receipts.
“Gross annual receipts” means any and all compensation and other consideration in any form whatever and any contributing grant or subsidy received directly or indirectly by a grantee from subscribers or users in payment for television or FM radio signals or service received within the City. “Gross annual receipts” shall not include any taxes on services furnished by the grantee imposed directly on any subscriber or user by any city, state, or other governmental unit and collected by the grantee for such governmental unit.

Article II. Franchises

20.90.091 Exclusive use of telephone facilities.
When and in the event that the grantee of any franchise granted hereunder constructs, operates, and maintains a CATV system exclusively through telephone company facilities constructed, operated and maintained pursuant to a State granted telephone franchise and offers satisfactory proof that in no event during the life of such franchise shall the grantee make any use of the streets independently of such telephone company facilities, the grantee shall be required to comply with all of the provisions hereof as a “licensee” and in such event whenever the term “grantee” is used herein it shall be deemed to mean and include “licensee.”

20.90.100 Franchise to operate.
A noninclusive franchise to construct, operate and maintain a CATV system within all or any portion of the City may be granted by the Council to any person, firm or corporation, whether operating under an existing franchise or not, who or which offers to furnish and provide such system under and pursuant to the terms and provisions of this title. No provision of this title may be deemed or construed as to require the granting of a franchise when in the opinion of the Council it is in the public interest to restrict the number of grantees to one or more.

20.90.110 Uses permitted by grantee.
Any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this title shall authorize and permit the grantee to engage in the business of operating and providing a CATV system in the City, and for that purpose to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along any public street, such poles, wires, cable, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other property as may be necessary and appurtenant to the CATV system; and in addition, so to use, operate and provide similar facilities or properties rented or leased from other persons, firms, or corporations, including but not limited to any public utility or other grantee franchised or permitted to do business in the City.

20.90.120 Charges.
The grantee may make a charge to subscribers for installation or connection to its CATV system and a fixed monthly charge as filed and approved as herein provided. No increase in the rates and charges to subscribers as set forth in the schedule filed and approved with grantee’s application may be made without the prior approval of the Council expressed by resolution.

20.90.130 Duration of franchise.
No franchise granted by the City Council under this chapter shall be for a term longer than 20 years following the date of acceptance of such franchise by the grantee or the renewal thereof. Any such franchise granted hereunder may be terminated prior to its date of expiration by the Council in the event that the Council shall have found, after 30 days’ notice of any proposed termination and public hearing; that:

A. The grantee has failed to comply with any provision of this title, or has, by act or omission, violated any term or condition of any franchise or permit issued hereunder; or

B. Any provision of this title has become invalid or unenforceable and the City Council further finds that such provisions constitutes a consideration material to the grant of the franchise; or

C. The City acquires the CATV system property of the grantee;

D. Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, a franchise granted hereunder shall not be terminated because of any act or omission of the grantee required by any valid rule, regulation, order or policy of the Federal Communications Commission.

20.90.140 Franchise payments.
Any grantee granted a franchise under this title shall pay to the City, during the life of such franchise, a sum equal to five percent or $1,200, whichever is greater, of the gross annual receipts of the grantee. Such payment by the grantee to the City shall be made annually, or as otherwise provided in the grantees’ franchise, by delivery of the same to the Director of Administrative Services.

20.90.150 Financial statement.
The grantee shall file with the City, within 30 days after the expiration of any calendar year or portion thereof during which such franchise is in force, a financial statement prepared by a certified public accountant, or person otherwise satisfactory to the Council, showing in detail the gross annual receipts, as defined herein, of grantee during the preceding calendar year or portion thereof. It shall be the duty of the grantee to pay to the City, within 15 days after the time for filing such statements, the sum hereinabove prescribed or any unpaid balance thereof for the calendar year or portion thereof by such statements.

20.90.160 Minimum charge.
In any year, or portion thereof, following the first full year service has been provided and during which payments under this section amount to less than $1,200 per year, grantee shall pay the City, as a minimum, an amount equal to $1,200 per year.

20.90.170 Records.
The City shall have the right to inspect the grantee’s records showing the gross receipts from which its franchise payments are computed and the right of audit and recomputation of any and all amounts paid under this title. No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the City may have for further or additional sums payable under this title or for the performance of any other obligation hereunder.

20.90.180 Holding over after term.
In the event of any holding over after expiration or other termination of any franchise granted hereunder, without the consent of the City, the grantee shall pay to the City reasonable compensation and damages of not less than 100 percent of its total gross profits during the period.

20.90.190 Limitations of franchise.
Any franchise granted under this chapter shall be nonexclusive.

20.90.200 No extra privileges or exemptions.
No privilege or exemption shall be granted or conferred by any franchise granted under this title except those specifically prescribed herein.

20.90.210 Privilege subordinate to lawful occupancy of public property.
Any privilege claimed under any such franchise by the grantee in any street or other public property shall be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy of the streets or other public property.

20.90.220 Personal trust.
Any such franchise shall be a privilege to be held in personal trust by the original grantee. It cannot in any event be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by voluntary sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise, without the prior consent of the Council expressed by resolution, and then only under such conditions as may therein be prescribed. Any such transfer or assignment shall be made only by an instrument in writing, a duly executed copy of which shall be filed in the Office of the City Clerk within 30 days after any such transfer or assignment. The consent of the City Council may not be arbitrarily refused; provided, however, the proposed assignee must show financial responsibility and must agree to comply with all provisions of this chapter; and provided, further, that no such consent shall be required for a transfer in trust, mortgage or other hypothecation as a whole to secure an indebtedness.

20.90.230 Prompt compliance.
Time shall be of the essence of any such franchise granted hereunder. The grantee shall not be relieved of his obligation to comply promptly with any of the provisions of this title or by any failure of the City to enforce prompt compliance.

20.90.240 Transfer of power.
Any right or power in, or duty imposed upon, any officer, employee, department, or board of the City shall be subject to transfer by the City to any other officer, employee, department, or board of the City.

20.90.250 Loss due to enforcement.
The grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the City for any loss, cost, expense or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of this chapter or of any franchise issued hereunder or because of its enforcement.

20.90.260 Compliance with code.
The grantee shall be subject to all requirements of this code or any rules, regulations and specifications heretofore or hereafter enacted or established.

20.90.270 Use of others’ poles.
Any such franchise granted shall not relieve the grantee of any obligation involved in obtaining pole space from any utility company or from others maintaining poles in streets.

20.90.280 Franchise.
Any franchise granted hereunder shall be in lieu of any and all other rights, privileges, powers, immunities, and authorities owned, possessed, controlled, or exercisable by grantee, or any successor to any interest of grantee, of or pertaining to the construction, operation, or maintenance of any CATV system in the City; and the acceptance of any franchise hereunder shall operate, as between grantee and the City, as an abandonment of any and all of such rights, privileges, powers, immunities, and authorities within the City, to the effect that, as between grantee and the City, any and all construction, operation and maintenance by any grantee of any CATV system in the City shall be, and shall be deemed and construed in all instances and respects to be, under and pursuant to the franchise, and not under or pursuant to any other right, privilege, power, immunity or authority whatsoever.

Article III. Rights of City

20.90.290 Not to impair rights of City.
Nothing herein shall be deemed or construed to impair or effect, in any way, to any extent, the right of the City to acquire the property of the grantee, either by purchase or through the exercise of the right of eminent domain, at a fair and just value, which shall not include any amount for the franchise itself or for any of the rights or privileges granted, and nothing herein contained shall be construed to contract away or to modify or abridge, either for a term or in perpetuity, the City’s right of eminent domain.

20.90.300 Reservation of rights and powers.
There is hereby reserved to the City every right and power which is required to be herein reserved or provided by this code or any ordinance of the City, and the grantee, by its acceptance of any franchise, agrees to be bound thereby and to comply with any action or requirements of the City in its exercise of such rights or power, heretofore or hereafter enacted or established.

20.90.310 Granting other franchises.
Neither the granting of any franchise hereunder nor any of the provisions contained herein shall be construed to prevent the City from granting any identical, or similar, franchise to any other person, firm or corporation, within all or any portion of the City.

20.90.320 Construction standards.
There is hereby reserved to the City the power to amend any section or part of this title so as to require additional or greater standards of construction, operation, maintenance or otherwise on the part of the grantee.

20.90.330 Rights and powers of City not waived.
Neither the granting of any franchise nor any provision hereof shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power of the City.

20.90.340 City officials.
The Council may do all things which are necessary and convenient in the exercise of its jurisdiction under this chapter, and may determine any question of fact which may arise during the existence of any franchise granted hereunder. The City Manager is hereby authorized and empowered to adjust, settle, or compromise any controversy or charge arising from the operations of any grantee under this title, either on behalf of the City, the grantee, or any subscriber, in the best interest of the public. Either the grantee or any member of the public who may be dissatisfied with the decision of the City Manager may appeal the matter to the Council for hearing and determination. The City Council may accept, reject or modify the decision of the City Manager, and the Council may adjust, settle or compromise any controversy or cancel any charge arising from the operations of any grantee or from any provision of this chapter.

Article IV. CATV – Permits, Installation and Service

20.90.350 Time to obtain permits and authorizations.
Within 60 days after acceptance of any franchise the grantee shall proceed with due diligence to obtain all necessary permits and authorizations which are required in the conduct of its business, including, but not limited to, any utility joint use attachment agreements, microwave carrier licenses, and any other permits, licenses and authorizations to be granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of CATV systems, or their associated microwave transmission facilities.

20.90.360 Time to commence construction.
Within 90 days after obtaining all necessary permits, licenses and authorizations, grantee shall commence construction and installation of the CATV system.

20.90.370 Time to render service.
Within 90 days after the commencement of construction and installation of the system, grantee shall proceed to render service to subscribers, and the completion of the construction thereafter, so that service to all areas designated on the map accompanying the application for franchise, as provided in CMC 20.90.110, shall be provided within one year from the date that service was first provided.

20.90.380 Failure to perform – Termination.
Failure on the part of the grantee to commence and diligently pursue each of the foregoing requirements and to complete each of the matters set forth herein shall be grounds for termination of such franchise, under and pursuant to the terms of CMC 20.90.050; provided, however, that the Council in its discretion may extend the time for the commencement and completion of construction and installation for additional periods in the event the grantee, acting in good faith, experiences delays by reason of circumstances beyond his control.

Article V. CATV Property

20.90.390 Director of Public Services approval.
Any poles, wires, cable lines, conduits or other properties of the grantee to be constructed or installed on streets shall be so constructed or installed only at such locations and in such manner as shall be approved by the Director of Public Services acting in the exercise of his reasonable discretion.

20.90.400 Installation on public streets.
The grantee shall not install or erect any facilities or apparatus in or on public property, places or rights-of-way, or within any privately owned area within the City which has not yet become a public street but is designated or delineated as a proposed public street on any tentative subdivision map approved by the City, except those installed or erected upon public utility facilities now existing, without obtaining the prior written approval of the Director of Public Services.

20.90.410 Underground utilities.
In those areas and portions of the City where the transmission or distribution facilities of both the public utility providing telephone service and those of the utility providing electric service are underground or hereafter may be placed underground, then the grantee shall likewise construct, operate and maintain all of its transmissions and distribution facilities underground. For the purpose of this section, “underground” shall include a partial underground system, e.g., streamlining. Amplifiers in grantee’s transmission and distribution lines may be in appropriate housing upon the surface of the ground as approved by the Director of Public Services.

Article VI. Performance Bond

20.90.420 Discontinuance of system.
In the event that the use of any part of the CATV system is discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of 12 months, or in the event such system or property has been installed in any street or public place without complying with the requirements of grantee’s franchise or this title, or the franchise has been terminated, canceled or has expired, the grantee shall promptly, upon being given 10 days’ notice, remove from the streets or public places all such property and poles of such system other than any which the Director of Public Services may permit to be abandoned in place. In the event of such removal, the grantee shall promptly restore the street or other area from which such property has been removed to a condition satisfactory to the Director of Public Services.

20.90.430 Property considered permanently abandoned.
Any property of the grantee remaining in place 30 days after the termination or expiration of the franchise shall be considered permanently abandoned. The Director of Public Services may extend such time not to exceed an additional 30 days.

20.90.440 Abandonment procedure.
Any property of the grantee to be abandoned in place shall be abandoned in such manner as the Director of Public Services shall prescribe. Upon permanent abandonment of the property of the grantee in place, the property shall become that of the City, and the grantee shall submit to the Director of Administrative Services an instrument in writing, to be approved by the City Attorney, transferring to the City the ownership of such property.

20.90.450 Changes required by public improvements.
The grantee shall, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the same street or other public place, or remove from the street or other public place, any property of the grantee when required by the Director of Public Services by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway and street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines, and tracks or any other type of structures or improvements by public agencies; provided, however, that the grantee shall in all such cases have the privileges and be subject to the obligations to abandon any property of the grantee in place, as provided in CMC 20.90.420 through 20.90.440. (Ord. 1956 § 2, 2004)

20.90.460 Failure to perform street work.
Upon failure of the grantee to commence, pursue, or complete any work required by law or by the provisions of this title or by its franchise to be done in any street or other public place, within the time prescribed, and to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Services, the City Manager may, at his option, cause such work to be done and the grantee shall pay to the City the cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported by the Director of Public Services to the grantee within 30 days after receipt of such itemized report.

20.90.470 Bond – Amount – Terms.
The grantee shall, concurrently with the filing of the acceptance of award of any franchise granted under this title, file with the Director of Administrative Services, and at all times thereafter maintain in full force and effect for the term of such franchise or any renewal thereof, at grantee’s sole expense, a corporate surety bond in a company and in a form approved by the City Attorney, in the amount of $15,000, renewable annually, and conditioned upon the faithful performance of grantee, and upon the further condition that in the event grantee shall fail to comply with any one or more of the provisions of this title, or of any franchise issued to the grantee hereunder, there shall be recoverable jointly and severally from the principal and surety of such bond any damages or loss suffered by the City as a result thereof, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, or cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the grantee as prescribed hereby which may be in default, plus a reasonable allowance for attorney’s fees and costs, up to the full amount of the bond; the condition to be a continuing obligation for the duration of such franchise and any renewal thereof and thereafter until the grantee has liquidated all of its obligations with the City that may have arisen from the acceptance of such franchise or renewal by the grantee or from its exercise of any privilege therein granted. The bond shall provide that 30 days’ prior written notice of intention not to renew, cancellation, or materials change be given to the City.

20.90.480 Bond – Does not limit liability.
Neither the provisions of this section, nor any bond accepted by the City pursuant hereto, nor any damages recovered by the City thereunder, shall be construed to excuse faithful performance by the grantee or limit the liability of the grantee under any franchise issued hereunder or for damages, either to the full amount of the bond or otherwise.

20.90.490 Indemnification of City.
The grantee shall, concurrently with the filing of an acceptance of award of any franchise granted under this title, furnish to the City and file with the Director of Administrative Services and at all times during the existence of any franchise granted hereunder maintain in full force and effect, at its own cost and expense, a liability insurance policy in the amount of $100,000, in a company approved by the City Manager and in a form satisfactory to the City Attorney, indemnifying and saving harmless the City, its officers and employees from and against any and all claims, demands, actions, suits, and proceedings by others, against all liability to others, including but not limited to any liability for damages by reason of or arising out of any failure by the grantee to secure consent from the owners, authorized distributors or licensees of programs to be delivered by the grantee’s CATV system, and against any loss, cost, expense and damages resulting therefrom, including reasonable attorney’s fees, arising our of the exercise or enjoyment of its franchise, irrespective of the amount of the comprehensive liability insurance policy required hereunder.

20.90.500 Liability insurance.
The grantee shall, concurrently with the filing of an acceptance of award of any franchise granted under this title, furnish to the City and file with the City Clerk, and at all times during the existence of any franchise granted hereunder maintain in full force and effect, at its own cost and expense, a general comprehensive liability insurance policy, in protection of the City, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees, in a company approved by the City Manager and a form satisfactory to the City Attorney, protecting the City and all persons against liability for loss or damage for personal injury, death and property damage, occasioned by the operations of grantee under such franchise, with minimum liability limits of $100,000 for personal injury or death of any one person and $300,000 for personal injury or death of two or more persons in any one occurrence and $50,000 for damage to property resulting from any one occurrence.

The policies mentioned in the foregoing paragraph shall name the City, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees, as additional insured and shall contain a provision that a written notice of cancellation or reduction in coverage of the policy shall be delivered to the City 10 days in advance of the effective date thereof; if such insurance is provided by a policy which also covers grantee or any other entity or person other than those above named, then such policy shall contain the standard cross liability endorsement.

Article VII. Administration and Operations

20.90.510 Inspection of property and records.
At all reasonable times, the grantee shall permit any duly authorized representative of the City to examine all property of the grantee, together with any appurtenant property of the grantee situated within or without the City, and to examine and transcribe any and all maps and other records kept or maintained by the grantee or under its control which deal with the operation, affairs, transactions or property of the grantee with respect to its franchise. If any such maps or records are not kept in the City, or upon reasonable request made available in the City, and if the Council shall determine that an examination thereof is necessary or appropriate, then all travel and maintenance expense necessarily incurred in making such examination shall be paid by the grantee.

20.90.520 Reports.
The grantee shall prepare and furnish to the Director of Public Services and the Director of Administrative Services at the times and in the form prescribed by either of the officers, such reports with respect to its operations, affairs, transactions or property, as may be reasonably necessary or appropriate to the performance of the rights, functions or duties of the City or any of its officers in connection with the franchise.

20.90.530 Plans and records on file.
The grantee shall at all times make and keep in the City full and complete plans and records showing the exact location of all CATV system equipment installed or in use in streets and other places in the City.

20.90.540 Maps on file.
The grantee shall file with the Director of Public Services, on or before the last day in January of each year, a current map or set of maps drawn to scale showing all CATV system equipment installed and in place in streets and other public places of the City.

20.90.550 Operational standards.
The CATV system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the highest and best accepted standards of the industry to the effect that subscribers shall receive the highest possible service. In determining the satisfactory extent of such standards, the following among others shall be considered:

A. That the system be installed using all band equipment capable of passing the entire VHF and FM spectrum, and that it have the further capability of converting UHF for distribution to subscribers on the VHF band;

B. That the system, as installed, be capable of passing standard color TV signals without the introduction of material degradation of color fidelity and intelligence;

C. That the system and all equipment be designed and rated for 24 hours per day continuous operation;

D. That the system provides a nominal signal level of 2,000 microvolts at the input terminals of each TV receiver;

E. That the system signal to noise ratio is not less than 40 decibels;

F. That the modulation of the picture signal is less than five percent;

G. That the system use components having a SWR of 1.4 or less;

H. That the system shall comply fully with all technical standards prescribed by the Federal Communications Commission for CATV systems.

20.90.560 Filing, costs, location and service.
When not otherwise prescribed in this title, all matters herein are required to be filed with the Director of Administrative Services.

20.90.570 Reimbursement for publication expenses.
The grantee shall pay to the City a sum of money sufficient to reimburse it for all publication expenses incurred by it in connection with the granting of a franchise pursuant to the provisions of this title. Such payment shall be made within 30 days after the City furnishes the grantee with a written statement of such expenses by delivery of same to the Director of Administrative Services.

20.90.580 Office location.
The grantee shall maintain an office within the City limits or at a location which subscribers may call without incurring added message or toll charges so that CATV maintenance service shall be promptly available to subscribers.

20.90.590 Refusal of service.
No person, firm or corporation in the existing service area of the grantee shall be arbitrarily refused service; provided, however, that the grantee shall not be required to provide service to any subscriber who does not pay the applicable connection fee or monthly service charge.

20.90.600 Use of utility poles and facilities – Agreement.
When any portion of the CATV system is to be installed on public utility poles and facilities, certified copies of the agreement for such joint use of poles and facilities shall be filed with the Director of Administrative Services.

20.90.610 Application for franchise.
Application for a franchise hereunder shall be in writing, shall be filed with the Director of Administrative Services, and shall contain the following information:

A. The name and address of the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, the name and address of each partner shall also be set forth. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall also state the names and addresses of its directors, main office, major stockholders and associates, and the names and addresses of parent and subsidiary companies;

B. A statement and description of the CATV system proposed to be constructed, installed, maintained or operated by the applicant; the proposed location of such system and its various components; the manner in which applicant proposes to construct, install, maintain and operate the same; and, particularly, the extent and manner in which existing or future poles or other facilities or other public utilities will be used for such system;

C. A description, in detail, of the public streets, public places and proposed public streets within which applicant proposes or seeks authority to construct, install or maintain any CATV equipment or facilities; a detailed description of the equipment or facilities proposed to be constructed, installed or maintained therein; and the proposed specific location thereof;

D. A map specifically showing and delineating the proposed service area or areas within which applicant proposes to provide CATV services and for which a franchise is requested;

E. A statement or schedule in a form approved by the City Council of proposed rates and charges to subscribers for installation and services and a copy of proposed service agreement between the grantee and its subscribers shall accompany the application. For unusual circumstances, such as underground cable required, or more than 150 feet of distance from cable to connection of service to subscribers, and additional installation charge over that normally charged for installation as specified in the applicant’s proposal may be charged, with easements to be supplied by subscribers. For remote, relatively inaccessible subscribers with the City, service may be made available on the basis of cost of materials, labor, and easements if required by the grantee;

F. A copy of any contract, if existing between the applicant and any public utility providing for the use of facilities of such public utility, such as poles, lines, or conduits;

G. A statement setting forth all agreements and understandings, whether written, oral or implied, existing between the applicant and any person, firm or corporation with respect to the proposed franchise or the proposed CATV operator. If a franchise is granted to a person, firm or corporation posing as a front or as the representative of another person, firm or corporation, and such information is not disclosed in the original application, such franchise shall be deemed void and of no force and effect whatsoever;

H. A financial statement prepared by a certified public accountant, or person otherwise satisfactory to the Council, showing applicant’s financial status and his financial ability to complete the construction and installation of the proposed CATV system;

I. Each applicant shall, at the time of filing an application, deposit the sum of $50,000 in cash with the City Treasurer as an advance on the percentage payments to be due the City when the system is in operation. Any franchise granted as provided in this code shall provide for such deposits and for the forfeiture thereof as liquidated damages for nonperformance of any and all terms of the franchise. Any interest earned on said deposit shall be the property of the applicant. In the event the City, in the opinion of the City Council, shall require the services of a consultant to advise the City Council and the City Manager upon the technical aspects of the franchise the cost of such services shall be charged equally to all applicants for franchises and the share due from each applicant shall be deducted from his deposit at the time the franchise is granted. The deposit of all unsuccessful applicants, and any interest earned thereon less the above mentioned deduction, shall be returned at the time the franchise is granted.

20.90.620 Action on application.
Upon consideration of any such application, the Council may refuse to grant the requested franchise or the Council may by ordinance grant a franchise for a CATV system to any such applicant as may appear from said application to be in its opinion best qualified to render proper and efficient CATV service to television viewers and subscribers in this City. The Council’s decision in the manner shall be final. If favorably considered, the applicant submitted shall constitute and form part of the franchise as granted.

20.90.630 Franchise conditions.
Any franchise granted pursuant to this title shall include the following condition: “The CATV system herein franchised shall be used and operated solely and exclusively for the purpose expressly authorized by Chapter 20.90 of the Municipal Code of the City of Coronado and no other purpose whatsoever.” Inclusion of the foregoing statement in any such franchise shall not be deemed to limit the authority of the City to include any other reasonable condition, limitation or restriction which it may deem necessary to impose in connection with such franchise pursuant to the authority conferred by this title.

20.90.640 Franchise renewal.
Any franchise granted under this title is renewable at the application of the grantee, in the same manner and upon the same terms and conditions as required herein for obtaining the original franchise, except those which are by their terms expressly inapplicable; provided, however, that the Council may at its option waive compliance with any or all of the requirements of CMC 20.90.610.

20.90.650 Acceptance and effective date of franchise.
No franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this title shall become effective unless and until the ordinance granting same has become effective and, in addition, unless and until all things required in this section and CMC 20.90.060, 20.90.080, and 20.90.090 are done and completed, all of such things being hereby declared to be conditions precedent to the effectiveness of any such franchise granted hereunder. In the event any of such things are not done and completed in the time and manner required, the Council may declare the franchise null and void.

20.90.660 Filing acceptance of franchise.
Within 25 days after the effective date of the ordinance awarding a franchise, or within such extended period of time as the Council in its discretion may authorize, the grantee shall file with the Director of Administrative Services his written acceptance, in form satisfactory to the City Attorney, for the franchise together with the bond and insurance policies required by CMC 20.90.470 through 20.90.500. (Ord. 1956 § 3, 2004)

Article VIII. Violations

20.90.670 Franchise required for distribution of signal.
It is unlawful for any person to establish, operate or to carry on the business of distributing to any persons in this City any television signals or radio signals by means of a CATV system unless a franchise therefor has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this title, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect.

20.90.680 Franchise required for construction.
It is unlawful for any person to construct, install or maintain within any public street in the City, or within any other public property of the City, or within any privately owned area within the City which has not yet become a public street but is designated or delineated as a proposed public street on any tentative subdivision map approved by the City, any equipment or facilities for distributing any television signal or radio signal through a CATV system, unless a franchise authorizing such use of such street or property or area has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this title, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect.

20.90.690 Unauthorized connection.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of a franchise CATV system within this City for the purpose of taking or receiving television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs or sound.

20.90.700 Payment required.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of a franchised CATV system within this City for the purpose of enabling himself or others to receive any television signal, radio signal, picture, program or sound, without payment to the owner of such system.

20.90.710 Tampering with or injuring equipment.
It is unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner, to willfully tamper with, remove or injure any cables, wires or equipment used for distribution of television signals, radio signal pictures, programs or sound.

20.90.720 Charging tenants of customers.
It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to make any charge to any tenant of said person, firm, or corporation for CATV service in excess of the amount actually being paid to the operator of the CATV system for service to the premises occupied by the tenant. For purposes of this section, the amount actually paid for service to any premises in multiple apartments, or other multiple units, shall be calculated by dividing the total service charge per month by the total number of outlets. Tenants may be charged the actual costs of connection charges for their premises.

20.90.730 Penalty for violation.
Any person, firm or corporation which violates a provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction.

Chapter 20.94
COMPRESSED NATURAL
GAS DISPENSING
Sections:

20.94.010    Purpose.

20.94.020    Definition.

20.94.030    Issuing authority.

20.94.040    Application.

20.94.050    Regulations.

20.94.010 Purpose.
A. It is unlawful for any person to place, install, use or maintain a compressed natural gas dispensing unit without an operations permit: compressed natural gas dispensing.

B. Any person operating a compressed natural gas dispensing unit within the City in violation of this chapter or terms of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction in accordance with CMC 1.08.050(A). (Ord. 1807)

20.94.020 Definition.
A “compressed natural gas dispensing unit,” whether on public or private property, shall include any device used for the purpose of storing, dispensing or selling of compressed natural gas.

20.94.030 Issuing authority.
The Director of Fire Services is authorized to issue operations permit: compressed natural gas dispensing.

20.94.040 Application.
The application shall be filed no later than 30 days prior to the proposed date of the compressed natural gas dispensing operation.

20.94.050 Regulations.
There is hereby adopted by reference, by the City for the purpose of prescribing rules and regulations for a compressed natural gas dispensing operation, the 1991 Uniform Fire Code, Article 4, Permits, in its entirety.

Chapter 20.98
LIQUID PETROLEUM GAS DISPENSING
Sections:

20.98.010    Purpose.

20.98.020    Definition.

20.98.030    Issuing authority.

20.98.040    Application.

20.98.050    Regulations.

20.98.010 Purpose.
A. It is unlawful for any person to place, install, use or maintain a liquid petroleum gas dispensing unit without an operations permit: liquid petroleum gas dispensing.

B. Any person operating a liquid petroleum gas dispensing unit within the City in violation of this chapter or terms of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction in accordance with CMC 1.08.050(A). (Ord. 1956 § 4, 2004; Ord. 1807)

20.98.020 Definition.
A “liquid petroleum gas dispensing unit,” whether on public or private property, shall include any device used for the purpose of storing, dispensing or selling of liquid petroleum gas. (Ord. 1956 § 5, 2004)

20.98.030 Issuing authority.
The Director of Fire Services is authorized to issue operations permit: liquid petroleum gas dispensing.

20.98.040 Application.
The application shall be filed no later than 30 days prior to the proposed date of the liquid petroleum gas dispensing operation.

20.98.050 Regulations.
There is hereby adopted by reference, by the City for the purpose of prescribing rules and regulations for a liquid petroleum gas dispensing operation, the 1991 Uniform Fire Code, Article 4, Permits, in its entirety.

Chapter 20.99
SIDEWALK VENDING
Sections:

20.99.010    Application, permitting and regulation.

20.99.010 Application, permitting and regulation.
The City Council will establish by resolution an administrative procedure to regulate the application, permitting, and regulation of sidewalk vending. (Ord. 2090 § 5, 2019)

Title 32
ANIMAL REGULATIONS
Chapters:

32.04    General Provisions

32.08    Dogs

32.12    Cats

32.16    Superseded

32.20    Other Animals

Chapter 32.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

32.04.010    Purpose.

32.04.020    Definitions.

32.04.030    Fees.

32.04.040    Condition of ownership.

32.04.050    Inhumane treatment and abandonment.

32.04.060    Disturbing peace/disposition of animals at large.

32.04.070    Committing nuisance.

32.04.080    Reporting of bites.

32.04.090    Investigations.

32.04.100    Penalties.

32.04.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this title is to provide for the health and safety of the community through the enforcement and regulation of animal maintenance and ownership. It is unlawful for any person who keeps, possesses or maintains an animal within the City to fail to comply with the requirements of this title. (Ord. 1885; Ord. 1665)

32.04.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply:

“Altered” for a female animal means having had the ovaries and uterus surgically removed, or otherwise rendered incapable of reproduction in a medically approved manner. “Altered” for a male animal means having had the testicles surgically removed, or otherwise rendered incapable of reproduction in a medically approved manner.

“Animal” shall include but not be limited to birds, fishes, reptiles and nonhuman mammals.

“Animal shelter” means the City of Coronado Police Services animal holding facility.

“At large” means being on any private property without permission of the person who owns or has a right to possess or use the property; or unrestrained by a leash on either public property, unless expressly permitted by law, or private property open to the public; or in any place or manner which presents substantial risk of imminent interference with animal or public health, safety or welfare.

“Attack” means any action by an animal which places a person in reasonable fear of immediate bodily harm.

“Cat” means a Felis domesticus of either sex, altered or unaltered.

“City” means the City of Coronado.

“County” means the County of San Diego.

“County Veterinarian” means the County of San Diego Veterinarian, his/her agents or deputies with authority to enforce animal regulations within the City.

“Dangerous animal” means a dog or other animal which:

1. Has twice, within a 48-month period, attacked, bitten, or otherwise caused injury to a person or other animal engaged in lawful activity; or

2. Has once attacked, bitten, or otherwise caused injury to a person or other animal engaged in lawful activity, resulting in death or substantial injury; or

3. Has been declared a “dangerous dog or animal” by the Department.

“Department” means the City of Coronado Police Department, Director of Police Services or his/her agents, employees or deputies.

“Dog” means a Canis familiaris of either sex, altered or unaltered, or any other member of the Canis genus.

“Dog run” means an area designated by resolution of the City of Coronado. Within such areas dogs may be removed from their leashes and not be considered at large provided they remain under control of their owner/custodian.

“Guard dog” means:

1. A “sentry dog” as defined in the Dog Act of 1969 (Health and Safety Code Section 121880); or

2. Any dog furnished for hire for use in guarding, patrolling, or protecting any area, yard, or premises, with or without supervision, to deter or detain unauthorized persons. The term “hire” shall include, but not be limited to, the renting or leasing of the services of a dog with or without a dog handler, or the sale of a dog with an option to repurchase.

“Guard dog operator” means:

1. A “sentry dog company” as defined in the Dog Act of 1969 (Health and Safety Code Section 121895); or

2. Any person who furnishes a dog for hire for use in guarding, patrolling, or protecting any area, yard, or premises, with or without supervision, to deter or detain unauthorized persons. The term “hire” shall include, but not be limited to, the renting or leasing of the services of a dog with or without a dog handler, or the sale of a dog with an option to repurchase.

“Health Officer” means the County of San Diego Health Officer, his/her agents or deputies with authority to enforce animal regulations within the City.

“Impounded animal” means any animal in the lawful custody or control of the Department as provided in this title.

“Indoor housing facility” means any structure or building, housing or intended to house animals, which has the capability of controlling the environment within the enclosure created by the continuous connection of a roof, floor, and walls with at least one opening for entry and exit that is provided with a door or any movable structure used to close off the opening and typically consisting of a panel of wood, glass, metal, etc., which slides on rollers or swings on hinges; provided, however, that any openings which provide natural light shall be covered with a transparent material, e.g., glass, plastic, etc.

“Kennel” is a locale as defined elsewhere in this code.

“Kennel operator” means any person who owns, controls, or operates a kennel or any person who is responsible for or who participates in the control or operation of a kennel.

“Leash” means any rope, leather strap, chain or other material not exceeding six feet in length, being held in the hand of a person capable of controlling and actually controlling the animal to which it is attached.

“License” means a properly completed certification issued by the Department, the County of San Diego or another authorized agency. Department licenses shall include the dog or cat owner’s name, address, and telephone number; the dog or cat’s name and description, including breed, color, sex, month and year of birth; rabies vaccination date; license tag number and expiration date. Rabies vaccination information is not required for a cat license.

“License tag” means a piece of metal or other durable material inscribed with a number which has been issued by the Department or other authorized agency.

“Licensed cat” means a cat wearing its current cat license tag as required by this chapter.

“Licensed dog” means a dog wearing its current dog license tag as required by this chapter.

“Outdoor housing facility” means any structure or building, housing or intended to house animals which does not meet the definition of “indoor housing facility.”

“Owner” means any person who is the legal owner, keeper, harborer, possessor, or the actual custodian of an animal. Ownership is also established by a person registering as the owner on a license or other legal document or by a person who claims to be the owner or custodian and who takes possession or custody of an animal.

“Potentially dangerous animal” means:

1. Any animal of a species or type likely to cause injury to a person or other animal; or

2. Any animal which has once within the prior 48-month period attacked, bitten, or otherwise caused a less substantial injury to a person or other animal engaged in lawful activity.

“Primary enclosure” means any structure used to immediately restrict an animal or animals to a limited amount of space, such as a room, pen, run, cage, or compartment, exclusive of a kennel house.

“Protection dog” means any attack trained dog; any dog trained to guard, protect, patrol, or defend any premises, area, or yard; or any dog trained to protect, defend, or guard any person or property with or without the necessity of direct human supervision.

“Registered owner” means a person registered as the owner on a dog license or a person claiming ownership of an impounded animal and taking possession of it.

“Sanitize” means to make physically clean and to remove and destroy, to the maximum degree that is practical, agents that are injurious to animal or human health.

“Stray” means an animal which is “at large.”

“Substantial injury” means a substantial impairment of the physical condition of a person which requires professional medical treatment, including but not limited to loss of consciousness; concussion; bone fracture; protracted loss or impairment of function of any bodily member or organ; muscle tears, disfiguring lacerations, or a wound requiring multiple sutures; or any injury requiring corrective or cosmetic surgery.

“Vaccinated dog” means a dog inoculated with a California Department of Health Services approved, currently valid anti-rabies vaccine, and wearing a current dog license tag indicating proof of such vaccination.

“Veterinarian” means a person licensed in this State as a doctor of veterinary medicine or surgery.

“Wild animal” means any animal which is not normally domesticated in the United States including, but not limited to, any lion, tiger, bear, nonhuman primate, wolf/wolf hybrid, cougar, ocelot, wild cat, skunk, raccoon, ferret, venomous reptile, boa, python, anaconda, members of the order Crocodilia, or other such animal (ferae naturae) irrespective of its actual or asserted state of docility, tameness, or domesticity. (Ord. 2047 § 1, 2014; Ord. 1909)

32.04.030 Fees.
A. By resolution, the City Council may adopt, from time to time, fees for the administration of the provisions of this title.

B. Fees shall be charged and collected by the City for licensing, impounding, and other animal control services and enforcement. The owner of any animal which is lawfully impounded shall pay all fees and expenses related to such impoundment including, but not limited to, impound, board, vaccination, examination, and any medical treatment fees for the animal, whether or not the animal is claimed.

C. A list of currently adopted fees shall be maintained and available for public inspection at the Department, the animal shelter, or any other location approved by the Department for the collection of fees.

D. The owner or his or her agent shall pay the appropriate fee when due unless the Department, in accordance with City policy, authorizes a payment arrangement or waives such fees in full or in part.

E. Fees collected under this title shall be transferred to the general fund.

F. The person who owns, possesses or maintains any animal shall, at the Department’s discretion:

1. Reimburse the Department for all costs incurred by the Department in enforcing the provisions of this title against the person when the person has violated one or more of the provisions of this title; and

2. Be responsible for any injury or damage to private or public property caused by the animal(s).

32.04.040 Condition of ownership.
Animal owners or keepers shall comply with the following requirements:

A. Restrain and confine the animal as required by law;

B. Treat the animal humanely at all times;

C. Obtain vaccinations, licenses, and permits for the animal as required by law;

D. Keep animal premises sanitary and so as not to constitute a fly breeding reservoir, a source of offensive odors, or of human or animal disease; and

E. Not permit the animal or the animal premises to disturb the peace or constitute a public nuisance or hazard to public safety or health.

32.04.050 Inhumane treatment and abandonment.
A. No person shall treat an animal in a cruel or inhumane manner or willingly or negligently cause or permit any animal to suffer unnecessary torture or pain.

B. No person shall leave any domestic animal without care, or abandon it on any public or private property.

C. No person shall knowingly harbor or keep any dog or other animal with a serious injury or afflicted with mange, ringworm, distemper or any other contagious disease, unless such dog or other animal is, in the opinion of the Department or the County Veterinarian, being given adequate treatment for such disease. The Department or the County Veterinarian may take immediate possession of any such animal not being so treated or which is not responding to such treatment, and immediately dispose of the animal unless the owner shall forthwith place such animal under the control and treatment of a licensed veterinarian.

32.04.060 Disturbing peace/disposition of animals at large.
A. No person shall own or harbor an animal in such a manner that the peace or quiet of another person is unreasonably disturbed.

B. The keeping or maintenance, or the permitting to be kept or maintained, on any premises owned, occupied, or controlled by any person of any animal which, by any frequent or long continued noise, shall cause unreasonable annoyance or discomfort to any person of normal sensitivity in the vicinity shall constitute a violation of this section; provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall be construed to apply to reasonable noises emanating from legally operated veterinary hospitals, humane societies, animal shelters, or kennel that has been issued a noise permit under this code.

C. No person owning, having an interest in, harboring or having the care, charge, control, or possession of any animal shall allow such animal to be, remain, go or run at large within the City, except that dogs are allowed to be off leash in dog run areas or other areas designated by resolution or ordinance of the City Council.

D. The Department may attempt to capture any animal found at large in violation of law and may destroy an animal at large if, in their judgment, such action is required for public health and safety, or for the safety of the animal. The Department shall not seize or impound any animal, however, for being at large that has strayed from, but then returned to, the private property of its owner or custodian, but in such case a citation may be issued; provided, however, that if in such a situation the owner or custodian is not home, the animal may be impounded, but the Department shall post a notice of such impounding on the front door or other appropriate entry location of the living unit of the owner or custodian of the animal.

E. Any person who finds an animal at large may take it into his/her possession and must as soon as possible, but no later than 24 hours thereafter, notify the Department and surrender the animal. No such action shall result in a charge against the City. The finder of the animal at large shall use reasonable care to preserve it from injury.

F. Any person who relinquishes an animal to the Department shall give his/her name, address and, if she/he is not the owner, the location where the animal was found. If a person relinquishes their own animal, they are responsible for payment of any fees that may have been established in connection with this action.

G. The Department shall hold an impounded animal for not less than three days if it was not wearing a license tag and there is no other means to identify an owner. If the animal is wearing a license tag or other identification, the Department shall hold the animal for not less than five days.

H. The Department may humanely dispose of or transfer to a new owner upon payment of the applicable fee, or transfer to an animal rescue or other suitable placement organization any impounded animal not claimed by its owner or custodian within the prescribed holding period. Animals relinquished by their owners may be destroyed or transferred to a new owner without regard to any prescribed holding period. Injured or diseased animals, or newborn animals unable to feed themselves, may be humanely destroyed by the Department or its designees without regard to the prescribed holding period in order to alleviate suffering or to protect other impounded animals from exposure to a contagious disease.

I. Any dog or cat not claimed by its owner and which has not been altered shall not be sold, transferred or given away unless the prescribed spay/neuter fees have been deposited with the Department to be refunded upon presentation of proof of altering by a licensed veterinarian.

J. The individual adopting any unaltered cat or dog shall have the altering performed within 30 days from the date of adoption unless the animal is under six months of age at the time of adoption. In such case, the individual shall have the altering performed by the time the animal is seven months of age. This shall not apply to any person who obtains a written certification from a licensed veterinarian stating that, due to health considerations, the animal should not be altered, or that in the professional judgment of the veterinarian, the animal has previously been altered.

K. The spay/neuter deposit shall be forfeited if such proof of altering or written certification has not been presented to the Department within the period specified. All such forfeited deposits shall be used for the purpose specified by Sections 30503 and 31751 of the California Food and Agricultural Code. (Ord. 2047 § 2, 2014)

32.04.070 Committing nuisance.
A. No person shall allow an animal in his/her custody to defecate or to urinate on any property other than that of the owner or person having control of the animal, except in a dog run as established in this title.

B. It shall be the duty of all persons having control of an animal to immediately remove any feces to a proper receptacle designated for public use, or in a private trash receptacle with the express consent of the owner.

C. A person having care, custody, control or possession of an animal, when such custodial person and animal are on public property within the City, shall have in his or her possession equipment sufficient to remove and thereafter contain defecation from such animal.

D. Disabled persons while relying on a seeing eye, hearing, or service dog shall be exempt from this section when the nature of their disability renders compliance impossible.

32.04.080 Reporting of bites.
A. All persons bitten and the parents or guardians of minor children bitten by a dog, cat, skunk, fox, bat, coyote, bobcat, or other animal of a species subject to rabies shall immediately notify the Department or the Health Officer. Physicians treating such bites and other persons having the knowledge of such bites shall immediately notify the Department or the Health Officer.

B. Any person owning or having custody or control of a dog, cat, skunk, fox, bat, coyote, bobcat, or other animal of a species subject to rabies that bites a person or other animal shall immediately notify the Department or the Health Officer.

C. It shall be unlawful for any owner to leave the scene of an animal bite without identifying themselves to other parties involved in the bite incident and notifying the Department as required in this chapter.

32.04.090 Investigations.
In accordance with law, the Department, the County Veterinarian, and the Health Officer may enter private property to investigate reports of dangerous dogs, rabies, or other contagious animal diseases, and to investigate possible violations of and enforce the provisions of law relating to or affecting animals.

32.04.100 Penalties.
A. Unless otherwise provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter or failure to comply with any requirement thereof shall be punishable as provided in Chapters 1.08 and 1.10 CMC.

B. Each day on which a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense.

C. Each violation of this chapter, in addition to the other penalties under this section, shall constitute a public nuisance. (Ord. 2047 § 3, 2014)

Chapter 32.08
DOGS
Sections:

32.08.010    License.

32.08.020    Restricted places.

32.08.030    Defecation removal/custodial equipment.

32.08.040    Protection of public from dogs.

32.08.050    Establishing dog runs.

32.08.060    Rabies control.

32.08.070    Use of dogs by disabled persons.

32.08.080    Police dogs.

32.08.090    Declaration of dangerous animal.

32.08.100    Hearings.

32.08.110    Restrictions and conditions.

32.08.010 License.
A. Any person owning or having custody of a dog, except dogs present in the City less than 30 days each calendar year that are licensed in another jurisdiction, shall:

1. Apply for and obtain from the Department a separate dog license for each dog they own, possess, keep, or harbor in the City after it is four months old. Such persons must possess the license by the time the dog is five months old or 30 days after obtaining or bringing any dog over four months of age into the City; and

2. Renew the dog license before it expires for as long as they own, possess, keep, harbor, or otherwise have custody of the dog, unless a valid license is obtained from another jurisdiction wherein the dog resides. If renewal is not required, such persons shall within 30 days after the expiration date advise the Department of the reason therefor.

B. Any dog which is legally impounded according to the provisions of this chapter and does not have a valid dog license at the time will be legally licensed prior to release, regardless of the owner’s place of residence, unless a fee is deposited pursuant to the payment of fee as required in this title.

C. Upon presentation by the dog owner of a properly completed dog license application form including proof that the rabies vaccination will be valid throughout the license period, and payment of the proper license fees, the Department shall issue a dog license and license tag. The dog owner shall retain the dog license for inspection by any person responsible for enforcing the provisions of this chapter.

D. The licenses shall be valid for a term not to exceed the maximum immunity duration periods specified for the various types of canine rabies vaccines approved by the California Department of Health Services and must be renewed prior to the expiration of the term by the payment of the current effective fee for each renewal.

E. The dog owner shall securely affix the current license tag to the collar or harness of the dog for which the license tag was issued and shall ensure that the dog wears such license tag at all times except when the dog is being exhibited at a dog show. A license tag issued for one dog shall not be transferred or attached to any other dog.

F. Without the authorization of the Department or person owning or having custody of the dog, no person shall remove a license tag from a collar or harness or remove from a dog the collar or harness bearing such tag. A license tag shall be removed only when necessary to prevent injury to the animal or to provide medical care.

G. Whenever a license tag is lost or damaged, the owner shall apply for, pay the prescribed fee, and obtain a replacement license from the Department.

H. Owners of dogs having a current license issued in their name by another dog licensing agency may be issued a City dog license upon payment of the applicable transfer fee. The rabies vaccination for any such dog must be valid for the duration of the license issued, and approved for use in California by the Department of Health Services.

I. Whenever the ownership of a licensed dog changes, the new owner shall apply for and obtain a change of ownership license from the Department and pay the applicable fee. The address of the owner is presumed to be the address where the dog is kept. Any change of address/ownership must be reported to the Department within 30 days following such change. (Ord. 1885; Ord. 1722; Ord. 1665)

32.08.020 Restricted places.
A. Unless in accordance with a permit issued by the City Manager and approved by the City Council, or in accordance with an exemption expressed in this title, it shall be unlawful for a person owning, having an interest in, harboring or having the care, charge, control or possession of any dog to allow such dog to be, remain, go, or run in or upon any park or beach within the City, the Coronado Municipal Golf Course, or the municipal lawn bowling green, except that properly restrained and leashed dogs are allowed in:

1. Centennial Park;

2. Paved areas of Tidelands Park;

3. Vetter Park;

4. Harborview Park; and

5. Bayview Park.

B. Dogs off leash are allowed in Dog Beach and the marked dog run area only of South Cays Park. (Ord. 2058 § 2, 2016; Ord. 2047 § 4, 2014; Ord. 2006 § 2, 2010).

32.08.030 Defecation removal/custodial equipment.
A. No person owning, having an interest in, harboring or having the care, charge, control or possession of any dog shall allow defecation from such dog to remain on any public property or private property without the express consent of the property owner and shall immediately remove, place in a closable container and deposit such defecation in a trash receptacle designated for public use or in private trash receptacle with the express consent of the owner.

B. A person having care, custody, control or possession of a dog, when such person and dog are on public property within the City, shall have in his or her possession equipment sufficient to remove and thereafter contain defecation from such dog.

32.08.040 Protection of public from dogs.
A. Any person owning or having custody or control of a dog shall at all times prevent the dog from attacking, biting, or otherwise causing injury to any person or animal engaged in a lawful act; from interfering with the lawful use of public or private property; or from damaging personal property which is lawfully upon public property or upon private property with the permission of the person who owns or has the right to possess or use the private property.

B. It is unlawful for any person owning or having custody or control of an animal to fail to exercise ordinary care with the result that the animal attacks, bites, or otherwise causes injury to a person engaged in lawful activity, if:

1. The animal is a protection dog, guard dog, dangerous animal, or potentially dangerous animal; and

2. The person owning or having custody or control of the dog knows or should have known of the animal’s vicious or dangerous nature, or the

animal’s protection dog, guard dog, dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal status.

This subsection does not apply to animals being used, at the time, in official military or law enforcement work.

32.08.050 Establishing dog runs.
The City Council may, from time to time, by resolution, establish upon public property such dog runs as are, in its discretion, necessary or convenient for the care and exercise of dogs.

32.08.060 Rabies control.
A. Any person owning or having custody of a dog shall ensure that the dog is vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian with a rabies vaccine approved by the California Department of Health Services for use in dogs, within 30 days after it becomes four months of age or within 30 days after obtaining or bringing any dog over four months of age into the City.

B. Such vaccination shall be repeated at intervals specified by the California Department of Health Services in order to maintain adequate immunity. The rabies certificate shall be made available by the owner of the animal for inspection by any person responsible for enforcing the provisions of this chapter.

C. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, a dog need not be vaccinated for rabies during an illness if a licensed veterinarian has examined the dog and certified in writing that such vaccination should be postponed because of a specified illness. Old age, debility, and pregnancy are not considered contraindications to rabies vaccination. Exemption certificates are subject to approval by the Department and shall be valid only for the duration of the illness. Exemption from vaccination does not exempt a dog from the licensing requirement.

D. Any person having care of custody of an animal which shows symptoms of rabies or which acts in a manner which would lead to a reasonable suspicion that it may have rabies shall notify the Department, the County Veterinarian, or the Health Officer as soon as possible, but within 24 hours, and comply with appropriate laws and regulations regarding suspected cases of rabies as directed by the Department, the County Veterinarian, or the Health Officer.

E. Any rabid animal, clinically suspected rabid animal, or biting dog or cat shall be isolated in strict confinement in a place and manner approved by the Department. Dogs and cats must be observed for 10 days, commencing the day after the occurrence, while other animals must be observed at least 14 days.

32.08.070 Use of dogs by disabled persons.
A. The definitions and provisions of State law, as may be amended from time to time, relating to the use of dogs by disabled persons, are applicable within the City. (Civil Code § 54 et seq.)

B. Nothing contained in this title shall be construed to prevent full access to premises or facilities by blind persons, visually handicapped persons, deaf persons or other physically disabled persons when accompanied by a guide dog, signal dog, or service dog performing the duty of a mobility or signal aid.

C. Nothing contained in this title shall be construed to relieve the disabled person from liability for any damage done to premises or facilities by such person’s guide dog, sign dog or service dog.

32.08.080 Police dogs.
A. Nothing in this title shall be deemed to restrict the activities of a dog under the control of a law enforcement officer during the performance of that officer’s official duties.

B. It shall be unlawful for any person to tease, taunt or otherwise interfere with a dog or other animal being utilized by a law enforcement officer for official purposes.

32.08.090 Declaration of dangerous animal.
A. If the Department has cause to believe that an animal is a “dangerous animal,” it may commence proceedings as provided herein.

B. The Department shall first serve, upon the owner and/or custodian, notice of intent to declare the animal a “dangerous animal.” The notice shall inform the owner and/or custodian of the incident(s) that provide a basis for the Department’s action, and specify that he/she may request a hearing within five working days to determine whether grounds exist for such declaration; the potential consequences if such a declaration is issued; and the Department’s authority for such action.

C. Failure of the owner and/or custodian to request a hearing pursuant to subsection B of this section, or failure to attend or be represented at a scheduled hearing, shall satisfy the hearing requirements and shall result in the issuance of a “dangerous animal” declaration.

D. The Department is hereby authorized and empowered to impound and/or abate any “dangerous animal” independently of any criminal prosecution or the results thereof by any means reasonably necessary to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the public including, but not limited to, the destruction of the dog or by the imposition upon the owner and/or custodian specific reasonable restrictions and condition for the maintenance of the animal. It shall be unlawful for any person to conceal or fail to surrender a dangerous animal when ordered by the Department. The restrictions and conditions may include, but are not limited to those specified in this chapter.

E. When, in the opinion of the Department, immediate impoundment is necessary for the preservation of animal or public health, safety or welfare, or if the animal has been impounded under other provisions of law, the pre-impoundment hearing shall be waived, however, the owner or custodian of record shall be given a notice allowing five working days to request an abatement hearing. If a hearing is requested, the animal shall not be disposed of prior to satisfaction of the hearing requirements.

F. A finding at an abatement hearing that grounds exist for the impoundment and/or abatement of the animal, or the failure of the owner and/or custodian to request a hearing or to attend or be represented at a scheduled hearing, shall satisfy the hearing requirements and the animal shall be impounded and/or abated after the five-day appeal period lapses.

32.08.100 Hearings.
All hearings required pursuant to this chapter shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.08 CMC as an administrative hearing. The hearing officer for such hearings shall be the City Manager or the Director of Police Services or his or her designee. The disposition of an animal that is the subject of said hearing shall be stayed while any appeals are pending, or until the time for filing such an appeal has expired.

32.08.110 Restrictions and conditions.
Upon the declaration that an animal is a “dangerous animal,” the Department may impose upon the owner and/or custodian specific restrictions and conditions for the maintenance of the dog as are reasonable for the protection of the public health and safety. These restrictions and conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:

A. The animal owner shall obtain and maintain liability insurance in an amount not less than $100,000 and furnish a certificate or proof of insurance by which the Department shall be notified at least 10 days prior to cancellation or nonrenewal of or, at the owner’s option, the filing with the Department of proof of a bond in an amount not less than $35,000, to be used in responding to damages. The specific policy or bond amount shall be determined by the Department at the time of declaration as a dangerous animal.

B. The location of the animal’s residence shall be registered with Coronado Animal Control. If the owner/custodian moves or sells the animal or otherwise transfers the ownership, custody or residence of the animal, Coronado Animal Control shall be informed at least 10 days prior to the sale or transfer in writing. This notification shall include, as a minimum, the name, address and telephone number of the proposed new owner or custodian, and/or the proposed new residence, and the name and description of the animal. In the event the animal is transferred to a new owner/custodian, they must agree in writing to all terms and condition and restrictions set forth herein. The Department may prohibit the proposed transfer for cause, or may modify restrictions based on the circumstances of the new owner’s residence.

C. Any time the dog is not in transit, the responsible person shall lock the dog in an enclosure which has specific requirements as to size, construction and design (CMC 86.55.310). At no time while the dog is in transit is it to be unrestrained or on a leash in excess of four feet. In addition, the dog shall wear a Department approved muzzle at any time it is in, or could reasonably have contact with, the public. If the dog escapes, the owner and/or custodian shall notify the Department immediately and make every reasonable effort to recapture it.

D. The dog shall be permanently marked for purposes of identification. This is to be accomplished by either micro chipping, tattooing, or other methods as specified by the Department. Proof of compliance is to be provided to Coronado Animal Control within 10 days.

E. The dog is to be altered by a licensed veterinarian within 30 days and proof of compliance provided to Coronado Animal Control.

F. The dog is to obtain and maintain a current Coronado Animal License. In addition to these restrictions and conditions, all State and local laws and ordinances pertaining to animals and animal ownership shall be adhered to.

G. The dog owner/custodian agrees to inspections of the dog and its enclosure by the Department or any other law enforcement agency. These inspections may be conducted at any time and without notice.

H. The owner/custodian of the dog agrees to pay any reasonable expenses incurred or fees charged by the Department in verifying compliance to and enforcing the provisions of these or any conditions, laws or ordinances pertaining to this animal.

I. In the event of the animal’s death, the owner and/or custodian shall notify the Department no later than 24 hours thereafter and, upon request, produce the animal for verification.

J. The owner and/or custodian of a “dangerous animal” shall surrender such animal to the Department upon demand.

K. The Department may add to and modify existing restrictions and conditions, as reasonably required to protect the public health, safety, or welfare.

L. The owner of a dangerous animal shall notify the Animal Control authority of jurisdiction if the animal is moved from the City. The Department shall seek to notify the receiving jurisdiction any time it becomes aware of a dangerous animal leaving this City and relocating to another city or county.

Chapter 32.12
CATS1
Sections:

32.12.010    License.

32.12.020    At large.

32.12.010 License.
It is unlawful for any person to permit or allow any cat to be kept or to remain upon the premises under the person’s ownership or immediate control, unless the cat is properly and currently licensed with the Department. (Ord. 1885; Ord. 1665)

32.12.020 At large.
It is unlawful for any person having control, harboring, or having ownership of any cat:

A. To suffer, allow, or permit the cat to run at large upon any street, land, alley, park or other public place, or private property under the control of another person; or

B. To fail to keep the cat in such manner that the peace and quiet of another person or the traveling public is not disturbed.

1
Code reviser’s note: For provisions on animals generally, see Chapter 32.04 CMC.


Chapter 32.16
OTHER ANIMALS1
Superseded by Ord. 1885.

1
Code reviser’s note: See Chapter 32.20 CMC for current provisions relating to other animals.


Chapter 32.20
OTHER ANIMALS
Sections:

32.20.010    Wild animals.

32.20.020    Livestock, fowl, bees.

32.20.010 Wild animals.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess or maintain any venomous reptile.

B. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess or maintain any other wild animal, or animal not normally domesticated, unless he/she complies with all Federal, State and local laws, regulations, and permit requirements affecting such animals, or to fail to:

1. Keep the animal at all times in cages or enclosures of such size and construction or confined in such a manner as to preclude the possibility of escape. Such cages, enclosures or confinement shall be of such size as to permit the animals reasonable freedom of movement.

2. At all times provide the animal(s) with adequate food, water, and veterinary care and kept the animals in clean and sanitary conditions at all times.

3. Keep the animal(s) in a manner so as not to threaten or annoy any person of normal sensitivity.

4. Take adequate safeguards to prevent unauthorized access to the animal(s) and to preserve animal and public health, safety, and welfare.

5. In the event of escape of the animal(s), to notify immediately the Department and make every reasonable effort to recapture the animal(s).

6. Upon request by the Department, make available for inspection by the Department the animal(s), premises, facilities, equipment, and any required permit(s) for the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this code.

7. Keep and transport the animal(s) only in escape-proof enclosures.

8. Publicly transport, carry, walk, or display the animal(s) without first obtaining prior Department authorization.

C. Wild animal(s) may be immediately impounded if in the opinion of the Department, it is necessary for the preservation of animal, other animals or public health, safety, or welfare. (Ord. 1885; Ord. 1665)

32.20.020 Livestock, fowl, bees.
A. It is unlawful and a nuisance for any person to keep, or cause to be kept, or to permit or suffer to be kept, or to maintain or control livestock, cattle, goats, poultry, peacock or other nondomesticated fowl within the limits of this City.

B. It is unlawful and a nuisance for any person to keep, or cause to be kept, or to permit or suffer to be kept, or to maintain or control any bees, or hive of or for bees, or any apiary within the limits of this City.

Title 36
HEALTH
Chapters:

36.08    Prohibition of Smoking in Public Places

36.10    Regulation of the Sale of Tobacco Products to Minors

36.12    Manure

36.16    Stagnant Water

36.20    Prohibited Marijuana Activities

Chapter 36.08
PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN CERTAIN PUBLIC PLACES
Sections:

36.08.010    Definitions.

36.08.020    Prohibition of smoking in enclosed places.

36.08.030    Minimum smoking distance required.

36.08.040    Prohibition of smoking in unenclosed areas.

36.08.050    Other requirements and prohibitions.

36.08.060    Penalties and enforcement.

36.08.070    Statutory construction.

36.08.010 Definitions.
A. “Business” means any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, association, or other entity formed for profit-making purposes.

B. “Employee” means any person who is employed or retained as an independent contractor by any employer or nonprofit entity in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, or any person who volunteers his or her services for an employer or nonprofit entity.

C. “Employer” means any business or nonprofit entity that retains the service of one or more employees.

D. “Enclosed area” means an area in which outside air cannot circulate freely to all parts of the area, and includes an area that has:

1. Any type of overhead cover whether or not that cover includes vents or other openings and at least three walls or other vertical constraint to airflow including, but not limited to, vegetation of any height whether or not those boundaries include vents or other openings; or

2. Four walls or other vertical constraints to airflow including, but not limited to, vegetation that exceeds six feet in height whether or not those boundaries include vents or other openings.

E. “Outdoor dining area” means any unenclosed area including rights-of-way and sidewalks that may be located on private property, public property, or a combination of both private and public property, which is available to or customarily used by the general public or employees, and which is designed, established, or regularly used for consuming food or drink.

F. “Outdoor public place” means any publicly or privately owned area, including but not limited to streets, highways, alleys, rights-of-way, parkways, sidewalks, parking lots or pathways, open to the general public for a public event, regardless of any fee or age requirement. The term “outdoor public place” also includes, but is not limited to, a farmers’ market, parade, craft fair, festival, concert, play, or any other event open to the general public.

G. “Outdoor recreational area” means any publicly or privately owned area, including but not limited to streets, highways, alleys, rights-of-way, parkways, sidewalks, parking lots or pathways, that is controlled or used by the City and open to the general public for recreational purposes, regardless of any fee or age requirement. The term “outdoor recreational area” also includes, but is not limited to, parks, picnic areas, playgrounds, sports fields, walking paths, gardens, hiking trails, bike paths, riding trails, swimming pools, roller- and ice-skating rinks, skateboard parks, amusement parks, and beaches.

H. “Outdoor service area” means any publicly or privately owned area, including, but not limited to, streets, highways, alleys, rights-of-way, parkways, sidewalks, parking lots or pathways, designed to be used or is regularly used by one or more persons to receive a service, wait to receive a service or to make a transaction, whether or not such service or transaction includes the exchange of money. The term “outdoor service area” also includes, but is not limited to, areas at and adjacent to information kiosks, automated teller machines (ATMs), ticket lines, bus stops or shelters, mobile vendor lines or cab stands.

I. “Person” means any natural person, business, cooperative association, nonprofit entity, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity including a government agency.

J. “Place of employment” means any area, enclosed or unenclosed, under the legal or de facto control of an employer that an employee or the general public may have cause to enter in the normal course of the operations, regardless of the hours of operation, and includes a private residence required to be licensed as a family day care home under California law.

K. “Public property” means, for the purposes of this chapter, property owned or controlled by the City, including those areas that a business has the use of, with or without the benefit of an encroachment permit.

L. “Smoke” or “smoking” shall have the meaning set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 104495, as may be amended from time to time, and includes inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, or pipe, or any other lighted or heated tobacco or plant product intended for inhalation, whether natural or synthetic, in any manner or in any form. “Smoking” includes the use of an electronic smoking device that creates an aerosol or vapor, in any manner or in any form, or the use of any oral smoking device for the purpose of circumventing the prohibition of smoking. Material that the purpose of which is solely olfactory, such as, for example, smoke from incense, is not considered “smoke” under this definition.

M. “Unenclosed area” means an area in which outside air can circulate freely to all parts of the area, and includes an area that has:

1. Any type of overhead cover, and no more than two walls or other vertical constraint to airflow including, but not limited to, vegetation of any height; or

2. No more than three walls or other vertical constraint to airflow including, but not limited to, vegetation of any height, and which has no overhead cover of any type. (Ord. 2080 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2038 § 2, 2013)

36.08.020 Prohibition of smoking in enclosed places.
Smoking is prohibited by State law in the enclosed areas of places of employment within the City of Coronado as such places are defined and regulated pursuant to California Labor Code Section 6404.5 as may be amended from time to time, which is hereby incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein. (Ord. 2080 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2038 § 2, 2013)

36.08.030 Minimum smoking distance required.
A. Smoking in all unenclosed areas shall be prohibited less than 25 feet from any doorway, window, opening, crack, or vent from an enclosed area in which smoking is prohibited.

B. Exceptions.

1. The unenclosed areas of private residential properties.

2. Outdoor dining areas in which the majority of dining area consists of private property. Notwithstanding the general provision in subsection A of this section prohibiting smoking within 25 feet of any doorway, window, opening, crack or vent into an enclosed area in which smoking is prohibited, this prohibition does not apply to: (a) outdoor dining areas when the outdoor dining area is entirely sited on private property, or (b) outdoor dining areas that are sited on a combination of public and private property, and where the majority of the contiguous outdoor dining area consists of private property. (Ord. 2080 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2038 § 2, 2013)

36.08.040 Prohibition of smoking in unenclosed areas.
A. Smoking is prohibited in the unenclosed areas of the following places within the City of Coronado:

1. All public property including, but not limited to, streets, highways, alleys, rights-of-way, parkways, sidewalks, parking lots and pathways;

2. Outdoor public places;

3. Outdoor recreational areas;

4. Outdoor service areas;

5. Outdoor dining areas.

B. Exceptions.

1. Coronado Municipal Golf Course. Notwithstanding the general provision in subsection (A)(3) of this section prohibiting smoking in outdoor recreation areas, the prohibition does not apply to the Coronado Municipal Golf Course.

2. Outdoor dining areas in which the majority of dining area consists of private property. Notwithstanding the general provision in subsection (A)(5) of this section prohibiting smoking in outdoor dining areas, the prohibition against smoking does not apply to: (a) outdoor dining areas when the outdoor dining area is entirely sited on private property, or (b) outdoor dining areas that are sited on a combination of public and private property, and where the majority of the contiguous outdoor dining area consists of private property.

C. Nothing in this chapter prohibits any person, employer, or nonprofit entity with legal control over any property from prohibiting smoking on any part of such property, even if smoking is not otherwise prohibited in that area. (Ord. 2080 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2038 § 2, 2013)

36.08.050 Other requirements and prohibitions.
A. No person, employer, or nonprofit entity shall knowingly permit smoking in an area which is under the legal or de facto control of that person, employer or nonprofit entity and in which smoking is prohibited by law, unless otherwise required by State or Federal law.

B. A person, employer, or nonprofit entity that has legal or de facto control of an unenclosed area in which smoking is prohibited by this chapter shall post a clear, conspicuous and unambiguous “No Smoking” or “Smoke Free” sign at each point of ingress to the area, and in at least one other point within the area. For purposes of this section, the City Manager or his/her designee shall be responsible for the posting of signs in regulated facilities owned or leased in whole or in part by the City. Notwithstanding this provision, the presence or absence of signs shall not be a defense to a charge of smoking in violation of any other provision of this chapter.

C. No person, employer, or nonprofit entity shall intimidate, threaten any reprisal, or effect any reprisal, for the purpose of retaliating against another person who seeks to attain compliance with this chapter.

D. Each instance of smoking in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation. For violations other than for smoking, each day of a continuing violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 2080 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2038 § 2, 2013)

36.08.060 Penalties and enforcement.
A. The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity.

B. Each incident of person, employer, or entity in violation of this chapter is an infraction subject to a $100.00 fine or otherwise shall be punishable in accordance with Chapter 1.08 CMC. Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the City Manager or his/her designee. In addition, any peace officer or code enforcement official also may enforce this chapter.

C. Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any provision of this chapter shall also constitute a violation of this chapter.

D. Any violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance.

E. Except as otherwise provided, enforcement of this chapter is at the sole discretion of the City. Nothing in this chapter shall create a right of action in any person against the City or its agents to compel public enforcement of this chapter against private parties. (Ord. 2080 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2038 § 2, 2013)

36.08.070 Statutory construction.
It is the intent of the City Council of the City of Coronado to supplement applicable State and Federal law and not to duplicate or contradict such law, and this chapter shall be construed consistently with that intention. (Ord. 2080 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2038 § 2, 2013)

Chapter 36.10
REGULATION OF THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO MINORS
Sections:

36.10.010    Purpose.

36.10.020    Definitions.

36.10.030    Prohibitions.

36.10.040    Parental responsibility.

36.10.050    Nonretaliation.

36.10.060    Other applicable laws.

36.10.070    Violation, enforcement and penalties.

36.10.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to reduce the availability of tobacco products to minors by regulating the display and manner of sale of such products in retail and business establishments. The City Council finds and declares it in the public interest to: (A) prohibit self-service sales and self-service displays, racks and shelves of tobacco products; (B) require the posting of warning signs at the point of purchase stating the legal age of sale and that identification is required to purchase tobacco; (C) prohibit vending machine sales of tobacco products; and (D) require all cigarettes, other tobacco or smoking products be sold in their original packaging with all required health warnings. In addition, the City Council desires to prohibit a minor from lawfully possessing or using tobacco products; therefore, appropriate criminal sanctions have been articulated in this regard. It is further the intent of City Council to discourage parents from permitting, or by insufficient control, allowing such possession or usage by a minor by establishing criminal sanctions against the parent for violating provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1876)

36.10.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter the following words are defined:

A. “Business” means any sole proprietorship, joint venture, corporation or other business entity formed for profitmaking purposes, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold as well as professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural or other professional services are delivered.

B. “City” shall mean the City of Coronado.

C. “Employee” means any person who is employed by any employer in consideration for direct or indirect wages or profit, and any person who volunteers his or her services for a nonprofit entity.

D. “Minor” means any individual who is less than 18 years old.

E. “Nonprofit entity” means any corporation, unincorporated association or other entity created for charitable, philanthropic, educational, character-building, political, social or other similar purposes, the net proceeds from the operations of which are committed to the promotion of the objectives or purposes of the entity and not to private gain. A public agency is not a “nonprofit entity” within the meaning of this section.

G. “Parent” means a person who is the natural or adoptive parent of a person. “Parent” includes a court appointed guardian or other person 18 years of age or older, authorized by the parent, by a court order, or by court appointed guardian to have the care and custody of the person.

F. “Person” shall mean any individual, partnership, cooperative association, private corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity.

H. “Public place” means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access, and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, office buildings, transport facilities, shopping centers, and malls.

I. “Self-service merchandising” means open display of tobacco products and point-of-sale tobacco-related promotional products that the public has access to without the intervention of an employee.

J. “Tobacco product” means any tobacco cigarette, cigar, pipe tobacco, smokeless tobacco, snuff or any other form of tobacco which may be utilized for smoking, chewing, inhaling or other manner of ingestion.

K. “Tobacco retailer” shall mean any person or governmental entity that operates a store, stand, booth, concession, or other place at which sales of tobacco products are made to purchasers for consumption or use.

L. “Tobacco vending machine” means any electronic or mechanical device or appliance the operation of which depends upon the insertion of money, whether in coin or paper currency, or other things representative of value, which dispenses or releases a tobacco product.

M. “Vendor-assisted” means only a store employee has access to the tobacco product and assists the customer by supplying the product. The customer does not take possession of the product until it is purchased.

36.10.030 Prohibitions.
A. No person or business shall engage in the sale of a tobacco product without first posting a plainly visible sign at the point of purchase of tobacco products which states “THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW. PHOTO ID IS REQUIRED TO PURCHASE TOBACCO.” The letters of the sign shall be at least one-half-inch high.

B. No person, business, tobacco retailer, or owner, manager or operator of any establishment subject to this chapter shall sell, offer to sell or permit to be sold any tobacco product to an individual without requesting and examining identification establishing the purchaser’s age as 18 years or greater unless the seller has another reasonable basis for determining the buyer’s age.

C. No person, business, tobacco retailer or other establishment shall sell or offer for sale cigarettes or other tobacco or smoking products not in the original packaging provided by the manufacturer and with all required health warnings.

D. It shall be unlawful for any person, business, or tobacco retailer to sell, permit to be sold, offer for sale or display for sale any tobacco product by means of self-service merchandising or by means other than vendor-assisted sales.

E. No person, business, or tobacco retailer shall locate, install, keep, maintain or use, or permit the location, installation, keeping, maintenance or use on his, her or its premises any tobacco vending machine for the purposes of selling or distributing any tobacco product.

F. No minor shall possess, use, or consume any tobacco product in any public place, nor shall a minor solicit another person for the purpose of purchasing or otherwise acquiring a tobacco product.

36.10.040 Parental responsibility.
A. With probable cause to believe there is a violation of CMC 36.10.030(F), a Peace Officer may issue a citation to the minor and may detain the minor until he or she can be placed in the care and custody of his or her parent. If cited, the minor and a parent shall appear in court as directed in the citation. The parent shall be advised of the fact that the minor was cited for a violation of CMC 36.10.030(F), and the parent shall also be warned of their responsibility and liability as the minor’s parents.

B. If a parent has been previously warned as set forth in subsection A of this section, upon a parent’s first contact after being advised of their responsibility as set forth under that subsection, they may be issued a citation for an infraction to appear in court, or may be subject to a civil action as described in CMC 36.10.070.

36.10.050 Nonretaliation.
A. No person or employee shall discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner retaliate against any employee or applicant for employment because such employee or applicant agrees to abide by the provisions of this chapter.

B. No person shall intimidate or threaten any reprisal or effect any reprisal for the purpose of retaliating against another person because such other person seeks to attain compliance with provisions of this chapter.

36.10.060 Other applicable laws.
This section shall not be interpreted or construed to permit tobacco vending machines and distribution of tobacco product samples where they are otherwise restricted by other applicable laws.

36.10.070 Violation, enforcement and penalties.
A. Any person, business or tobacco retailer who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as specified in CMC 1.08.050 for an infraction, or may be subject to civil action and fine as specified in Chapter 1.10 CMC.

B. The owner, operator or manager of any public place or place of employment within the purview of this chapter shall comply herewith. Such owner, operator or manager shall post or cause to be posted all signs required by this chapter.

C. It shall be the responsibility of employers to disseminate information concerning the provisions of this chapter to employees.

Chapter 36.12
MANURE
Sections:

36.12.010    Transportation.

36.12.020    Storage and use.

36.12.030    Manure piles.

36.12.040    Garbage.

36.12.050    Penalty for violation.

36.12.010 Transportation.
No manure, animal excreta or stable refuse shall be transported within the City unless the same shall be treated with a larvacide satisfactory to the Director of Public Health, and in a vehicle effectively covered to prevent the contents from being dropped, which vehicle shall have been approved for such transportation by the Director of Public Health. A certificate evidencing compliance with the above shall remain in the possession of the person transporting the above-mentioned fertilizer at all times and shall be shown to any peace or health officer upon demand.

36.12.020 Storage and use.
No person shall keep or store manure, animal excreta or stable refuse unless the same shall have been treated with a larvicide satisfactory to the Director of Public Health. All manure delivered to property for use as fertilizer, unless stored as provided herein, shall be disposed of within 48 hours either by spading the same into the ground so that no part of it shall be exposed on the surface and attract and offer a breeding place for flies, or such manure shall be spread on the surface of lawns as grass fertilizer.

36.12.030 Manure piles.
No manure shall be allowed to remain in piles within the City, except when the same be cared for in the following manner:

A. Manure that is to be converted into compost by mixing with earth, leaves, garden litter, etc., shall be completely covered over with sufficient earth so that no part may be exposed to the air and will prevent the development of any offensive or disagreeable odor.

B. Such piles of compost shall not be allowed nearer than 50 feet from the living rooms of neighboring residence.

C. When any portion of this compost shall be removed, the broken surface shall be immediately covered with fresh soil in order that no part of the interior shall be exposed to the air.

D. If wood is used instead of cement, the boards used for the purpose of constructing the pit shall be at least one and one-half inches in thickness, free from knots that may drop out later and give access to flies. These boards shall be securely nailed and the corners reinforced to ensure tightness at all times.

E. The sides of the pit shall be at least one foot above the general surface and be provided with a stout close fitting cover of wood; or a canvas cover, provided the same is large enough to cover the pit completely and hang over on all sides for at least eight inches.

F. Any person intending to use such pits, of either material mentioned, shall apply for a permit; and the pit shall be inspected by the regular Building Inspector before use is made of it.

36.12.040 Garbage.
No garbage of any sort, either of animal or vegetable origin, shall be composted with the manure or placed in the manure pits.

36.12.050 Penalty for violation.
Any person, firm or corporation violating a provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 1400)

Chapter 36.16
STAGNANT WATER
Sections:

36.16.010    Stagnant water.

36.16.010 Stagnant water.
All pools of water or places more or less stagnant, and all wooden, metallic, or cement tanks, barrels, oil cans, wash boilers, tubs, or other receptacles containing occasionally, or at all time, rain or hydrant water, pure or impure, in which mosquitoes may breed, and all receptacles not properly or tightly covered or screened with No. 14 mesh wire screening, are hereby declared to be a public nuisance.

Chapter 36.20
PROHIBITED MARIJUANA ACTIVITIES
Sections:

36.20.010    Legislative findings and statement of purpose.

36.20.020    Definitions.

36.20.030    Prohibited activities.

36.20.040    Public nuisance.

36.20.050    Violations.

36.20.010 Legislative findings and statement of purpose.
A. The City Council finds that the prohibitions on commercial marijuana activities, marijuana cultivation, marijuana processing, marijuana delivery, and marijuana dispensaries are necessary for the preservation and protection of the public health, safety, and welfare for the City and its community and are consistent with federal law that makes the manufacture, possession, or use of marijuana to be a crime. The City Council’s prohibition of such activities is within the authority conferred upon the City Council by Federal and State law.

B. On October 9, 2015, the Governor signed the “Medical Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act” (“MCRS Act”) into law. The Act became effective January 1, 2016, and contains new statutory provisions that allow local agencies to regulate or ban the cultivation, storage, manufacture, transport, provision, or other related activities pertaining to medical marijuana.

C. The City Council finds that the State is not allowed to issue a license for the cultivation of medical marijuana within the City because Health and Safety Code Section 11362.777(b)(3) provides that the Department of Food and Agriculture may not issue a State license to cultivate medical marijuana within a city that prohibits cultivation under principles of permissive zoning. Pursuant to CMC 86.02.050, uses not expressly permitted are prohibited and cultivation is not currently allowed in Coronado as it is not specifically permitted by the Zoning Code.

D. The City Council finds that this chapter is necessary to address certain public health, safety, and welfare concerns by prohibiting the cultivation of marijuana in the City, whether for personal use or by a collective or dispensary, and the delivery of marijuana in the City.

E. On November 8, 2016, the State voters approved the Adult Use of Marijuana Act, also identified as Proposition 64 (“Prop 64”). Prop 64 legalized adult nonmedical use of marijuana and established a State licensing scheme for nonmedical marijuana facilities largely patterned on the MCRS Act, and generally: (1) allows adults 21 years and older to possess up to one ounce of marijuana and cultivate up to six plants for personal use; (2) regulates and taxes the production, manufacture, and sale of marijuana for adult use; (3) allows local regulation and taxation of marijuana; (4) prohibits smoking marijuana in places where smoking tobacco is prohibited; and (5) rewrites criminal penalties so as to reduce the most common marijuana felonies to misdemeanors and allow prior offenders to petition for reduced charges. Prop 64, similar to the MCRS Act, allows cities and counties to prohibit the establishment of nonmedical facilities and licenses that are provided under Prop 64, providing for minimal personal use exceptions. (Ord. 2071 § 2, 2017; Ord. 2054 § 2, 2016)

36.20.020 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

A. “Caregiver” or “primary caregiver” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7 as the same may be amended from time to time.

B. “Commercial marijuana activity” includes the cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, transportation, distribution, delivery, or sale of marijuana and marijuana products.

C. “Cultivation” includes the growing, planting, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, trimming, or processing of marijuana.

D. “Delivery” means the commercial transfer of marijuana or marijuana products to a customer, qualified patient, or primary caregiver. “Delivery” also includes the use by a marijuana dispensary or retailer of any technology platform owned and controlled by a marijuana dispensary or retailer that enables customers, qualified patients, or primary caregivers to arrange for or facilitate the commercial transfer by a licensed dispensary or retailer of marijuana or marijuana products.

E. “Marijuana” or “cannabis” means any or all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin or separated resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin, including marijuana infused in foodstuff or any other ingestible or consumable product containing marijuana. The term “marijuana” shall also include “medical marijuana” as such phrase is used in the August 2008 Guidelines for the Security and Non-Diversion of Marijuana Grown for Medical Use, as may be amended from time to time, that was issued by the Office of the Attorney General for the State of California or subject to the provisions of California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 (Compassionate Use Act of 1996) or California Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.7 to 11362.83 (Medical Marijuana Program Act).

F. “Marijuana processing” means any method used to prepare marijuana or its byproducts for commercial retail and/or wholesale including, but not limited to, drying, cleaning, curing, packaging, and extraction of active ingredients to create marijuana-related products and concentrates.

G. “Marijuana dispensary” or “marijuana dispensaries” means any business, office, store, facility, location, retail storefront or wholesale component of any establishment, cooperative or collective that delivers, whether mobile or otherwise, dispenses, distributes, exchanges, transmits, transports, sells, or provides marijuana to any person for any reason, including members of any medical marijuana cooperative or collective consistent with the August 2008 Guidelines for the Security and Non-Diversion of Marijuana Grown for Medical Use, as may be amended from time to time, that was issued by the Office of the Attorney General for the State of California, or for the purposes set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 (Compassionate Use Act of 1996) or California Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.7 to 11362.83 (Medical Marijuana Program Act).

H. “Medical marijuana collective” or “cooperative or collective” means any group that is collectively or cooperatively cultivating and distributing marijuana for medical purposes that is organized in the manner set forth in the August 2008 Guidelines for the Security and Non-Diversion of Marijuana Grown for Medical Use, as may be amended from time to time, that was issued by the Office of the Attorney General for the State of California or subject to the provisions of California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 (Compassionate Use Act of 1996) or California Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.7 to 11362.83 (Medical Marijuana Program Act). (Ord. 2071 § 2, 2017; Ord. 2054 § 2, 2016)

36.20.030 Prohibited activities.
A. It is unlawful for any person or business to engage in commercial marijuana activities of any type in all zones and in all specific plan areas. No person shall establish, operate, conduct, or allow a commercial marijuana activity anywhere within the City.

B. It is unlawful for any person or business to engage in the cultivation of marijuana, including cultivation by a qualified patient or a primary caregiver that is exempt from State licensing requirements, in all zones and in all specific plan areas in the City. No person, including a qualified patient or primary caregiver, shall cultivate any amount of marijuana in the City, even for medical purposes.

C. To the extent not already covered by subsections A and B of this section, it is unlawful to deliver any amount of marijuana within the City except for personal use by a qualified patient or for delivery by a primary caregiver to a qualified patient for personal use as provided in Business and Professions Code Section 19319 and Health and Safety Code Section 11362.765(b). With the exception noted above, no person shall conduct any deliveries that either originate or terminate within the City.

D. It is unlawful to establish or operate a marijuana dispensary, medical marijuana collective, or any other business establishment associated with any type of commercial marijuana activity within the City.

E. This section is meant to prohibit all commercial or medical marijuana activities in the City except where the City is preempted by Federal or State law from enacting a prohibition on any such activity. Accordingly, the City shall not issue any permit, license, or other entitlement for any commercial or medical marijuana activity for which a State license is required under any State law, and no person shall otherwise establish or conduct such activities in the City, except where the City is preempted by Federal or State law from enacting a prohibition on any such activity for which the use permit, variance, building permit, or any other entitlement, license, or permit is sought. (Ord. 2071 § 2, 2017; Ord. 2054 § 2, 2016)

36.20.040 Public nuisance.
Any violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. (Ord. 2071 § 2, 2017; Ord. 2054 § 2, 2016)

36.20.050 Violations.
To the extent not preempted by State law, any person or business that violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the enforcement provisions of Chapters 1.08 and 1.10 CMC. (Ord. 2071 § 2, 2017; Ord. 2054 § 2, 2016)

Title 40
PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS, AND WELFARE
Chapters:

40.10    Nudity in Parks and Beaches

40.20    Cardrooms

40.22    Abatement of Illegal Drug Activity

40.23    Bingo

40.24    Games of Skill and Chance

40.28    Consumption of Alcohol

40.30    Responsible Host

40.36    Use of Public Streets

40.40    Disturbance Abatement

40.42    Security Alarm Ordinance

40.44    Radio, Television Interference

40.48    Use of Public Property

40.60    Curfew

40.62    Daytime Loitering of Juveniles on School Days

40.68    Weapons – Discharging

40.72    Door-to-Door Solicitation/Canvassing

40.80    Repealed

Chapter 40.10
NUDITY IN PARKS AND BEACHES
Sections:

40.10.010    Nudity prohibited.

40.10.010 Nudity prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to appear, bathe, sunbathe, walk or be in any public park, playgrounds, beach or the waters adjacent thereto, in such a manner that the genitals, vulva, pubis, pubic symphysis, pubic hair, natal cleft, perineum, anus, anal region, or pubic hair region of any person, or any portion of the breast at or below the upper edge of the areola thereof of any female person, is exposed to public view or is not covered by an opaque covering. (Ord. 1795)

Chapter 40.20
CARDROOMS
Sections:

40.20.010    Penalty for violation.

40.20.020    Guilty as principal.

40.20.030    Business license.

40.20.010 Penalty for violation.
It is unlawful for any person or persons, individually, or by association with others, either as owner, principals, clerk, agent, servant or employee, to establish, open, keep, carry on, or maintain, or assist in maintaining any cardroom, or rooms, or other place in the City where any card table or tables or other place designed to be used for playing of card games is or are kept for hire or public use and any person or persons opening, keeping, carrying on, or assisting in carrying on, maintaining, or assisting in maintaining, any such place, herein specified, in the City shall be guilty of an infraction, and every act in violation of this section shall separately, or for each day of its continuance, be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 1400)

40.20.020 Guilty as principal.
Any clerk, servant, agent, employee, or person committing any act in violation of any of the provisions of CMC 40.20.010 shall be deemed guilty as principal.

40.20.030 Business license.
Every person taking out or having taken out a license for any business for which a license is required by the City, who shall be convicted of establishing, keeping, or maintaining a place where any card table or tables or other place designed to be used for playing of card games are kept for hire or public use contrary to the provisions of this chapter, shall, in cases where such unlawful place has been established, kept or maintained, or such unlawful act has been done in connection with such lawful business, forfeit such license for such lawful business shall be issued to said person during a period of one year thereafter.

Chapter 40.22
ABATEMENT OF ILLEGAL DRUG ACTIVITY
Sections:

40.22.010    Purpose.

40.22.020    Nuisance subject to abatement.

40.22.030    Authority.

40.22.040    Procedure.

40.22.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to restate the authority of the City to abate buildings or places where illegal drug activity is occurring. (HS § 11570, et seq.) (Ord. 1794; Ord. 1749)

40.22.020 Nuisance subject to abatement.
Every building or place used for the purpose of unlawfully selling, serving, storing, keeping or giving away controlled substances as defined by the laws of the State of California, in every building or place wherein or upon which such acts take place, is a nuisance which shall be enjoined, abated and prevented, whether it is a public or private nuisance.

40.22.030 Authority.
At the direction of the City Council the City Attorney may initiate an action to abate a nuisance as defined herein. (HS § 11570.5)

40.22.040 Procedure.
The procedures to be followed in abating a nuisance as defined herein shall comply with the State law. (HS §§ 11572 – 11578)

Chapter 40.23
BINGO
Sections:

40.23.010    Bingo authorized.

40.23.020    Definitions.

40.23.030    License required.

40.23.040    Application.

40.23.050    Terms of license and fees.

40.23.060    Application investigation.

40.23.070    License not transferable.

40.23.080    Limitations.

40.23.090    Inspection.

40.23.100    Application denial, license suspension and/or revocation.

40.23.110    Appeal procedure.

40.23.120    Violations and penalties.

40.23.130    Severability.

40.23.010 Bingo authorized.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted pursuant to Section 19, of Article IV, of the California Constitution in order to make the game of bingo lawful under the terms and conditions in the following sections of this chapter.

40.23.020 Definitions.
Whenever in this chapter the following terms are used, they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section.

A. “Authorized organization” is an organization exempted from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by Sections 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g, and 23701.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; a mobilehome park association or a senior citizens organization; and provided, that the proceeds of such games are used by such organizations only for charitable purposes.

B. “Bingo” is a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conforms to numbers or symbols selected at random.

C. “Minor” is any person under the age of 18 years. (Ord. 1384; Ord. 1355)

40.23.030 License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any bingo game in the City unless such person is a member of an authorized organization, acting on behalf of such an authorized organization and has been issued a license as provided by this chapter. (Ord. 1384)

40.23.040 Application.
Application for license shall be made to the Administrative Services Department on forms prescribed by the Director of Police Services and shall be filed not less than 10 days prior to the proposed date of the bingo game or games. Such application form shall require from the applicant at least the following:

A. A list of all members who will operate the bingo game, including full names of each member, date of birth, place of birth, physical description and driver’s license number.

B. The date(s) and place(s) of the proposed bingo game or games.

C. Proof that the organization is an authorized organization as defined by this chapter. (Ord. 1384)

40.23.050 Terms of license and fees.
A. The term of a bingo license is six months and may be renewed for a period of six months any time within one year from its date of issuance upon application therefor.

B. The fee for a bingo license shall be $50.00 and the fee for renewal shall be $10.00. The appropriate fee shall accompany the submission of each application. If an application for a license is denied, one-half of any license fee paid shall be refunded to the organization. (Ord. 1384)

40.23.060 Application investigation.
A. Upon receipt of an application for a license, the Director of Police Services may send copies of such application to any office or department which he deems essential in order to carry out a proper investigation of the applicant.

B. The Director of Police Services and every officer and/or department to which an application is referred shall investigate the truth of the matters set forth in the application, the character of the applicant, and may examine the premises to be used for the bingo game.

C. Upon approval of any application for a bingo license, the Administrative Services Department shall issue the license.

40.23.070 License not transferable.
Each license issued hereunder shall be issued to a specific person on behalf of a specific authorized organization to conduct a bingo game at a specific location and shall in no event be transferable from one person to another nor from one location to another. (Ord. 1384)

40.23.080 Limitations.
An authorized organization shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, and which property is used by such organization for an office or for the performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require that the property owned or leased by the organization be used or leased exclusively by such organization.

A. No minors shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game.

B. All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the members of the authorized organization.

C. A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the authorized organization which organized it. Such members shall be approved by the Director of Police Services and shall not receive a profit, wage, or salary from any bingo game. Only the organization authorized to conduct a bingo game shall operate such or participate in the promotion, supervision, or any other phase of such game.

D. No individual, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity except the organization authorized to conduct a game shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo game.

E. Within 30 days after the bingo game is held, the applicant will file with the Director of Police Services a full and complete financial statement of all moneys collected, disbursed and remaining for charitable purposes. With respect to organization exempt from payment of the bank and corporation tax by Section 23701d of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such profits shall be used only for charitable purposes. With respect to other organizations authorized to conduct bingo games pursuant to this chapter, all proceeds derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes, except as follows:

1. Such proceeds may be used for prizes.

2. A portion of such proceeds, not to exceed 20 percent of the proceeds before the deduction for prizes, or $1,000 per month, whichever is less, may be used for rental of property, overhead, and administrative expenses. (Ord. 1652; Ord. 1384)

40.23.090 Inspection.
Any Peace Officer of the City shall have free access to any bingo game licensed under this chapter. The licensee shall have the bingo license and list of approved staff available for inspection at all times during any bingo game.

40.23.100 Application denial, license suspension and/or revocation.
The Director of Police Services may deny an application for a bingo license, or suspend or revoke a license if he finds the applicant or licensee or any agent or representative thereof has:

A. Knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application or in any record or report required to be filed under this chapter; or

B. Violated any of the provisions of this chapter.

If after investigation the Director of Police Services determines that a bingo license should be suspended or revoked or an application for such license denied, he shall prepare a notice of suspension, revocation or denial of application. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail to the applicant’s last address provided in the application or be personally delivered. Any person who has had an application for a bingo license denied by the Director of Police Services may appeal the Director’s decision in the manner provided in this chapter.

40.23.110 Appeal procedure.
Whenever an appeal is provided for in this chapter, such appeal shall be filed and conducted as prescribed in this section:

A. Within 15 calendar days after the date of any denial, suspension, revocation or other decision of the Director of Police Services, an aggrieved party may appeal such action by filing with the City Clerk a written appeal briefly setting forth the reasons why such denial, suspension, revocation or other decision is not proper.

B. Upon receipt of such written appeal, the City Clerk shall assign the appeal to a hearing officer selected by the City Clerk on a rotating basis from a list of qualified hearing officers approved by the City Council. The hearing officer so assigned shall schedule a hearing before him within 10 days after the date of assignment of the appeal by the City Clerk. At least one week prior to the date of the hearing on the appeal, the City Clerk shall notify the appellant and Director of Police Services of the date and place of the hearing. The hearing officer is authorized to issue subpoenas, to administer oaths and to conduct the hearing on the appeal. At such hearing the Director of Police Services and the appellant may present evidence relevant to the denial, suspension, revocation or other decision of the Director of Police Services. The hearing officer shall receive evidence and shall rule on the admissibility of evidence and on questions of law. The formal rules of evidence applicable in a court of law shall not apply to such hearing.

C. At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer may uphold the denial, suspension, revocation or other decision of the Director of Police Services, or the hearing officer may allow that which has been denied, reinstate that which has been suspended or revoked, or modify or reverse any other decision of the Director of Police Services which is the subject of the appeal. The hearing officer shall within five days file with the City Clerk written findings of fact and conclusions of law and his decision. The decision of the hearing officer is final.

40.23.120 Violations and penalties.
A. It is a misdemeanor for any person to receive or to pay a profit, wage, or salary from any bingo game authorized by this chapter. A violation of this subsection A shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $10,000 which shall be deposited in the general fund of the City.

B. Any person violating any provision or failing to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction.

C. The City may enforce any of the provisions of this chapter by injunction. (Ord. 1400; Ord. 1384)

40.23.130 Severability.
If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable.

Chapter 40.24
GAMES OF SKILL AND CHANCE
Sections:

40.24.010    Games of chance prohibited.

40.24.020    Free games as lure.

40.24.030    Intent of chapter.

40.24.010 Games of chance prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to set up, manage, conduct or maintain any game, machine or enterprise wherein:

A. A consideration is paid by the player; and

B. Prizes are awarded as determined by chance or by any combination of skill and chance; and

C. Said game, machine or enterprise is played concurrently with or alternately or in conjunction or connection with:

1. Any lottery; or

2. Any game of chance, whether or not a consideration is paid for playing the game of chance. (Ord. 1732)

40.24.020 Free games as lure.
It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to set up, manage, conduct or maintain any combination of games, machines or enterprises wherein games of chance and games of skill are alternated or played in any sequence with each other so that free games are used to entice or allure players into then playing for a consideration of paid games of skill or such games combining the element of chance with the element of skill. Any person violating any provision of this section is guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 1400)

40.24.030 Intent of chapter.
This chapter is intended to prohibit the playing of “bingo” (except as provided for in Chapter 40.23 CMC), “tango,” “bridge,” “skill ball,” or any game or combination of games similar in operation to such games, and to apply to free as well as to paid playing of such games. (Ord. 1956 § 14, 2004; Ord. 1356)

Chapter 40.28
CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL
Sections:

40.28.010    Consumption of alcohol on public property – Tidelands Park.

40.28.015    Consumption of alcohol on public property – City hosted functions.

40.28.020    Warning regarding alcohol consumption.

40.28.030    Beverage containers on posted premises.

40.28.010 Consumption of alcohol on public property – Tidelands Park.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, and in subsection B of this section, no person shall consume any malt, spirituous or vinous liquor containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume on any public street, alley, sidewalk, beach, park, or other public property within this City except in accordance with the terms of a lease or other permit approved by the City Council. (Pen. Code § 647(f).)

B. Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, consumption of any malt, spirituous or vinous liquor containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume may be allowed for private events conducted in Tidelands Park under those conditions approved by the Coronado City Council including, at a minimum, the following:

1. The event must be for groups of 25 or more.

2. The event must be located in a controlled area, clearly designated in Tidelands Park through markings or limited access.

3. The responsible party shall provide private, professional security on site at all times during the event, with one security officer present for the first 25 participants and one security officer for each additional 50 participants.

4. Alcohol may be consumed during the hours of 12:00 noon and 10:00 p.m. on the same day, with all alcohol removed from Tidelands Park at the time of the conclusion of the event, in no event later than 10:00 p.m.

5. Alcoholic beverages shall be provided only to event participants, aged 21 and older, and shall be free of charge.

6. The responsible party shall first obtain permits issued by (a) the San Diego Unified Port District, and (b) the Coronado City Manager’s Office, which shall be subject to such conditions as approved by the Coronado City Council. If a caterer is hired to provide and/or serve the alcoholic beverages at the event, the responsible party shall also provide proof that the caterer has obtained the necessary permit from the State Alcoholic Beverage Control Board.

7. The responsible party shall execute a release and hold harmless agreement in the form approved by the City Attorney, and shall provide liability insurance in the form and coverage limits, and with such endorsements (including endorsements covering the sale or provision of alcohol), approved by the City’s Director of Administrative Services, or his or her designee. Each policy shall provide an endorsement naming the City of Coronado and its elected and appointed officials, officers, agents and employees as additional insureds. (Ord. 2004 § 2, 2009)

40.28.015 Consumption of alcohol on public property – City hosted functions.
A. Notwithstanding CMC 40.28.010(A), the possession and/or consumption of any malt, spirituous or vinous liquor containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume may be allowed at any organized group activity which has been planned, sponsored, co-sponsored, or funded by the City.

B. The Coronado City Manager or the Coronado City Managerâ€™s designee may attach conditions to any such group activity as outlined in subsection A of this section which are deemed necessary or appropriate to ensure that the consumption of alcohol will be carried on in conformance with applicable laws, rules and regulations, in a manner consistent with proper public facilities area uses, and in a manner not detrimental to the public interest.

C. Alcoholic beverages shall be provided only to participants or attendees of any such group activity, aged 21 or older.

D. Alcoholic beverages shall be prohibited from all events involving youth honorees. (Ord. 2059 §  2, 2016)

40.28.020 Warning regarding alcohol consumption.
A. Any person or entity who owns, operates, manages, leases or rents premises offering wine, beer or other alcoholic beverages for sale, or dispensing for consideration to the public, shall cause a sign or notice to be permanently posted or displayed on the premises which reads as follows:

PREGNANCY AND ALCOHOL DO NOT MIX – DRINKING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES, INCLUDING WINE AND BEER, DURING PREGNANCY CAN CAUSE BIRTH DEFECTS.

B. The sign or notice shall be no smaller than eight and one-half inches wide by five and one-half inches long with lettering of no less than three-eighths inch in height.

C. The sign shall be placed:

1. Where the sale or dispensing of wine, beer or other alcoholic beverages to the public is primarily intended for consumption off the premises, at least one sign shall be so placed as to assure that it is conspicuously displayed so as to be readable at all points of purchase.

2. Where the sale of wine, beer or other alcoholic beverages to the public is primarily intended for consumption on the premises, at least one sign shall be placed to ensure that it is conspicuously displayed so as to be readable in each public restroom.

D. In the event a substantial number of the public patronizing a premises offering for sale or dispensing wine, beer or other alcoholic beverages uses a language other than English as a primary language, an additional sign or notice as is required by this section shall be worded in the primary language or languages involved. (Ord. 1702; Ord. 1653; Ord. 1575)

40.28.030 Beverage containers on posted premises.
A. No person who has in his or her possession any bottle, can or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which has been opened or a seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed, shall enter, be, or remain on the posted premises of, including the posted, nonprivate residential parking lot immediately adjacent to, any retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage licensee licensed pursuant to Division 9, commencing with Section 23000, of the Business and Professions Code, or on any public sidewalk immediately adjacent to the licensed and posted premises.

B. A retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage licensee licensed pursuant to Division 9 of the Business and Professions Code to operate within this City of Coronado shall post such licensed premises with notices clearly visible to patrons of the licensee and parking lot and to persons on the public sidewalk that the provisions of subsection A of this section are applicable. Such notices shall include language that states that possession of any opened alcoholic beverage container is prohibited by law.

C. Any person violating a provision of this section is guilty of an infraction.

D. As used in this section, “posted premises” means those premises which are subject to licensure under any retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage license, the parking lot immediately adjacent to the licensed premises and any public sidewalk immediately adjacent to the licensed premises on which clearly visible notices indicate that the provisions of subsection A of this section are applicable.

E. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a private residential parking lot which is immediately adjacent to the posted premises. (Ord. 1592)

Chapter 40.30
RESPONSIBLE HOST
Sections:

40.30.010    Purpose.

40.30.020    Definitions.

40.30.030    Consumption or ingestion of alcoholic beverages, marijuana or controlled substances by minors prohibited in public place, place open to the public, or place not open to the public.

40.30.040    Hosting, allowing a party, gathering, or event – Prohibitions.

40.30.045    Duty to act.

40.30.050    Prima facie evidence.

40.30.060    Separate violation for each offense.

40.30.070    Penalty.

40.30.080    Reservation of legal options.

40.30.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is:

A. To protect public health, safety and general welfare;

B. To enforce laws prohibiting the consumption and/or ingestion of alcohol, marijuana and controlled substances by minors; and

C. To reduce the costs of providing law enforcement services to parties, gatherings, or events requiring a response by requiring party hosts to ensure minors are not consuming and/or ingesting alcoholic beverages, marijuana and/or controlled substances. (Ord. 2093 § 3 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 1949 § 2, 2003)

40.30.020 Definitions.
A. “Alcohol” means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced.

B. “Alcoholic beverage” means the same as is defined in Section 23004 of the Business and Professions Code, as may be amended or superseded, and includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances.

C. “Control” means any form of dominion including ownership, tenancy, or other possessory right.

D. “Controlled substance” means a drug or substance described in California Health and Safety Code Section 11007, as may be amended or superseded; provided, that the term does not include any drug or substance for which an individual found to have possessed or consumed such drug or substance has a valid prescription issued by a licensed medical practitioner authorized to issue such a prescription.

E. “Enforcement services” includes the salaries and benefits of police officers or other code enforcement personnel for the amount of time actually spent in responding to, or in remaining at, the party, gathering, or event and the administrative costs attributable to the incident; the actual cost of any medical treatment to injured police officers or other code enforcement personnel; and the cost of repairing any damaged City equipment or property; and the cost arising from the use of any damaged City equipment in responding to or remaining at the party, gathering, or event.

F. “Guardian” means (1) a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or (2) a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court.

G. “Host” means someone who receives and entertains guests.

H. “Marijuana” means all parts, as a whole or in part, of the Cannabis plant, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, and/or the resin extracted from any such plant; and every compound, manufacture, derivative or preparation of such plant including seeds, resin, and concentrated marijuana. The prohibition herein includes marijuana in any form including, but not limited to, cigarettes, vapor, food products, or any other product of marijuana that can be smoked or ingested in any way.

I. “Minor” means any person under 21 years of age.

J. “Parent” means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of another person.

K. “Party, gathering, or event” means a group of persons who have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or social activity. (Ord. 2093 § 3 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 1949 § 3, 2003)

40.30.030 Consumption or ingestion of alcoholic beverages, marijuana or controlled substances by minors prohibited in public place, place open to the public, or place not open to the public.
Except as permitted by State law, it is unlawful for any minor to:

A. Consume or ingest at any public place or any place open to the public any alcoholic beverage, marijuana and/or any controlled substance; or

B. Consume or ingest at any place not open to the public any alcoholic beverage, marijuana and/or controlled substance, unless in connection with the consumption of the alcoholic beverage that the minor is being supervised by his or her own parent or legal guardian as permitted by Article I, Section 4 of the California Constitution. (Ord. 2093 § 3 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 1949 § 4, 2003)

40.30.040 Hosting, allowing a party, gathering, or event – Prohibitions.
No person having immediate control of any residence or premises shall allow a party, gathering, or event to take place or continue at the residence or premises if:

A. The person knows, or reasonably should know, that three or more minors are present at the party, gathering, or event and alcoholic beverages, marijuana and/or controlled substances are being consumed, ingested or used by any minor; and

B. The person knows, or reasonably should know, that a minor is consuming/ingesting any alcoholic beverage, marijuana and/or any controlled substance at the party, gathering, or event.

C. This section shall not apply to any location or place regulated by the California Department of Alcohol and Beverage Control. (Ord. 2093 § 3 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 1969 § 2, 2005)

40.30.045 Duty to act.
A. Any adult having immediate control of a residence or premises, who is present at the residence or premises at the time alcohol, marijuana or any controlled substance is being consumed or ingested by minors, shall be held to have taken charge of said minors on the basis that said adult knows, or reasonably should know, a duty to terminate the illegal conduct once it is, or should have been, discovered.

B. When a residence or premises are under the immediate control of an adult who is present at the residence or premises at the time alcohol, marijuana or any controlled substance is being consumed or ingested by minors, said control shall be presumed to confer on the adult the ability to terminate the illegal conduct once it is, or should have been, discovered.

C. It is the duty of any person having control of any private property, who knowingly hosts, permits or allows a gathering on the property, to take all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of alcoholic beverages, marijuana or any controlled substance by any minor at the gathering. Reasonable steps include, but are not limited to, (1) controlling access to alcoholic beverages, marijuana, or any controlled substances, (2) controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages, marijuana, or any controlled substances, (3) verifying the age of persons at the gathering by inspecting driver’s licenses or other government-issued identification cards, and (4) supervising the activities of minors at the gathering. (Ord. 2093 § 3 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 1969 § 3, 2005)

40.30.050 Prima facie evidence.
Whenever a person having control of private property is present at that property during a gathering when a minor obtains, possesses, consumes or ingests any alcoholic beverage, marijuana and/or controlled substance, it shall be prima facie evidence that the person knows or should have known that the minor obtained, possessed or consumed an alcoholic beverage, marijuana or controlled substance at the gathering. (Ord. 2093 § 3 (Exh. A), 2019)

40.30.060 Separate violation for each offense.
Each violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2093 § 3 (Exh. A), 2019)

40.30.070 Penalty.
A. A violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to $1,000 and/or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months except that notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any such violation constituting a misdemeanor under this section may, in the discretion of the attorney having prosecutorial functions, be charged and prosecuted as an infraction in accordance with CMC 1.08.050.

B. In addition to criminal prosecution, when a gathering prohibited by this chapter occurs and a police officer or code enforcement officer is called to the scene, the person or persons having control of the residence or premises shall be liable for the cost of providing enforcement services. (Ord. 2093 § 3 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 1949 § 6, 2003. Formerly 40.30.050)

40.30.080 Reservation of legal options.
The City of Coronado does not waive its right to seek reimbursement for actual costs of enforcement services associated with the enforcement of this chapter through other legal remedies or procedures. The procedures provided for in this chapter are in addition to any other statute, ordinance, or law. CMC 40.30.030 and 40.30.040 in no way limit the authority of peace officers or private citizens to make arrests for any criminal offense arising out of conduct regulated by those same sections, nor do they limit in any way the prosecution’s ability to initiate and prosecute a criminal prosecution for any violation of a criminal offense arising out of the same circumstances necessitating the application of those same sections. (Ord. 2093 § 3 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 1949 § 7, 2003. Formerly 40.30.060)

Chapter 40.36
USE OF PUBLIC STREETS
Sections:

40.36.010    Purpose.

40.36.020    Definitions.

40.36.030    General provisions.

40.36.040    Application procedures.

40.36.050    Processing of application.

40.36.060    Objection to determination.

40.36.070    Issuance of permit.

40.36.080    Contents of permit.

40.36.090    Notification of issuance.

40.36.100    Enforcement.

40.36.010 Purpose.
This chapter establishes the procedures for regulating events conducted on public streets for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the public.

40.36.020 Definitions.
A. A “public street event” is any assembly, procession, march or other activity consisting of persons, animals, equipment, bicycles or vehicles, or any combination thereof, conducted upon any public street, sidewalk or alley which will not comply with traffic regulations or which will interfere with the normal flow of traffic.

B. “Street” shall be defined by CMC 52.40.010(F) and shall include the entire width of the dedicated right-of-way.

40.36.030 General provisions.
A. Permit Required. No person shall conduct, manage or sponsor any public street event without a permit issued by the City Manager.

B. Interference with Public Street Event. No person shall, without the consent of the permittee, join or participate in a permitted public street event, nor in any manner interfere with its progress or orderly conduct.

C. Prohibited Events. A permit shall not be issued for a public street event that would endanger public health, safety or welfare or if the public street event is directed at solicitation of funds, sale of merchandise or the sale of tickets to observers of the event.

40.36.040 Application procedures.
A. Timely Application. The applicant shall file with the City Manager an application for permit not less than 30 days nor more than 180 days prior to the proposed date of the event.

B. Application by Agent. If the event is to be conducted by or on behalf of an organization or person other than the organization or person applying for the permit, then the applicant shall file with the application written evidence that such organization or person has authorized the applicant to apply for such permit on its behalf.

C. Contents of Application. The application shall include information relating to the following:

1. Intended purpose of the event.

2. Description of each organization sponsoring or conducting the event to include address and telephone number.

3. The name, telephone number and address of each person responsible for the supervising of the conduct of the event.

4. The proposed site and route of the event to include alternative sites and routes.

5. The proposed date of the event and the anticipated time of commencement and completion of the event with proposed alternatives.

6. A description of each vehicle and piece of equipment which will participate in or be utilized in the conduct of the event.

7. The number and types of animals that will participate in or be utilized in the conduct of the event.

8. The number and types of persons that will participate in or assist in the conduct of the event.

9. A description of each type of sound amplification device that will be utilized during the event to include a description of the anticipated use. (Ord. 1421)

40.36.050 Processing of application.
A. Action by City Manager. Within eight days after the filing of the application, the City Manager shall deny or approve the application or request additional information from the applicant.

B. Requirements for Approval. In approving an application, the City Manager must find that:

1. The event will not endanger the health, safety and welfare of the public.

2. The event does not have as its purpose the solicitation of funds or sale of merchandise or tickets to persons observing the event.

3. The event will not unduly interrupt the safe and orderly movement of the public within the City.

4. The event will not require the diversion of so great a number of police, firemen and ambulance service so as to inhibit the normal level of protection provided to the City.

5. The event will not unduly interfere with the fire protection, police protection and ambulance service normally provided to the City.

C. Determination of Cost. The City Manager shall determine the cost of public services that must be provided in order to allow the conduct of the event. The City Manager shall determine the dollar amount of liability that could potentially arise out of the conduct of the event.

D. Conditions on Issuing a Permit. In approving an application, the City Manager shall impose the following conditions upon the issuance of the permit:

1. The signing of a hold harmless agreement provided by the City by all organizations sponsoring or conducting the event.

2. Evidence of liability insurance in favor of the City of Coronado acquired by the sponsoring organization in an amount to be determined by the City Manager equal to the anticipated maximum amount of potential liability that could arise out of the conduct of the event.

3. The payment of a fee computed on the basis of the cost of providing public services for the event.

4. Such other conditions as the City Manager deems appropriate.

E. Late Applications. If an application is filed less than 30 days prior to the events the City Manager may still accept the application for processing; provided, that he determines that the event can be thoroughly analyzed for purposes of approving the issuance of a permit.

F. Notice to Applicant. The City Manager shall notify the applicant as to the action taken pursuant to subsection A of this section.

40.36.060 Objection to determination.
A. The determination of the City Manager shall become final 15 days after such action.

B. Anyone directly affected by the determination and who objects to such determination may request the City Council to consider the matter.

C. Such request must be filed with the City Clerk within 15 days of the determination and must describe the substance of the objection.

D. The City Council may consider the objection and take whatever action it deems appropriate. The decision of the City Council shall be final as to all issues involved.

40.36.070 Issuance of permit.
Upon the determination of the City Manager that all conditions imposed upon the issuance of the permit have been satisfied, the City Manager shall issue a permit allowing the public street event to be conducted in conformity with the restrictions and conditions set forth in the permit.

40.36.080 Contents of permit.
Each permit shall contain the following information:

A. Date of the event.

B. Site and route of the event.

C. Time of commencement.

D. Time of completion.

E. Minimum and maximum speed.

F. Maximum interval of distance to be maintained between units participating in the event.

G. Portions of the street that may be utilized by the event.

H. Conditions or restrictions imposed upon the conduct of the event.

40.36.090 Notification of issuance.
Upon the issuance of a public street event permit, the City Manager shall send a copy of the permit to the following:

A. The Director of Police Services.

B. The Director of Fire Services.

C. The Director of Public Services.

D. The Director of Recreation Services.

E. Each public entity which could foreseeably be affected by the conduct of the event.

F. The applicant.

40.36.100 Enforcement.
Any person conducting a public street event in violation of this chapter or the terms of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

Chapter 40.40
DISTURBANCE ABATEMENT
Sections:

40.40.010    Purpose.

40.40.020    Definitions.

40.40.030    First response.

40.40.040    Subsequent responses.

40.40.050    Confidentiality.

40.40.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide a source of recovery for the costs incurred by the City in returning a second and subsequent times to the scene of a disturbance of the peace.

40.40.020 Definitions.
A. “Costs of second and subsequent responses” means the full compensation of the City employees and officials for the amount of time actually expended in responding to or in remaining at the disturbance of the peace at a rate established by the City Council; together with the actual costs of any medical treatment to injured City employees; and the costs of repairing or replacing any damaged or destroyed City equipment or property.

B. “Responsible person” means the person who owns the property where the disturbance of the peace is occurring, the person in charge of the premises where the disturbance of the peace is occurring, or the person who organized the event which is causing the disturbance of the peace. If the “responsible person” is a minor, then the parents or guardians of that minor will be jointly and severally liable for the costs incurred for the second and subsequent City responses.

40.40.030 First response.
A. During a first response to a disturbance of the peace occurring on private property, the responding officer may, among other things, deliver to the responsible person or persons a notice of violation: first response which shall contain a message substantially as follows:

This notice of violation is given to you as a result of a first response of the City of Coronado to a disturbance of the peace occurring in violation of Penal Code Section 415. You will be charged all City personnel and equipment expenses incurred as a result of any second or subsequent response to this location.

B. The notice of violation: first response may contain such other information as deemed necessary by the City Manager to accomplish the purpose of this chapter.

40.40.040 Subsequent responses.
A. If the City is required to respond a second or subsequent time to a disturbance of the peace and a notice of violation: first response has been delivered to the responsible person or persons, then the City shall assess the responsible person a fine set forth in an adopted fee schedule, which may be amended from time to time, and as needed, by resolution of the City Council.

B. A statement of the charges incurred by the City in its second and subsequent responses shall be prepared and delivered to the responsible person or persons.

C. The amount of the charge shall be deemed a debt to the City of the responsible person or persons who shall be liable in an action brought in the name of the City for recovery of such amount, including reasonable attorney’s fees. (Ord. 2049 § 2, 2015)

40.40.050 Confidentiality.
Information furnished and secured pursuant to this chapter shall be confidential in character and shall not be subject to public inspection and shall be kept so that the contents thereof shall not be known except to persons charged with the administration of this chapter or pursuant to a court order. (Ord. 1738)

Chapter 40.42
SECURITY ALARM ORDINANCE
Sections:

40.42.010    Short title.

40.42.020    Purpose and intent.

40.42.030    Definitions.

40.42.040    Registration.

40.42.050    Alarm user’s permit.

40.42.060    Correction of information.

40.42.070    Alarm system standards.

40.42.080    Alarm system regulations.

40.42.090    Purpose of alarm system.

40.42.100    Direct dial telephone device.

40.42.110    Permit – Display.

40.42.120    Display of alarm company information.

40.42.130    Permit – Required.

40.42.140    False activation fine.

40.42.150    Billing – Late fees.

40.42.160    Right to discontinue response.

40.42.170    Suspension/revocation of permits – Appeals process.

40.42.180    Criminal penalties.

40.42.190    Limitations of liability.

40.42.200    Other alarm systems.

40.42.210    Governmental entities.

40.42.220    Confidentiality.

40.42.010 Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “City of Coronado Security Alarm Ordinance.” (Ord. 1904; Ord. 1867)

40.42.020 Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to ensure alarm systems do not create excessive or unnecessary demands on City services, and to assure that any security system utilized by a residence or business is properly documented and compatible with the City’s needs.

40.42.030 Definitions.
A.  “Alarm agent” means and includes any person who is self-employed or employed directly or indirectly by an alarm business operator whose duties include, but are not limited to, selling, maintaining, installing, monitoring, demonstrating or causing others to respond to an alarm in or on any building, place or premises. This definition shall not apply to local safety officers as defined in Government Code Section 20019.4.

B. “Alarm business operator” means and includes any business operated for any consideration whatsoever, engaged in the installation, maintenance, alteration or servicing of alarm systems or which responds to such alarm systems. “Alarm business operator,” however, shall not include a business which merely sells from a fixed location or manufacture alarm systems, unless such business services, installs, monitors or responds to alarm systems at the protected premises.

C. “Alarm system” means any device designed for the protection of persons or property, including vehicles, boats or trailers, or for the detection of an unauthorized entry on the premises or for alerting others of the commission of an unlawful act or both, which when activated emits an audible or silent signal or message to which police are expected to respond. It excludes those devices which emit a signal at or within the protected premises only and are continuously supervised by the proprietor of the premises where located, and otherwise is known as a property alarm. Alarm systems include alarms where there is no direct request by the alarm user for a police presence, but rely upon other’s request to the police in response to the audible alarm. Auxiliary devices installed by a telephone company to protect its systems, which might be damaged or disrupted by the use of an alarm system, are not included in the definition.

D. “Alarm user” means any person or business other than an alarm system agent or operator that owns or uses an alarm system located within the Coronado City limits.

E. “Audible alarm” means any alarm system that emits a sound audible outside of the protected premises to alert persons of an unauthorized entry on the premises or of the commission of an unlawful act.

F. “Business” means any nonresidential use.

G. “Direct dial device” means a device which is connected to a telephone line and upon activation of the alarm system, it automatically dials a predetermined telephone number and transmits a message or signal indicating an activation of the alarm system.

H. “False alarm” means the activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, accident, misoperation, malfunction, misuse, or the negligence of an alarm user. False alarms shall not include alarms caused by acts of nature, the malfunction of telephone lines, circuits or other causes which are beyond the control of the owner or lessee of the alarm system. The status of an activation as a “false alarm” is made by City employees/officers responding to the alarm.

I. “Issuing officer” means the Director of Police Services or the Director’s designee.

J. “Permittee” means the person who obtains an alarm user’s permit. A business permittee shall be the person who obtains the permit on behalf of any business entity. The permittee is responsible for the use and operation of the alarm system, as well as for all fees and fines levied in accordance with the code.

K. “Person” means an individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, organization, company or a governmental political unit.

L. “Residential” means premises used as dwelling units which includes single-family residences or multi-unit apartments, occupied or not. Alarm systems installed in hotels or motels shall be considered business alarms. (Ord. 1904)

40.42.040 Registration.
A. It is unlawful for any person, partnership, corporation or firm to own, manage, conduct or carry on an alarm business within the City without first having obtained a license issued by the State Director of Consumer Affairs for the alarm business, along with any other licenses or permits as required by law. Upon request by the issuing officer, the alarm business shall provide the number of the consumer affairs license, and the name and business address of the manager of operations for the area which includes the City.

B. Alarm Agents. It is unlawful for any person, including any alarm business operator, to act as an alarm agent within the City of Coronado without first having registered with the State Director of Consumer Affairs pursuant to the provisions of Section 7514(g) of the California Business and Professions Code. Alarm agents shall provide proof of such registration to the issuing officer or any police officer upon request.

40.42.050 Alarm user’s permit.
A. No alarm user shall operate, or cause to be installed or used, an alarm system on any business or residence owned or in the possession or control of such person within the City of Coronado without first having obtained an alarm user’s permit from the issuing officer. The issuing officer shall prescribe the form of the application and request such information as is necessary to evaluate and act upon the permit application.

B. The permit application as required under subsection A of this section shall state:

1. The number of alarm systems and the specific purpose for which the alarm system or systems shall be used;

2. The permittee’s name;

3. The address of the premises in or upon which the alarm system has been or will be installed;

4. The permittee’s telephone number;

5. The name and address of the alarm business operator or operators selling, installing, monitoring or inspecting the alarm system. If the system is installed by the owner or principle resident personally, provisions requiring the name of the alarm business or alarm agent do not apply under this code;

6. The name and telephone number of at least two persons who will respond to an alarm signal and who will open the premises and be able to disengage the alarm system upon police request;

7. A waiver of damages and liability that protects the City and its employees from any claim by the alarm user which may result from a public safety response and forced entry into the alarm location, or any delay or failure to respond;

8. A code word to be utilized for maintenance or testing purposes as described in CMC 40.42.080(B).

C. A residential alarm permit is specific to a single location, and shall be valid for a period of two years from the date of issuance, or whenever a change in ownership or occupancy occurs. Permits must be renewed within 30 days after expiration or a change in ownership or occupancy.

D. A business permit is specific to a single location and business, and shall be valid for a period of two years from the date of issuance, or whenever a change in ownership or tenancy occurs. Permits must be renewed within 30 days after expiration or a change in ownership or tenancy.

E. Where an alarm system is in operation prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the alarm user shall be responsible for obtaining a permit within 90 days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Any alarm user who has a system in operation prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and who applies for a permit within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be exempt from paying the initial application fee for the first issuance of the required permit. Subsequent renewals will be charged according to the fees listed in this chapter. (Ord. 1904)

40.42.060 Correction of information.
Whenever any change occurs relating to the written information required by CMC 40.42.050, or a change in the configuration of the system occurs, the permittee shall give a written notice of such change to the issuing officer within 10 working days of the change.

40.42.070 Alarm system standards.
All alarm systems and appurtenant equipment installed on any premises shall meet or exceed those standards which may be established by the City or the issuing officer. The City reserves the right to inspect all alarm systems subject to all applicable laws including Code of Civil Procedure Section 1822.50 et seq.

40.42.080 Alarm system regulations.
A. Alarm Deactivation – Audible Alarms. Audible residential and commercial alarms shall be equipped with an automatic shutoff mechanism that terminates the audible annunciation after activation within a maximum of 20 minutes.

B. Maintenance Notification. The alarm user shall contact the Coronado Police Department’s Communication Dispatcher and the company charged with monitoring the alarm prior to any service, test, repair, maintenance, alteration, or installation of an alarm system which might produce a false alarm. The user shall provide their designated code word and permit number to the police dispatcher when reporting the possible false alarm. Any alarm activated where such prior notice has been received by the Police Department shall not constitute a false alarm.

C. Power Supply. Alarm systems shall be supplied with an uninterrupted power supply in such a manner that the failure or interruption of normal utility electricity will not activate the alarm system. The power supply must be capable of at least four hours of operation.

D. Notification of Permit Number. It shall be the alarm user’s responsibility to ensure that when their monitoring service calls the Police Department to report the activation of an alarm system they monitor, they shall provide the permit number to the police dispatcher for Department purposes.

40.42.090 Purpose of alarm system.
It is unlawful to use an alarm system other than for purposes specifically stated in the application as required by CMC 40.42.030(C).

40.42.100 Direct dial telephone device.
No alarm system shall be equipped with either a direct dial device or any direct line equipment which when activated will automatically dial a telephone number in or signal directly any Office of the Police Department.

40.42.110 Permit – Display.
Whenever the issuing officer provides the alarm user with an alarm permit, it shall be displayed on the front door or on a window immediately adjacent to the front door or a location immediately visible to public safety personnel.

40.42.120 Display of alarm company information.
For every audible alarm system, the owner shall post the names and telephone numbers of the alarm business operator to be notified to render repairs or service 24 hours a day. This information shall be placed on the front door or the window closest to the front door, or at a conspicuous location visible to public safety personnel who may respond to an alarm.

40.42.130 Permit – Required.
Every alarm user must obtain an alarm user permit from the City. (Ord. 1904)

40.42.140 False activation fine.
Fines will be charged for false alarms within any fiscal year period set forth in an adopted fee schedule, which may be amended from time to time, and as needed, by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 2049 § 3, 2015; Ord. 1904)

40.42.150 Billing – Late fees.
A. The City shall cause a monthly bill to be issued to the alarm user for fines accrued. Such bill shall be due and payable within 30 days of the billing date.

B. A late fee as set forth in an adopted fee schedule, which may be amended from time to time, and as needed, by resolution of the City Council shall be added to the unpaid balance of any fines required by this section not paid within 30 days of the billing date.

C. The amount of any fee or fine assessed pursuant to this section shall be deemed a debt to the City of Coronado, and an action may be commenced by the Director of Administrative Services in the name of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction in the amount of the delinquent debt. Payment of any penalty assessment fees and late charges shall not prohibit criminal prosecution for the violation of any provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2049 § 3, 2015; Ord. 1904)

40.42.160 Right to discontinue response.
A. When any alarm system or alarm user fails to meet any of the requirements specified by this chapter or the issuing officer, the issuing officer is authorized to cease any police response to such alarm system until evidence of full compliance is provided by the user to the issuing officer.

B. The issuing officer may discontinue response by police officers to any location where an alarm system is located when the alarm user has failed to pay any such fee for the fourth or subsequent false alarms within 90 days of notice.

C. Reinstatement may occur when the alarm user has taken steps to eliminate or correct the cause of the false alarm(s), has documented the corrective action in writing to the issuing officer and paid any outstanding fees that are due.

40.42.170 Suspension/revocation of permits – Appeals process.
If at any time it comes to the attention of the issuing officer that the holder of an alarm user’s permit under this chapter has violated any provisions of this chapter, or rules, or regulations made pursuant to this chapter, including but not limited to false alarms which exceed the numbers permitted pursuant to CMC 40.42.140, or has failed or refused to pay the false alarm fee as provided in this chapter, the issuing officer may suspend or revoke the permit. If an alarm user’s permit is to be suspended or revoked, as provided thereunder, the issuing officer shall notify the holder of the permit in writing of the intention to revoke such permit 72 hours before the effective hour of the suspension or revocation, along with notice of the opportunity for administrative review and appeal of the proposed action pursuant to Chapter 1.12 CMC.

40.42.180 Criminal penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished in accordance with Chapter 1.08 CMC regarding infractions. Such persons shall be guilty of a separate offense for each occurrence and each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such persons.

40.42.190 Limitations of liability.
The City of Coronado and the Coronado Police Department are under no special duty or obligation to an alarm user or any other person by reason of any provisions of this chapter.

40.42.200 Other alarm systems.
A. The provisions of CMC 40.42.160 and 40.42.170 to revoke or suspend a permit or discontinue police response shall not apply to a bank, savings bank, credit union, or other financial institution alarm systems.

B. The provisions of CMC 40.42.050 through 40.42.130 and 40.42.170 shall not apply to alarm systems affixed to automobiles, boats, boat trailers, recreational vehicles and aircraft.

40.42.210 Governmental entities.
The permit fee provisions of CMC 40.42.050 shall not apply to municipal, County, State and Federal agencies.

40.42.220 Confidentiality.
To the extent authorized by State law, the information furnished and secured pursuant to this chapter shall be confidential in character and shall not be subject to public inspection and shall be kept so that the contents thereof shall not be known except to the issuing officer or designees.

Chapter 40.44
RADIO, TELEVISION INTERFERENCE
Sections:

40.44.010    Person defined.

40.44.020    Interference prohibited – Penalty.

40.44.030    Exceptions.

40.44.040    X-ray, screening.

40.44.050    Neon signs.

40.44.060    Radio stations.

40.44.070    Enforcement officer.

40.44.080    Inspection – Notice.

40.44.090    Mailed notice.

40.44.100    Operation after notice.

40.44.010 Person defined.
“Person” means and includes both the singular and plural and shall also mean and include person, individual, firm, corporation, copartnership, association, club, society or any other organization.

40.44.020 Interference prohibited – Penalty.
It is unlawful for any person to operate in this City any device, appliance, equipment, and/or apparatus, generating and/or causing high frequency oscillations and/or radiations which interfere with radio broadcast receiving apparatus or wireless receiving apparatus or television reception. Any person violating any provision of this section is guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 1400)

40.44.030 Exceptions.
X-ray pictures, examinations or treatments may be made at any time if the machines or apparatus used therefor are properly equipped to avoid all unnecessary or reasonably preventable interference with radio and television reception and are not negligently operated.

40.44.040 X-ray, screening.
Complete screening of the room in which offending X-ray apparatus is operated may be required when such screening is necessary in order to avoid such interference.

40.44.050 Neon signs.
Neon signs shall be deemed to comply with the provision of this chapter when such signs are properly equipped to avoid all unnecessary or reasonably preventable interference with radio and television reception and are not negligently operated.

40.44.060 Radio stations.
This chapter shall not apply to radio stations, either broadcast commercial or amateur, licensed by the Federal government and/or which are engaged in interstate communication.

40.44.070 Enforcement officer.
The City Manager is hereby charged with the enforcement of this chapter. He may appoint or deputize such other persons as he deems necessary, to assist him in enforcing the provisions of this chapter.

40.44.080 Inspection – Notice.
When an inspection and test shall have been made by the enforcement officer, or his duly authorized deputy, and/or deputies, and it is found that equipment or apparatus coming within the terms of this chapter is being operated in violation of its terms, the person responsible for the operation of such equipment shall be notified in writing to discontinue its use, or to make additions, repairs or modifications thereof, in order that the same may be operated in a manner which complies with the provisions of this chapter.

40.44.090 Mailed notice.
The mailing of a registered letter addressed to the owner at the premises where the equipment or apparatus is located shall constitute a sufficient notice for purpose of this chapter.

40.44.100 Operation after notice.
In the event that the owner or operator of such equipment or apparatus does not, within 10 days after receipt of notice to repair or discontinue the use of such equipment or apparatus, either entirely discontinue the use of such equipment or apparatus, or repair the same so that it complies with the provisions of this chapter, such owner shall be deemed to be operating such machine or equipment or apparatus in violation of the provisions of this chapter and such person shall be subject to the penalties provided for such violations.

Chapter 40.48
USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY
Sections:

40.48.010    Camping, lodging.

40.48.012    Barricades, tents.

40.48.020    Private property.

40.48.030    Automobiles.

40.48.040    Obstruction of public property.

40.48.050    Use of house cars, campers and trailer coaches for home habitation prohibited.

40.48.055    Curfews.

40.48.060    Special event.

40.48.010 Camping, lodging.
A. Between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, it is unlawful for any person to camp, lodge, or sleep in any public park or on any public beach.

B. It is unlawful for any person to camp, lodge, or sleep on any public median, street, or right-of-way.

C. Between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, it is unlawful for any person to remain on a median of any public street or highway, except:

1. So long as traffic does not allow the person to complete the crossing of the street or highway; or

2. As required by an emergency threatening public safety or health. (Ord. 2048 § 2, 2015; Ord. 1898)

40.48.012 Barricades, tents.
A. Between 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, it is unlawful for any person to place, erect, maintain, or use a barricade, canopy, or tent on any public park or public beach.

B. Between 5:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. of the same day, it is unlawful for any person to leave unattended, in any public park, a barricade, canopy, or tent which the person placed, erected, or maintained.

C. Except between 5:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. on the day of the Independence Day Parade, it is unlawful for any person to place, erect, maintain, or use a barricade, canopy, chair, or tent on any public median, street, or right-of-way. (Ord. 2048 § 2, 2015; Ord. 2046 § 2, 2014; Ord. 1898)

40.48.020 Private property.
No person shall camp, lodge, or sleep on any private property without first obtaining the permission of the owner or lessee of such property. (Ord. 1898)

40.48.030 Automobiles.
No person shall sleep or recline in any automobile parked upon any public street or highway within the City for any period greater than two hours continuously.

40.48.040 Obstruction of public property.
No person shall stand or sit on any crosswalk, sidewalk or any other public street, highway, public park or public beach or arcade, shopping center or other property opened or dedicated to public use or to which the public is invited, so as in any manner to obstruct the free use thereof by the public or passage therein or thereon by pedestrians, or to hinder, molest or annoy any person or persons in passing along the same, or to obstruct the entrance of any public building, public beach or public park.

40.48.050 Use of house cars, campers and trailer coaches for home habitation prohibited.
No person shall use or occupy or permit the use of occupancy of any house car, camper or trailer coach for human habitation, or for sleeping, either singly or in groups, on any public right-of-way, public parking area, street, park, beach, square, avenue, or alley within the City limits between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., except as otherwise provided in this code.

40.48.055 Curfews.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or remain upon any public property which is closed by a curfew established by this section, unless authorized by a permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this code.

B. The following curfews are established:

1. The beach area west of the Naval Radio Station Coronado extending north from the city of Imperial Beach to the southernmost portion of the Silver Strand State Park is closed from the hours of 9:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m.

2. Coronado City parks are closed from 11:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m.

3. North Beach is designated by signs and generally described as between a point 15 feet seaward of the southwest curb line of Ocean Boulevard and tidal west sand, and between a line which is a southwesterly prolongation of the southeast curb line of Ocean Drive, across the sandy beach, and the fence at the Naval Air Station North Island (NASNI), including that adjoining portion of NASNI beach currently maintained by the City of Coronado, and is closed from 11:00 p.m. to 4:00 a.m. (Ord. 2048 § 2, 2015; Ord. 1983 § 1, 2007; Ord. 1966 § 2, 2004)

40.48.060 Special event.
A. By Council action, the City Council may suspend or modify one or more of the regulations in this chapter as part of a special event or other activity approved by the City Council or City Manager.

B. Specified use of public streets and rights-of-way or public property contrary to the provisions of the chapter will be allowed when a permit has been issued by the City Manager in accordance with this code. (Ord. 1898)

Chapter 40.60
NIGHTTIME CURFEW FOR MINORS
Sections:

40.60.010    Purpose.

40.60.020    Definitions.

40.60.030    Curfew restrictions.

40.60.040    Enforcement and penalty.

40.60.010 Purpose.
This chapter is intended to reasonably balance the public interest and the protected rights of minors and their parents. A curfew for minors is critical in preserving the health, safety and welfare of the City by protecting against juvenile crime and victimization within the City. (Ord. 1884; Ord. 1830; Ord. 1400)

40.60.020 Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:

“Curfew hours” means the period from 11:00 p.m. any evening of the week until 5:00 a.m. the following day.

“Emergency” means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, natural disaster, automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.

“Establishment” means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment.

“Guardian” means: (1) a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or (2) a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court.

“Minor” means any person under 18 years of age.

“Parent” means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of a minor.

“Public place” means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops.

“Remain” means to linger, stay, be present, or to fail to leave when requested to do so by a Peace Officer, owner, operator or person in control of premises.

“Responsible adult” means a person at least 18 years of age, authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.

“Serious bodily injury” means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.

40.60.030 Curfew restrictions.
A. It is unlawful for any minor to remain in a public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City during curfew hours.

B. It is unlawful for any parent or guardian of a minor knowingly to permit, or by insufficient control to allow, the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City during curfew hours.

C. It is a defense under subsection A or B of this section that the minor was:

1. Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian or by a responsible adult;

2. On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian, or responsible adult, without any detour or stop;

3. In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;

4. Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;

5. Involved in an emergency;

6. On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence;

7. Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by one or more adults and sponsored by the City, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by one or more adults and sponsored by City, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor;

8. Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution; or

9. Emancipated pursuant to law.

D. Prior to taking any law enforcement action under this chapter, the law enforcement officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in the public place or on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. The law enforcement officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this chapter unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any responses and other circumstances, no defense under this section is present or applicable.

40.60.040 Enforcement and penalty.
A. Each violation of this chapter constitutes a separate offense.

B. A charge under this chapter may be prosecuted either as a misdemeanor or an infraction. Minors shall be prosecuted in accordance with juvenile court law and procedure.

C. Any person convicted of an infraction for violating this chapter may be punished by a fine not exceeding $250.00 or by a requirement to perform County or City approved work projects or community service or both.

D. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor for violating this chapter may be punished by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of time not exceeding six months, or by a fine not exceeding $1,000, or both.

Chapter 40.62
DAYTIME LOITERING OF JUVENILES ON SCHOOL DAYS
Sections:

40.62.010    Purpose.

40.62.020    Definitions.

40.62.030    Daytime loitering of juveniles in public places on school days.

40.62.040    Parental responsibility.

40.62.050    Enforcement procedure.

40.62.060    Penalties.

40.62.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to reduce the incidence of juvenile truancy that plagues our schools and creates a burden upon the health, safety and welfare of the community. Students who are absent from school are denied an education; unexcused absences result in a loss of State and Federal funding to the detriment of all students; unsupervised students may involve themselves in unsafe activities by loitering in residential neighborhoods, business districts, or industrial centers; some unsupervised students may engage in criminal activity to the detriment of the community; further, some unsupervised students may become a burden on police who must return them to school, wait for parents to pick them up, and investigate any and all criminal activity related to the student’s truancy. As a result, therefore, the City Council of the City of Coronado finds and determines that a special need exists for the adoption of an ordinance to prohibit truancy of any juvenile under the age of 18, who is subject to compulsory education or to compulsory continuation education, with certain specific exceptions set forth herein. In addition, the City Council desires to discourage parents from permitting, or by insufficient control, allowing such truancy. It is further the intent of the City Council to provide appropriate criminal sanctions against any juvenile or parent who violates the provisions of this chapter.

40.62.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined as follows:

A. “Adult” means any person 21 years of age and older.

B. “Emergency” includes but is not limited to fire, natural disaster, automobile accident, or requirement for immediate medical care for another person.

C. “Establishment” means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment.

D. “Juvenile” means any person under 18 years of age.

E. “Parent” means a person who is the natural or adoptive parent of a person. “Parent” includes a court appointed guardian or other person 18 years of age or older, authorized by the parent, by a court order, or by a court appointed guardian to have the care and custody of the person.

F. “Public place” means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, office buildings, transport facilities, shopping centers, and malls.

40.62.030 Daytime loitering of juveniles in public places on school days.
A. It is unlawful for any juvenile who is subject to compulsory education or to compulsory continuation education to loiter, idle, wander, or be in or upon any public place, or the premises of any establishment, vacant lots or any unsupervised place between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. on any day when school is in session for that juvenile, except as otherwise provided in subsection B of this section.

B. A juvenile is not in violation of subsection A of this section:

1. When the juvenile is accompanied by his or her parent or other adult having the care or custody of the juvenile;

2. When the juvenile is on an emergency errand directed by his or her parent or other adult having care or custody of the juvenile;

3. When the juvenile is going to, or coming directly from, his or her place of school-approved employment;

4. When the juvenile is going to, or coming directly from, a medical appointment;

5. When the juvenile has permission to leave the school campus for lunch;

6. When the juvenile is going to, or coming from, a compulsory alternative education program activity;

7. When the juvenile is attending or, without any detour or stop, going to or returning from an official school, religious, government-sponsored activity, or other recreational activity supervised by adults;

8. When the juvenile is attending or, without any detour or stop, going to or returning from an event or activity directly related to the medical condition of a parent;

9. When the juvenile is officially enrolled in home schooling;

10. When the juvenile has passed a general educational development test and received a California high school equivalency certificate;

11. When the juvenile is on the campus of the school to which the juvenile is assigned and enrolled.

40.62.040 Parental responsibility.
It is unlawful for the parent of any juvenile to knowingly permit or, by insufficient control, to allow the juvenile to be in violation of CMC 40.62.030(A).

40.62.050 Enforcement procedure.
A. With probable cause to believe there is a violation of CMC 40.62.030(A), a Peace Officer may issue a citation to the juvenile and may detain the juvenile until he or she can be placed in the care and custody of his or her parent or may transport the juvenile to his or her home or to the school from which the juvenile is absent. If cited, the juvenile and a parent shall appear in court as directed in the citation. The parents shall be advised of the fact that the juvenile was cited for a violation of CMC 40.62.030(A). The parents shall be warned of their responsibility and liability as the juvenile’s parents.

B. If a parent has been previously warned as set forth in subsection A of this section, upon a parent’s first violation of CMC 40.62.040, a Peace Officer may issue a citation for an infraction to the parent to appear in court.

C. When a parent has previously been issued a citation for an infraction as set forth in subsection B of this section, upon any subsequent violation by a parent of CMC 40.62.040, a Peace Officer may issue a citation for a misdemeanor to the parents of the juvenile to appear in court.

40.62.060 Penalties.
A. Any person convicted of an infraction for violation of CMC 40.62.030(A) or 40.62.040 may be punished by a fine not exceeding $100.00 for the first offense, $200.00 for the second offense, or $550.00 for a third offense, or by a requirement to perform County, City, or school-approved work projects or community service or both. If required to perform a project, the total time for performance shall not exceed 20 hours over a period not to exceed 60 days, during times other than a juvenile’s hours of school attendance or a juvenile or parent’s hours of employment.

B. Any parent convicted of a misdemeanor violation of CMC 40.62.050(C) may be punished by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of time not exceeding six months, or by a fine not exceeding $1,000, or by both.

Chapter 40.68
WEAPONS – DISCHARGING
Sections:

40.68.010    Penalty for shooting.

40.68.020    Exception.

40.68.030    Confiscation.

40.68.040    Possession of firearms, air guns, pointed missiles, etc., by minors.

40.68.010 Penalty for shooting.
It is unlawful for any person to fire or discharge any pistol, gun or rifle, or any description of firearm, or any cannon, or other device, loaded with explosive, or shot, or to use any air gun, slingshot, beanshooter, sling, rubber sling, or other device for the propulsion of shot, stones or other similar substance within this City. Any person violating any provision of this section is guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 1400)

40.68.020 Exception.
CMC 40.68.010 does not apply to any Peace Officer while engaged in the official discharge of the officer’s duties.

40.68.030 Confiscation.
Upon conviction of a violation of CMC 40.68.010, the Director of Police Services is hereby authorized to confiscate any article of personal property therein set out used in violation of such section.

40.68.040 Possession of firearms, air guns, pointed missiles, etc., by minors.
A. Except as provided in this section, it is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to have in his or her possession or control while upon any public street or sidewalk, or in any place open to the public within the corporate limits of the City, any firearm, air gun, sharp pointed missile, dart or arrow, or other device designed for the propulsion of shot, stones, or other similar objects or substances.

B. This section shall not apply to any juvenile while under the lawful and immediate supervision of a parent or legal guardian, or while participating in an organized event requiring the use of such devices, provided there is an adult present to provide supervision. (Ord. 1897)

Chapter 40.72
DOOR-TO-DOOR SOLICITATION/CANVASSING
Sections:

40.72.010    Prohibition.

40.72.010 Prohibition.
Unless previously and expressly invited to come upon the premises, it shall be unlawful for a person to go upon private, residential property in defiance of a sign displayed to public view which indicates that the occupant refuses to allow persons to come upon the property for the purposes specified upon such sign. (Ord. 1587)

Chapter 40.80
VIEWING FOURTH OF JULY PARADE
(Repealed by Ord. 1898)

Title 41
NOISE ABATEMENT AND CONTROL REGULATIONS
Chapters:

41.02    General Provisions

41.04    Definitions

41.06    Authority and Duties of the Noise Control Officer

41.08    Departmental Cooperation

41.10    Limits

41.12    General Noise Regulations

41.13    Other Noise Regulations

41.14    Prohibitions

41.16    Variances from Noise Regulations

41.18    Enforcement

Chapter 41.02
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

41.02.010    Name.

41.02.020    Purpose.

41.02.030    Implementation of the Coronado General Plan.

41.02.040    Application and interpretation.

41.02.010 Name.
This title shall be known as the “Noise Abatement and Control Regulations of the City of Coronado” and may be cited as such, or as the “Noise Ordinance,” and will be referred to hereinafter as “this title” and sections or portions hereinafter referred to shall refer to sections, chapters, or portions of this title unless otherwise specifically identified. (Ord. 1791; Ord. 1446)

41.02.020 Purpose.
This title is hereby adopted to regulate and control disturbing, excessive and offensive noise, maintain quiet those areas of law noise levels and to implement programs aimed at reducing noise in those areas within the City of Coronado where noise levels are above acceptable values. The City Council of the City of Coronado does ordain and declare that creating, maintaining, causing or allowing to be created, caused or maintained any noise in a manner prohibited by or not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter is a public nuisance and shall be punishable as such.

41.02.030 Implementation of the Coronado General Plan.
It is also intended that the adoption of this title will implement a portion of the adopted General Plan of the City of Coronado; that the adoption of this title is deemed to be one of several formal actions necessary to preserve and improve Coronado as a beautiful, pleasant residential community in which to live, work, shop, and pursue leisure time activities; that the adoption of this title is deemed to be necessary in carrying out the objectives of the Noise Element of the General Plan; that the adoption of this title does not restrict the desirability of necessity of amending the General Plan and the provisions of this title relating to the General Plan amendments, from time to time as the situation may warrant, to ensure consistency between the General Plan and the provisions of this title.

41.02.040 Application and interpretation.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this title, provisions shall be construed to be minimum requirements. Where this title imposes greater restrictions that are imposed or required by other rules, regulations or ordinances, the provisions of this title shall control.

Chapter 41.04
DEFINITIONS
Sections:

41.04.010    Average sound level.

41.04.020    Construction equipment.

41.04.030    Decibel (dB).

41.04.040    Disturbing, excessive, or offensive noise.

41.04.050    Emergency work.

41.04.060    Motor vehicles.

41.04.070    Noise control officer (NCO).

41.04.080    Noise level.

41.04.090    Noise sensitive zone.

41.04.100    Person.

41.04.110    Powered model vehicle.

41.04.120    Public right-of-way.

41.04.130    Sound amplifying equipment.

41.04.140    Sound level.

41.04.150    Sound level meter.

41.04.160    Sound truck.

41.04.170    Supplementary definitions of technical terms.

41.04.010 Average sound level.
A sound level typical of the sound levels at a certain place during a given period of time, averaged by the general rule of combination for sound levels, said general rule being set forth in the American National Standard Specifications for the sound level meters S1.4-1971. Average sound level is also called equivalent continuous sound level.

41.04.020 Construction equipment.
Any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration, or similar action, for or of public or private rights-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property.

41.04.030 Decibel (dB).
A unit measure of sound (noise) level.

41.04.040 Disturbing, excessive, or offensive noise.
Any sound or noise conflicting with the criteria or limits set forth in this title.

41.04.050 Emergency work.
Any work performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency.

41.04.060 Motor vehicles.
Any and all self-propelled vehicles as defined in the California Vehicle Code, specifically including but not limited to “mini-bikes” and “go-carts.”

41.04.070 Noise control officer (NCO).
The Director of Community Development of the City of Coronado or his designated representative.

41.04.080 Noise level.
The same as “sound level.”

41.04.090 Noise sensitive zone.
Any area designated pursuant to CMC 41.06.040 for the purpose of ensuring exceptional quiet.

41.04.100 Person.
Any individual, association, partnership, or corporation, any officer, employee, department, agency or instrumentality of a State or any political subdivision of the State.

41.04.110 Powered model vehicle.
Any self-propelled, airborne, waterborne vessel or vehicle, which is not designated to carry persons, including but limited to any model airplane, boat, car, or rocket.

41.04.120 Public right-of-way.
Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk, alley, waterway, or similar place which is owned or controlled by a government entity.

41.04.130 Sound amplifying equipment.
Any device for the electronic amplification of the human voice, music, or any other sound, excluding standard automobile radios when used and heard only by occupants of the vehicle in which the radio is installed, and as used in this chapter, warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles or horns or other warning devices on any vehicle used only for public safety purposes.

41.04.140 Sound level.
Sound level in decibels is that quantity measured with a sound level meter as defined herein, by use of the “A” frequency weighting and “fast” time averaging unless some other time averaging is specified.

41.04.150 Sound level meter.
An instrument for the measurement of sound, including a microphone, and amplifier, and attenuator networks at least for the standardized frequency weighting “A,” and an indicating instrument having at least the standardized dynamic characteristic “fast,” as specified in American National Standard Specifications for Sound Level Meters S1.4-1971.

41.04.160 Sound truck.
Any motor vehicle, or any other vehicle, regardless of the motive power, whether in motion or stationary, having mounted thereon, or attached thereto, any sound amplifying equipment.

41.04.170 Supplementary definitions of technical terms.
Definitions of technical terms not defined herein shall be obtained from American National Standard Acoustical Terminology S1.1-1960 (R-1976).

Chapter 41.06
AUTHORITY AND DUTIES OF THE NOISE CONTROL OFFICER
Sections:

41.06.010    Lead official.

41.06.020    Powers.

41.06.030    Inspections.

41.06.040    Noise sensitive zone recommendations.

41.06.060    Zoning changes.

41.06.070    Duties of the Noise Control Officer.

41.06.080    Measurement enforcement procedures.

41.06.090    Investigate and pursue violations.

41.06.100    Delegation of authority.

41.06.110    Community Noise Element.

41.06.010 Lead official.
The noise abatement and control program established by this title shall be administered by the Noise Control Officer, who is the Director of Community Development or a designated appointee.

41.06.020 Powers.
In order to implement this title and/or the general purpose of noise abatement and control, the Noise Control Officer shall have, in addition to any other authority vested in him, the power to:

A. Studies. Conduct or cause to be conducted, studies, research, or monitoring.

B. Coordination. Coordinate the noise control activities with all municipal departments. In addition, he may consult with any other department or agency responsible for a proposed or final standard, regulation or similar action in connection with noise control.

41.06.030 Inspections.
The Noise Control Officer may, upon presentation of proper credentials, enter and/or inspect any private property, place, report, or records at any time when granted permission by the owner, or by some other person with apparent authority to act for the owner. When permission is refused or cannot be obtained, a search warrant may be obtained from a court of competent jurisdiction upon showing of probable cause to believe that a violation of this title may exist. Such inspection may include administration or any necessary tests.

41.06.040 Noise sensitive zone recommendations.
Noise sensitive zones may be set aside to preserve special quiet for hospital, libraries, and selected park and beach areas for public refuge. The Noise Control Officer may prepare recommendations, to be approved by the City Council, for the designation and posting of said noise sensitive zones.

41.06.060 Zoning changes.
The following is required prior to the approval of any zone change:

A. Review of the noise impact of the zoning change in connection with existing and projected noise sources and receivers.

B. Approve proposed noise mitigating measures to comply with this title. Said mitigation shall be contained in an acoustical analysis report prepared by an acoustician experienced in land use planning.

41.06.070 Duties of the Noise Control Officer.
In order to effectively implement and enforce this title, the Noise Control Officer may, within a reasonable time after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, carry out the duties as specified under CMC 41.06.080 through 41.06.120.

41.06.080 Measurement enforcement procedures.
A. Promulgate field measurement criteria and procedures for effective enforcement of this title.

B. Adopt acceptance section for laboratory tests of building materials and assemblies to comply with the provisions of California Administrative Code, Title 25 (Noise Insulation Standards).

C. Promulgate administrative procedures for effective enforcement of this title.

41.06.090 Investigate and pursue violations.
Under the provisions of this title, investigate and pursue possible violations of this title.

41.06.100 Delegation of authority.
Delegate functions, where appropriate under this title, to personnel under the Noise Control Officer and to other departments.

41.06.110 Community Noise Element.
A. Assist in the preparation or revision thereof of the City Noise Element of the General Plan as required by the Government Code, Section 65302(g) following guidelines set forth by the State Office of Noise Control. The Noise Control Officer may prepare a report to Council concerning the influences the Noise Element will have on City policy on or before 90 days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title.

B. Assist in or review the total transportation planning of the community, including planning for new roads and highways, bus routes, and other systems of public transportation, to ensure that proper consideration is taken with regard to the impact of sound levels and that the policies set forth in the Noise Element are adhered to. A report may be prepared by the Noise Control Officer for Council consideration.

C. Provide on-going assistance to local agencies and the San Diego Regional Council of Governments (Comprehensive Planning Organization) to develop practical mitigation for urban noise problems.

D. Participate in national programs and organization, seek grants and other subsidies or funds which the City of Coronado may use to ensure continued improvement of its noise control program.

Chapter 41.08
DEPARTMENTAL COOPERATION
Sections:

41.08.010    Departmental actions.

41.08.020    Department cooperation.

41.08.030    Compliance with other laws.

41.08.040    Project approval.

41.08.050    Right of review.

41.08.010 Departmental actions.
All departments shall, consistent with their authorities under other ordinances administered by them, carry out their programs in such a manner as to further the policies stated in Chapter 41.02 CMC.

41.08.020 Department cooperation.
All departments shall cooperate with the Noise Control Officer to the fullest extent possible in enforcing the noise regulations of this title.

41.08.030 Compliance with other laws.
All departments engaged in any activities which result or may result in the emission of noise shall comply with Federal and State laws and regulations, as well as the provisions of this title, respecting the control of noise to the same extent that any person is subject to such laws and regulations.

41.08.040 Project approval.
Each department, whose duty is to review and approve new projects, or change to existing projects which result or may result in the emission of noise, shall consult with the Noise Control Officer prior to any such approval.

41.08.050 Right of review.
The Noise Control Officer may comment on the advisability of revising any City standard or regulation which does not conform to the purpose or intent of this title.

Chapter 41.10
LIMITS
Sections:

41.10.010    Property line noise limits.

41.10.020    Motor vehicles.

41.10.025    Aircraft limits.

41.10.030    Watercraft limits.

41.10.040    Construction noise curfew.

41.10.050    Construction noise limits.

41.10.010 Property line noise limits.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause noise by any means to the extent that the one-hour average sound level exceeds the applicable limit given in the following table, at any location in the City of Coronado on or beyond the boundaries of the property on which the noise is produced. The noise subject to these limits is that part of the total noise at the specified location that is due solely to the action of said person.

TABLE OF APPLICABLE PROPERTY LINE NOISE LIMITS

Land Use Zone

Time of Day

One-Hour Average Sound Level (decibels)

Residential:
All R-1A; R-1B

7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.

7:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m.

10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.

50

45

40

All R-3; R-4;
R-PCD; and R-5

7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.

7:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m.

10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.

55

50

45

Commercial (C); Commercial Recreation (C-R); Hotel/Motel (H-M); Civic Use (C-U); Open Space (OS); and Parking Overlay (P-1)

7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.

7:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m.

10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.

60

60

50

B. The sound level limit at a location on a boundary between two zoning districts is the arithmetic mean of the respective limits for the two districts. Permissible construction noise level limits shall be governed by CMC 41.10.040 and 41.10.050.

C. Fixed-location public utility distribution or transmission facilities located on or adjacent to a property line shall be subject to the noise level limits of subsection A of this section measured at or beyond six feet from the boundary of the easement upon which the equipment is located. (Ord. 1956 § 6, 2004)

41.10.020 Motor vehicles.
A. Off-Highway.

1. Except as otherwise provided for in this section, it shall be unlawful to operate any motor vehicle on other than a public street or highway, as defined in the California Vehicle Code, in any manner so as to cause noise in excess of those noise levels permitted for on-highway motor vehicles as specified in the table for “45 miles per hour or less speed limits” contained in Section 23130 of the California Vehicle Code, and as corrected for distance set forth in subsection (A)(2) of this section.

2. Corrections. The maximum noise level as the off-highway vehicle passes may be measured at a distance of other than 50 feet from the center line of travel, provided the measurement is further adjusted by adding algebraically the applicable corrections as follows:

Distance (feet)

Correction (decibels)

25

-6

28

-5

32

-4

35

-3

40

-2

45

-1

50 (preferred distance)

0

56

+1

63

+2

70

+3

80

+4

90

+5

100

+6

41.10.025 Aircraft limits.
Violations for excessive noise of aircraft operating in air space over the jurisdiction of the City of Coronado shall be prosecuted under applicable provisions of this title.

41.10.030 Watercraft limits.
Violations for excessive noise of watercraft operating in waters under the jurisdiction of the City of Coronado shall be prosecuted under applicable provisions of the California Harbors and Navigation Code.

41.10.040 Construction noise curfew.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any day or on legal holidays and Sundays to erect, construct, demolish, excavate for, alter or repair any building or structure in such a manner as to create a disturbing, excessive or offensive noise unless a noise control permit has been applied for and granted beforehand by the Noise Control Officer. In granting such a permit, the Noise Control Officer should consider whether the construction noise in the vicinity of the proposed work site would be less objectionable at night than during the daytime; whether obstruction and interference with traffic, particularly on streets of major importance, would be less objectionable at night than during the daytime; whether the type of work to be performed emits noises at such a low level as to not cause significant disturbances in the vicinity of the work site; the character and nature of the neighborhood of the proposed work site; whether great economic hardship would occur; if the work is in the general public interest; and he shall prescribe such conditions, working time, types of construction equipment to be used and permissible noise levels as he deems to be required in the public interest.

B. The provisions of subsection A of this section shall not apply to emergency work as defined herein; provided, that the Noise Control Officer shall be notified in writing of such emergency work no later than 48 hours after work commences.

41.10.050 Construction noise limits.
Except as provided in CMC 41.10.040(B), it shall be unlawful for any person, including the City of Coronado, to conduct any construction activity so as to cause, at or within the property lines of any property zoned residential, an average sound level greater than 75 decibels during a one-hour period any time between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. unless a variance has been applied for and granted by the Noise Control Officer. (Ord. 1956 § 15, 2004)

Chapter 41.12
GENERAL NOISE REGULATIONS
Sections:

41.12.010    General.

41.12.020    Factors determining violations.

41.12.010 General.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, and in addition thereto, it shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or negligently make or continue, or cause to be made or continued, any disturbing, excessive or offensive noise causing discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing or working in the area.

41.12.020 Factors determining violations.
The factors which shall be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this chapter exist shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

A. The level of the subject noise.

B. The levels of ambient noise.

C. The proximity of the subject noise to residential sleeping facilities.

D. The nature and zoning of areas where the noise is audible.

E. The number of persons affected by the noise.

F. The duration and/or spectral content of the noise.

G. Whether the noise is continuous, recurrent or intermittent.

Chapter 41.13
OTHER NOISE REGULATIONS
Sections:

41.13.010    Loud, unusual noises – Prohibited.

41.13.020    Loud, unusual noises – Designated.

41.13.030    Horns, signaling devices, etc.

41.13.040    Radio, phonographs, etc.

41.13.050    Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising.

41.13.060    Yelling, shouting, etc.

41.13.070    Animals, birds, etc.

41.13.080    Exhausts.

41.13.090    Schools, courts, churches, hospitals.

41.13.100    Hawkers and peddlers.

41.13.110    Drums.

41.13.120    Blowers.

41.13.130    Hospital quiet zones – Established.

41.13.140    Hospital quiet zones – Loud noises prohibited.

41.13.150    Motor vehicle noises.

41.13.160    Penalty for violation.

41.13.010 Loud, unusual noises – Prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued within the City limits any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which injures or endangers the health, peace or safety of others. (HS § 39800 et seq.)

41.13.020 Loud, unusual noises – Designated.
The acts set forth in CMC 41.13.030 through 41.13.120, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this section but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive.

41.13.030 Horns, signaling devices, etc.
The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, streetcar or other vehicle on any street or public place of the City, except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of any device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time and the use of any signaling device where traffic is for any reason held up are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises.

41.13.040 Radio, phonographs, etc.
The using, operating, or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person or persons who are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.

41.13.050 Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising.
The using, operating or permitting to be played, used, or operated of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the streets for the attention of the public to any building structure is declared to be loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noise.

41.13.060 Yelling, shouting, etc.
Loud or raucous yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of any person in the vicinity is declared to be loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noise.

41.13.070 Animals, birds, etc.
The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity is declared to be loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noise; provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall be construed as applying to occasional noises emanating from legally operated dog and cat hospitals, humane societies and the City pounds.

41.13.080 Exhausts.
The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motorboat, or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom is declared to be loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noise.

41.13.090 Schools, courts, churches, hospitals.
The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church, or court while the same are in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institutions, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displaced in such streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital or court street, is declared to be loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noise.

41.13.100 Hawkers and peddlers.
The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers, and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood is declared to be loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noise.

41.13.110 Drums.
The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by the creation of noise to any performance, show or sale is declared to be loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noise.

41.13.120 Blowers.
The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise, is declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise.

41.13.130 Hospital quiet zones – Established.
All territory within a distance of 200 feet in all directions from any hospital, sanitarium, or similar institution in the City is to be a quiet zone.

41.13.140 Hospital quiet zones – Loud noises prohibited.
It is at all times unlawful for any person to make, cause or allow to be made any loud or unusual noise in such quiet zones or to sound or play upon any musical instrument therein between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.

41.13.150 Motor vehicle noises.
Any excessive, unusual, loud, or disturbing noise made by any motor vehicle and not reasonably necessary in its operation under the circumstances shall include but not be limited to noise caused by screeching or tires, racing or accelerating the engine, backfiring the engine and exhaust from the engine tail pipe or muffler.

41.13.160 Penalty for violation.
Any person, firm or corporation which violates a provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 1400)

Chapter 41.14
PROHIBITIONS
Sections:

41.14.010    General prohibitions.

41.14.020    Specific prohibitions.

41.14.010 General prohibitions.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 41.14 CMC, it shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued, within the limits of said City, any disturbing, excessive, or offensive noise which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing or working in the area. The Noise Control Officer will evaluate the reasonableness of the complaint and the sensitiveness of the person or persons by the criteria set forth in CMC 41.12.020.

41.14.020 Specific prohibitions.
The following activities are declared to constitute a violation of this chapter and said enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely:

A. Animals.

1. The keeping or maintenance, or the permitting to be kept or maintained, of any animal or animals upon any premises owned, occupied, or controlled by any person, which cause frequent or long continued noise.

2. Prima Facie Violations. The noise of any animal or animals that disturbs two or more residents who are in general agreement as to the times and durations of the noise, and who reside in separate residences (including apartments and condominiums) located on property adjacent at any point to the property in which the subject animal or animals are kept or maintained shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this subsection.

B. Burglar Alarms. The use of audible burglar alarms for structures unless such burglar alarm shall be capable of terminating its operation automatically within 20 minutes of its being activated. Notwithstanding the requirements of this provision, any member of the Police Department, or representative of the Noise Control Officer of the City of Coronado shall have the right to take such steps as may be reasonable and necessary to disconnect any such alarm installed on a structure at any time after 20 minutes of activation. Any structure upon which a burglar alarm has been installed shall prominently display the telephone number through which communication may be made with the owner of such building or the company which maintains the alarm system.

C. Loading, Unloading, Materials, Etc.

1. Loading, unloading, opening, closing or other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials, garbage cans, produce, or similar objects between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. which is clearly audible in a Residential Zone.

2. Playing of sound amplifying equipment on public property. The operation of any sound amplifying equipment, that exceeds 60 decibels at 10 feet from the source, is prohibited on a City of Coronado beach, park, sidewalk, or other public right-of-way.

D. Horns, Signaling Devices, Etc. Unnecessary use or operation of horns, signaling devices, etc., on automobiles, motorcycles or any other vehicle.

E. Places of Public Entertainment.

1. Operating or permitting the operation or playing of any loud speaker or musical instrument in any place of public entertainment that exceeds 90 decibels, one-hour average sound level at the listeners’ ears unless a conspicuous and legible sign has been posted as follows:

WARNING! SOUND LEVELS IN THIS BUILDING MAY CAUSE HEARING IMPAIRMENT.

2. Tampering. The removal or rendering inoperative, other than for purposes of maintenance, repair or replacement, of any noise control device or sign is prohibited.

F. Duly licensed parades, sound amplifying equipment mounted on motor vehicles, live bands for use in residential property, or any other proposed use which has a high potential for noise disturbance is unlawful unless a noise control permit has been applied for and granted by the Noise Control Officer.

G. Nonvehicular Motorized Equipment.

1. No person shall operate nonvehicular motorized equipment between the hours of 7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. which is clearly audible in any Residential Zone unless a noise control permit has been applied for and granted by the Noise Control Officer.

2. Construction and Repair of Vehicles or Marine Vessels. No person shall construct, alter or repair any vehicles or marine vessels between the hours of 7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. or on legal holidays, Saturdays or Sundays in such a manner as to create offensive noise which is clearly audible in any Residential Zone unless a noise control permit has been applied for and granted by the Noise Control Officer.

3. No person or persons shall hire or cause to be hired anyone using internal combustion powered gardening equipment between the hours of 7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. or on legal holidays and Sundays which is clearly audible in any Residential Zone unless a noise control permit has been applied for and granted by the Noise Control Officer.

H. Street Sales. Offering for sale, selling or advertising by amplified sound without a noise control permit is prohibited.

I. Yelling, Shouting, Etc. Loud or raucous yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on public streets between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. within said City limits is hereby prohibited.

Chapter 41.16
VARIANCES FROM NOISE REGULATIONS
Sections:

41.16.010    Variances.

41.16.020    Appeals.

41.16.030    Noise permits.

41.16.010 Variances.
The Coronado Planning Commission shall evaluate all applications for variances from the requirements of Chapter 41.14 CMC and may grant said variances with respect to time for compliances, subject to such terms, conditions, and requirements as the Planning Commission may deem reasonable to achieving compliance with the provisions of this title. Each variance shall set forth in detail the approved method of achieving compliance and time schedule for its accomplishment. If in the judgment of the Coronado Planning Commission the time for compliance cannot be reasonably determined, a variance may be issued for a period not to exceed three years. In determining the reasonableness of the terms of any proposed variance the Planning Commission shall consider the magnitude of the nuisance caused by the offensive noise, the uses of property within the area of impingement by the noise, operations carried on under existing nonconforming rights or conditional use permits or zone variances, the time factors related to study, design, financing and construction of remedial work, the economic factors related to age and useful life of the equipment and the general public interest and welfare. A fee as established by the City Council shall be charged to each applicant for processing variances.

41.16.020 Appeals.
Any person who is aggrieved by approval or disapproval of a variance granted by the Planning Commission may file an appeal within 10 calendar days to the City Council in accordance with Chapter 1.12 CMC. (Ord. 2025 § 5, 2011)

41.16.030 Noise permits.
The Noise Control Officer shall evaluate all applications for noise control permits from the requirements of Chapter 41.14 CMC and may grant said permits for convenience of the public with respect to conditions necessary to ensure that the requested activity will not result in a disruption to the public’s peace and quiet. Such permits are intended to permit reasonable use of live bands, and certain other social events, while assuring that such activities will not be injurious to neighboring residents.

Chapter 41.18
ENFORCEMENT
Sections:

41.18.010    Infractions.

41.18.020    Abatement orders.

41.18.030    Notice of violation.

41.18.040    Violations – Additional remedies injunctions.

41.18.050    Severability.

41.18.010 Infractions.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this title shall be deemed guilty of an infraction. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.

41.18.020 Abatement orders.
In lieu of issuing a notice of violation as provided for in CMC 41.18.030, the Noise Control Officer responsible for enforcement of any provision of this title may issue an order requiring abatement, within a reasonable time period, of a sound source alleged to be in violation. (Ord. 1956 § 16, 2004)

41.18.030 Notice of violation.
Violation of any provision of this title shall be cause for a notice of violation to be issued by the Noise Control Officer or other designated responsible enforcement official according to procedures which the Director of Community Development may prescribe.

41.18.040 Violations – Additional remedies injunctions.
As an additional remedy, any violation of any provision of this title shall be deemed and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. Additionally, no provision of this title shall be construed to impair common law or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefrom, of any person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this title or from other law.

41.18.050 Severability.
If any provision of this title is held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions of this title shall not be invalidated.

Title 44
FIRE PREVENTION
Chapters:

44.04    Repealed

44.08    Reimbursable Expense for Specified Fire Department Services

44.12    Removal of Rubbish and Weeds

44.16    Business Fire Safety Self-Inspection Program

Chapter 44.04
FIRE PREVENTION
(Repealed by Ord. 2063)
Chapter 44.04
FIRE PREVENTION
(Repealed by Ord. 2063)
Chapter 44.08
REIMBURSABLE EXPENSE FOR SPECIFIED FIRE DEPARTMENT SERVICES
Sections:

44.08.010    Purpose.

44.08.020    Definitions.

44.08.030    Reimbursement required.

44.08.040    Report.

44.08.050    Notice to responsible party.

44.08.060    Action by City Council.

44.08.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a procedure for obtaining reimbursement from responsible individuals for the expenses of an emergency response by the City to protect the public from fire or hazardous substances. (Ord. 1795; Ord. 1643; Ord. 1491)

44.08.020 Definitions.
The meaning of the terms used herein shall be as set forth in the Uniform Fire Code, then adopted and in use in the City, such terms as are included in Chapter 1, Part 1 of Division 12, of the Health and Safety Code commencing at Section 13000 relating to liability for fires and hazardous substances.

44.08.030 Reimbursement required.
In accordance with the Health and Safety Code Section 13000 et seq., an individual who acts negligently or in violation of the law and thereby requires the City to provide an emergency response to a danger posed by a fire or hazardous substance shall reimburse the City for the costs incurred.

44.08.040 Report.
A City department involved in an emergency may submit a report to the City Manager indicating:

A. The costs incurred;

B. The person or entity apparently responsible for reimbursing the City;

C. The basis of the determination regarding responsibility.

44.08.050 Notice to responsible party.
A. If it is reasonably likely that the party identified in the report is responsible for reimbursing the City, the City Manager may submit a demand to the identified party. The City Manager is authorized to accept a reasonable offer of reimbursement.

B. The City Manager may set the matter for administrative hearing by the City Council. Notice of the date set for hearing and the department report shall be sent to the person or entity to be charged together with a copy of the administrative hearing procedures contained in the Municipal Code.

44.08.060 Action by City Council.
If the matter is referred to the City Council for administrative hearing, the City Council shall, by resolution:

A. Confirm or disallow the charge, in full or in part;

B. Determine the amount of reimbursement owed by the party to the City; and

C. Direct that the City commence collection proceedings against the party.

Chapter 44.12
REMOVAL OF RUBBISH AND WEEDS
Sections:

44.12.010    Duty to remove rubbish and weeds.

44.12.020    Regulating authority.

44.12.030    Notice to remove.

44.12.040    Notice to clean premises.

44.12.050    City Council consideration of appeal of notice to clean premises.

44.12.060    Removal by City.

44.12.070    Charge for removal.

44.12.080    Confirmation of assessment.

44.12.090    Collection of assessment.

44.12.010 Duty to remove rubbish and weeds.
It is unlawful for any owner, lessee or occupant of any real property within the City to place or maintain dirt, rubbish, materials, grass, weeds or vegetation on or about such property or on or about adjacent sidewalks, parking areas, alleys or streets in a manner that is either dangerous or injurious to neighboring property or the health or welfare of residents in the vicinity, or interfere with the use of public rights-of-way. (Gov. Code § 39051 et seq.) (Ord. 1794; Ord. 1585)

44.12.020 Regulating authority.
The Director of Public Services or the Director’s authorized designee shall serve as the regulating authority for the provisions of this chapter.

44.12.030 Notice to remove.
Whenever the regulating authority discovers a violation of this chapter, the regulating authority shall proceed with the following procedure to correct the situation:

A. Send or deliver to the occupant of the premises a written request that appropriate cleanup can be done. This communication shall refer to the provisions of this chapter, explain what work is needed to correct the situation, and ask that it be completed within 15 days. In the case where the property is vacant, the communication will be mailed to the owner of record.

B. If the work is not done within the 15-day time period, another written communication shall be sent or delivered to the owner of record and also to any occupant of the premises referring to the original request, again outlining what work should be done and advising that if it is not completed within the next 10 days a formal notice to clean premises will be issued initiating the process whereby the City has the necessary work done and assesses the cost to the owner.

C. If the work is not done by the end of this additional 10-day time period, the regulating authority shall cause to be given a notice to clean premises as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1612)

44.12.040 Notice to clean premises.
A. The notice to clean premises shall be headed, in letters of not less than one inch in height, with the wording “NOTICE TO CLEAN PREMISES.”

B. The notice to clean premises shall contain:

1. The date the notice is mailed;

2. The address or other description of the property involved;

3. A description of the violation;

4. An order to cure the violation;

5. A warning that if the violation is not cured within 15 days of the date of mailing of the notice, of such additional time as may be expressly authorized by the regulating authority, the City is required to cure the violation and charge the owner for the costs incurred;

6. A warning that the costs incurred may become a lien on the property and subject the property for foreclosure;

7. A notice that the owner, lessee or occupant may contest the existence of the violation or deny the responsibility for its cure by filing a written response with the City Clerk within 10 days of the date of the mailing of the notice; and

8. A notice that the owner, lessee or occupant may appear and present evidence when the City Council considers the appeal.

C. On the date of mailing indicated in the notice to clean premises, the regulating authority shall cause such notice to be distributed as follows:

1. Mailed by certified mail to the property owner at the address shown on the latest tax assessment rolls available from the Office of the County Assessor. Such address shall be conclusively deemed to be the proper address for the purpose of mailing such notice;

2. Mailed by regular mail to “Owner or Occupant” at the address of the subject property; and

3. Posted in a conspicuous place on the real property involved in those cases where such property is vacant or there is evidence that no one resides on the property.

44.12.050 City Council consideration of appeal of notice to clean premises.
If a written appeal of the notice to clean premises is received by the City Clerk within 10 days of the mailing of the notice to clean premises which sets forth reasons for the appeal, the matter shall be set for consideration by the City Council at the next regular meeting. The City Clerk shall notify the person submitting the appeal of the date on which the City Council will consider the appeal.

44.12.060 Removal by City.
A. If no appeal is filed to the notice to clean premises, then on the sixteenth day following the mailing of the notice to clean premises, or as soon thereafter as practicable, the regulating authority shall cause the violative condition to be remedied.

B. If an appeal is filed, then no sooner than five days after the rendering of a decision by the City Council affirming the notice to clean premises, the regulating authority shall cause the violative condition to be remedied.

44.12.070 Charge for removal.
A. Upon removal of the violation, the regulating authority shall prepare and submit to the City Council a report listing the proposed assessment to be levied against the property. In computing the proposed assessment, there shall be added to the direct cost of removing the objectionable materials a charge, fixed by resolution of the City Council from time to time, in an amount sufficient to recover the labor, materials and administrative expenses incurred, to include interest on the moneys expended at the rate of 10 percent, in enforcing the provisions of this chapter against the subject property.

B. The City Clerk shall set the proposed assessment for consideration by the City Council at the next regular meeting no sooner than 10 days from the sending notice of the proposed assessment.

C. Notice of the proposed assessment shall be distributed in accordance with the procedures applicable to a notice to clean premises and shall contain the date and time when the City Council shall consider the report of the regulating authority and such information as the owner, lessee or occupant wishes to present regarding the amount of the proposed assessment.

44.12.080 Confirmation of assessment.
At the time set for considering the report of the regulating authority, the City Council shall hear any objections from persons liable to be assessed. The City Council may affirm, modify or reject the proposed assessment. The affirmation of any assessment shall declare that the amount is a lien upon the subject property.

44.12.090 Collection of assessment.
A. The assessment roll as confirmed by the City Council shall be delivered to the Director of Administrative Services who may receive the amount at any time within 10 days after the confirmation.

B. At the end of the 10-day period, any unpaid assessment shall be given to the Tax Collector of San Diego County for collection in the manner and form required by law. (Gov. Code §§ 51500 – 51510)

Chapter 44.16
BUSINESS FIRE SAFETY SELF-INSPECTION PROGRAM
Sections:

44.16.010    Establishment of self-inspection program.

44.16.020    Definitions.

44.16.030    Function of self-inspection program.

44.16.040    Penalties.

44.16.010 Establishment of self-inspection program.
For the purpose of providing and maintaining functions necessary for the prevention of fire and for the protection of life and property from fire and panic, the City Council does hereby establish a business fire safety self-inspection program assuring that certain B-2 and R-1 occupancies within the City are inspected on an annual basis for fire safety. (Ord. 1946 § 2 Att. B, 2003; Ord. 1795; Ord. 1616)

44.16.020 Definitions.
The terms “B-2” and “R-1” occupancies, as used in this chapter, shall mean those businesses as defined in Section 9.117 of the Uniform Fire Code. (Ord. 1946 § 2 Att. B, 2003)

44.16.030 Function of self-inspection program.
A. The Coronado Fire Department’s suppression/rescue personnel and Fire Prevention Bureau personnel may deliver by hand or by mail its “Self-Inspection Worksheet” and “Business and Emergency Record” forms to each B-2 and R-1 occupancy included in the business fire safety self-inspection program within the City on an annual basis.

B. The owner or manager of said occupancy or person in highest authority in said occupancy may within 30 days following receipt of the forms described in subsection A of this section inspect each occupancy, complete the aforementioned forms, correct all deficiencies, and return the same to the Coronado Fire Department. All deficiencies observed shall be reported on said forms and corrected prior to returning the forms to the Coronado Fire Department. (Ord. 1946 § 2 Att. B, 2003)

44.16.040 Penalties.
Any person who knowingly fails to comply with the requirements to inspect said premises, complete said forms, or correct all deficiencies noted within the aforementioned 30-day period, shall be guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 1946 § 2 Att. B, 2003)

Title 48
PARKS, BEACHES AND HARBORS
Chapters:

48.04    Beaches

48.08    Golfing in Parks

48.12    Municipal Golf Course

48.16    Glorietta Bay

48.20    San Diego Bay

48.24    Municipal Tennis Courts

48.28    Municipal Lawn Bowling Green

Chapter 48.04
BEACHES
Sections:

48.04.010    Authority to enforce provisions.

48.04.020    Water activity zones.

48.04.030    Definitions.

48.04.040    Bathing and swimming zone.

48.04.050    Board surfing zone.

48.04.060    Control zone.

48.04.070    No board surfing zone.

48.04.080    Closed zone.

48.04.090    Signs.

48.04.100    Swimming, bathing, etc. – Prohibited where warning signals.

48.04.110    Refusal to comply – Injuring warning signals.

48.04.120    Waste, refuse, etc. – Fires.

48.04.130    Unsafe property closed to public – Description.

48.04.140    Motorboats.

48.04.150    Reserved.

48.04.160    Provisions do not apply to employees.

48.04.165    Voluntary payment of penalty.

48.04.170    Penalty for violation.

48.04.010 Authority to enforce provisions.
It is the duty of the City Manager, and such employees of the City as he may from time to time designate, to enforce the provisions of this chapter and in that behalf all and any employees charged with the duty of maintaining peace, order and safety in the beach areas shall be and hereby are empowered to assist the police officers of the City in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter including the power to make arrests for the violation hereof when appointed by the Director of Police Services as deputy police officers1. (Ord. 1795)

48.04.020 Water activity zones.
A. It is the intent and purpose of the City Council in enacting this chapter to regulate and control such recreational water activities as bathing and swimming and board surfing in and upon the waters of all beach areas.

B. There are hereby established, in and upon the water under the jurisdiction and control of the City, the following five water activity zones:

1. Bathing and swimming zone;

2. Board surfing zone;

3. Control zone;

4. No board surfing zone;

5. Closed zone.

The boundaries of each zone shall be designated by the Director of Recreation Services and/or the head lifeguard on duty on the beaches, depending on the number of swimmers, the surf, wave, and tide conditions, and in protection of public health and safety. The areas shall be designated by portable signs indicating on the face thereof the type of zone to which it applies.

48.04.030 Definitions.
A. “Bathing” and “swimming” mean all bathing and swimming activities conducted in water except those activities which involve board surfing or those which involve the possession, control or use of a surfboard.

B. “Board surfing” shall mean any activity which involves riding waves with the use or aid of a surfboard, or being carried along or being propelled by the action of the waves with the use or aid of a surfboard. To “board surf” means to do or engage in board surfing.

C. “Surfboard” means any rigid, inflexible device upon which or with the use or aid of which a person can ride waves or be carried along or propelled by the action of the waves.

48.04.040 Bathing and swimming zone.
Only bathing and swimming are permitted in a bathing and swimming zone, and it is unlawful for any person to board surf in, or to possess, control, or use a surfboard in, or to release or place a surfboard in, or to carry, throw or discharge a surfboard into, or to permit a surfboard to float, drift or be carried into, a bathing and swimming zone.

48.04.050 Board surfing zone.
Only board surfing shall be permitted in a board surfing zone, and it is unlawful for any person to engage in bathing and swimming activities, except such as may be incidental to board surfing, in a board surfing zone.

48.04.060 Control zone.
Board surfing shall be permitted in a control zone except during the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. daily. It is unlawful for any person to board surf in, or to possess, control or use a surfboard in, or to release or place a surfboard in, or to carry, throw or discharge a surfboard into, or to permit a surfboard to float, drift or be carried into, a control zone during the hours between 11:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. daily.

48.04.070 No board surfing zone.
It is unlawful for any person to board surf in a no board surfing zone.

48.04.080 Closed zone.
It is unlawful for any person to board surf in, or to possess, control or use a surfboard in, or to release or place a surfboard in, or to carry, throw or discharge a surfboard into, or to permit a surfboard to float, drift or be carried into, or to engage in bathing and swimming activities in, a closed zone.

48.04.090 Signs.
Portable signs giving notice of the applicable water activity zone, if any, shall be placed in appropriate places upon the beach or lands abutting or adjacent thereto. For each water activity zone, there shall be displayed upon the signs therefor notice as follows:

A. For a bathing and swimming zone: “BATHING AND SWIMMING ONLY – SURFBOARDS UNLAWFUL;”

B. For a board surfing zone: “BOARD SURFING ONLY – BATHING AND SWIMMING UNLAWFUL;”

C. For a control zone: “BOARD SURFING UNLAWFUL BETWEEN ELEVEN A.M. AND SIX P.M.;”

D. For a closed zone: “SURFBOARDS, SWIMMING AND BATHING UNLAWFUL.”

48.04.100 Swimming, bathing, etc. – Prohibited where warning signals.
It is unlawful for any person to bathe, swim, surfboard ride, row, canoe and/or operate a sailboat or powerboat or other device on or upon water where warning signals have been placed except for the purpose of making a rescue.

48.04.110 Refusal to comply – Injuring warning signals.
It is unlawful for any person to refuse to follow or comply with any lawful order, signal or other lawful direction of a lifeguard, or for any person without lawful authority to deface, injure, knock down or remove any sign or warning placed for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter or for any person to deface, injure, knock down, break into or destroy or molest any lifeguard structure placed in the beach area by the Director of Fire Services or designee.

48.04.120 Waste, refuse, etc. – Fires.
A. It is unlawful for any person to leave, discard, deposit, or throw away any glass container, tin or aluminum can, waste food, papers, or any other refuse or rubbish upon any beach area in the City. All waste materials shall be deposited in trash cans or receptacles provided for that purpose.

B. It is unlawful for any person to move, molest, turn over, remove, deface, or knock down any trash can or receptacle placed in any beach area by the City.

C. It shall be unlawful for any person to build, maintain, or kindle a fire on any public beach, except in a City provided fire circle, or except as otherwise provided herein. It shall also be permissible to build a fire in a portable barbecue or other similar device. The coals from said barbecue or device shall be deposited in an official fire circle or hot coal container. A fire in a fire circle or portable barbecue shall be used only to build beach fires for cooking or warmth, and it shall be unlawful to use the same as incinerators to burn rubbish and waste materials. The materials used for fires on the public beach shall not exceed a height of 12 inches above the upper edge of the fire circle or portable barbecue and shall be contained within the inside edge of the fire circle or portable barbecue.

D. It shall be unlawful for any person to burn in any such fire circle, barbecue, or device landscape debris, paint, stain, sealer, wood preservative, cloth, rubber, metal (including nails and other hardware), asphalt, foam rubber, plastic, or any similar matter or material inconsistent with San Diego County Air Pollution Control District restrictions and leaving any type of solid residue other than ash.

E. It is unlawful for any person to abandon any lawful fire upon any beach area without first having extinguished the fire. The ashes thereof, however, shall not be covered. All unburned wood shall be removed or placed in trash cans or receptacles provided therefor, so that the beach is left in a clean, sanitary, and presentable condition.

F. It shall be unlawful for any person to have, possess, or use any cup, tumbler, jar, bottles or container whose exterior surface is, in any degree, made of glass upon any beach in the City. (Ord. 2041 § 2, 2014; Ord. 1435)

48.04.130 Unsafe property closed to public – Description.
The City Council hereby finds and determines that the following property owned and/or controlled by the City is unsafe and it is hereby withdrawn from personal access and use by members of the public. The property is more particularly described as follows:

A. A point on the embankment at the intersection with the bulkhead line extended northerly from Station 512 and a point on the bulkhead line 630 feet easterly of Station 514;

B. A point on the embankment lying on a line perpendicular to the bulkhead line at Station 518, and a point on the embankment lying on a line perpendicular to the bulkhead line at a point 1,025 feet northerly of Station 518;

C. A point on the embankment lying on a line perpendicular to the bulkhead line at a point 1,520 feet northerly of Station 518, and a point on the embankment lying on a line perpendicular to the bulkhead line at a point 400 feet southerly of Station 520.

48.04.140 Motorboats.
It is unlawful for any person to launch or operate a motorboat within that area of the City commonly known as Central Beach and which is bounded by the North Island Naval Air Station Base fence and the Hotel del Coronado sea wall, and the water area of which is marked by at least three buoys located parallel to the beach and 500 feet distant therefrom, which area is hereby removed from use by the general public and is reserved to the people as a swimming area.

48.04.150 Reserved.
48.04.160 Provisions do not apply to employees.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent any employee of the City from doing anything that in the opinion of the City Manager or designee may be thought necessary and proper for the maintenance, improvement or betterment of the beach area, and further that nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent any employee or agent of the City from doing anything that in the opinion of the City Council may be thought necessary or proper for the best interests of the City.

48.04.165 Voluntary payment of penalty.
Any operator or owner of a vehicle to whom a citation has been issued in violation of CMC 48.04.160 may, within 10 days of the time of the issuance of the citation, pay to the Parking Citation Processing Officer, 706 Orange Avenue, Coronado, CA 92118, as a penalty for, and in full satisfaction of, such violation, the sum of $25.00. The failure of such owner or operator to make such payment within said 10 days shall render such owner or operator subject to the penalties provided for violation of the provisions of this code. (Ord. 1498)

48.04.170 Penalty for violation.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or fails to comply with any of the regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 1400)

1
For statutory provisions regarding free access to beaches, see Gov. Code Section 54090 et seq. For provisions concerning the development by cities of beaches, see Gov. Code Section 54093.


Chapter 48.08
GOLFING IN PARKS
Sections:

48.08.010    Prohibited – Penalty for violation.

48.08.010 Prohibited – Penalty for violation.
It is unlawful for any person to play or practice golf in any public park. Any person who violates this section is guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 1400)

Chapter 48.12
MUNICIPAL GOLF COURSE
Sections:

48.12.010    Permit.

48.12.020    Access and use.

48.12.030    Golf Course Marshals.

48.12.040    Penalty for violation.

48.12.010 Permit.
The access and use of the hereinafter described property by the members of the public is hereby limited to access and use as a municipal golf course. The property is described as follows:

All that area south and west of a straight line drawn between old Station 152 of the bulk head line and Station 51 on the adjudicated mean high tide line and the prolongation thereof to its intersection with the easterly curbline of Glorietta Boulevard, thence turning southerly and westerly at the intersection and following in the meandering course along the curbline around Glorietta Point and Bay to a point on the curbline which is six hundred feet, more or less, north of Station 21 on the adjudicated mean high tide line, thence turning easterly and southerly in a straight line through Station 29 on the adjudicated mean high tide line and this prolongation to its intersection with the pierhead line, and thence following the pierhead line in its meandering course around Glorietta Bay, Glorietta Point, back to Station 235 on the pierhead line and thence turning westerly in a straight line to new Station 151 on the bulkhead line of Glorietta Bay, excluding area occupied by public streets, parking and buildings.1

48.12.020 Access and use.
It is unlawful for any person to enter upon any portion of the lands herein restricted for use as a municipal golf course for any purpose other than that for which the area is restricted without a permit issued by the Director of Golf Services or other duly authorized employee of the City, provided such restricted area shall have been posted with signs declaring such restricting at intervals of not greater than two blocks along streets, highways, and/or waterways bounding said restricted area. (Ord. 1349)

48.12.030 Golf Course Marshals.
The Director of Golf Services may appoint one or more Golf Course Marshals to supervise the flow of play on the course and such regulations for use of the course as may be promulgated by the Director of Golf Services. All persons using the golf course shall comply with the directions of the Course Marshals and the regulations for the use of the course. (Ord. 1349)

48.12.040 Penalty for violation.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or fails to comply with any regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter is guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 1400)

1
For statutory provisions authorizing a City to acquire property for a golf course, see Gov. Code Section 37353.


Chapter 48.16
GLORIETTA BAY1
Sections:

48.16.010    Definitions.

48.16.020    Stray, abandoned or derelict vessels.

48.16.030    Sunken or grounded craft.

48.16.040    Removal of obstructing craft.

48.16.050    Launching facilities.

48.16.060    Unsafe or dangerous mooring or anchorage.

48.16.070    Obstruction of navigation.

48.16.080    Mooring limitations.

48.16.090    Speed – Reasonable or prudent.

48.16.100    Speed limit.

48.16.110    Authority of Port Director.

48.16.120    Permit required.

48.16.130    Plans and specifications for moorings.

48.16.140    Conditions of permit – Cancellation.

48.16.150    Removal upon cancellation.

48.16.160    Temporary use of unoccupied mooring.

48.16.170    Loss by nonuser.

48.16.180    Annual inspection – Fee.

48.16.190    Adjustments.

48.16.200    Fees.

48.16.210    Quarterly permit.

48.16.220    Nonpayment of fees – Loss of mooring.

48.16.230    Documentation or registration of vessels.

48.16.240    Transfer of mooring.

48.16.250    Application.

48.16.260    Construction – Permission.

48.16.270    Anchors – Materials.

48.16.280    Weight – Chain.

48.16.290    Buoy construction.

48.16.300    Buoy chains and fastenings.

48.16.310    Buoy colors and numbering.

48.16.320    Buoy maintenance.

48.16.330    Regulation of anchorage areas.

48.16.340    Length of mooring chains.

48.16.350    Construction – Operation by City.

48.16.360    Permit.

48.16.370    Unlawful occupancy of floats, etc.

48.16.380    Watch – Fire equipment.

48.16.390    Lighting facilities.

48.16.400    Additional regulations.

48.16.410    Anchorage areas – Commercial vessels.

48.16.420    Sale of petroleum products.

48.16.430    Storage of gasoline.

48.16.440    Fire protection equipment.

48.16.450    Storage of fuel containers.

48.16.460    Use of landing floats, piers, etc.

48.16.470    Obstruction of access to floats, etc.

48.16.480    Refuse disposal.

48.16.490    Disposal of oil, paints, etc.

48.16.500    Causing fill or excavation in harbor.

48.16.510    Safety of vessels – Storm warnings.

48.16.520    Intoxication – Liquor.

48.16.530    Malicious mischief, etc.

48.16.540    Water skiing areas.

48.16.550    Bathing, swimming and surf boarding.

48.16.555    Glorietta Bay anchorage areas.

48.16.560    General rules and regulations for water skiing.

48.16.570    Miscellaneous rules.

48.16.580    Penalty for violation.

48.16.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless a different meaning is apparent from the context or is specified elsewhere in this code:

A. “Designated anchorage areas” means the areas as set forth by a map prepared by the Port Director and approved by resolution of the City Council and which shall designate every mooring, pier, float, wharf, dock or landing within such area and the shoreline thereof, together with the approaches thereto.

B. “Float” means and includes wharf, pier, quay or landing and/or fixed structure.

C. “Mooring” means any weight, chain, rope, float structure and/or appliance used by a vessel for anchoring purposes, and which is not carried aboard such vessel as part of the regular equipment.

D. “Vessel” and “craft” mean and include ships of all types, canal boats, barges, landing barges, sailing vessels, motorboats, and every structure adapted to be navigated from place to place for the transportation of property and persons by any means.

48.16.020 Stray, abandoned or derelict vessels.
All stray, abandoned or derelict vessels, skiffs, rowboats, dinghies, timber or other articles found within the designated anchorage areas, not in the lawful possession or control of some person, shall be immediately delivered to and/or taken in charge by the Port Director in whose custody they shall remain until claimed by the proper owners. The owners shall pay all expenses incurred by the Port Director in connection therewith, including a charge for keeping and storing the same; and if the vessels, timbers, or other articles are not claimed within 30 days and the charges paid as herein provided for, the Port Director may proceed to sell such property and the proceeds of such sale shall be paid into the City Treasury.

48.16.030 Sunken or grounded craft.
In case of any vessel, boat, watercraft, raft or other obstruction sinking or grounding or being unnecessarily delayed in Glorietta Bay and other portions of San Diego Bay within the City limits in such manner as to stop, interfere with or, in the opinion of the Port Director, endanger navigation or otherwise unnecessarily obstruct the waters or tideland approaches thereto, the Port Director shall have the right to take immediate possession of such vessel, boat, watercraft, raft or other obstruction so far as to remove it, and to immediately clear the harbor or tideland approaches thereto of the obstruction, using his best judgment to prevent any unnecessary damage to such craft or obstruction aforesaid, and no one shall interfere with or prevent such removal.

48.16.040 Removal of obstructing craft.
Any sunken or abandoned vessels, boats, watercraft, rafts, wharves, buildings or other obstructions shall be subject to be removed, destroyed, sold or otherwise disposed of by the Port Director by direction of the City Council and at the expense to the owner or owners, or the City Council may, in its discretion, direct the Port Director to give notice in writing to the owner or owners of any such craft or obstruction, requiring them to remove it; provided, that the expense of removing any such craft or obstruction as aforesaid shall be a charge against such craft and/or obstruction or contents thereof, and if the owner of the same shall fail or refuse to reimburse the City for such expenses within 30 days after notification, then the City Council shall secure bids for the removal thereof, and may sell the aforesaid craft, obstruction and/or contents, or any part thereof that may not have been destroyed in removal and the proceeds of such sale, or such amount thereof as may be necessary to reimburse the City for the expense of such removal, shall be paid to the City Treasurer.

48.16.050 Launching facilities.
It is unlawful to launch or remove from the waters of Glorietta Bay, or designated anchorage areas, any vessel except at such locations as are designated for that purpose, or at such locations as are provided with launching facilities to do such work.

48.16.060 Unsafe or dangerous mooring or anchorage.
If any vessel arriving and anchoring or being moored or fastened to any wharf in the designated anchorage areas shall be so moored or placed as to be unsafe or dangerous to any other vessel previously lying at anchor in the anchorage areas, or moored or fastened as aforesaid, the Port Director is hereby authorized to order and direct the position of the vessel to be changed. The master or other person having charge of such vessel shall forthwith cause the position of such vessel to be changed as directed by the Port Director, and upon the failure or refusal of such master or other person in charge of such vessel to change the position of the vessel, as directed by the Port Director and/or in the absence of such master or other person in an emergency, the Port Director may forthwith board such vessel with such assistance as may be necessary and change the position of such vessel, and the expense of changing the position of such vessel, or of arranging the rigging thereon, may be recovered from the master or owner of such vessel by a suit in the name of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction.

48.16.070 Obstruction of navigation.
It is unlawful to tie up or anchor a vessel in the designated anchorage areas in such a manner as to obstruct the marked channels, or to prevent or obstruct the passing of other vessels or to voluntarily or carelessly sink or allow to be sunk any vessel in any channel or berthing space, or to float loose timbers, logs or piles in any channel or berthing space, in such a manner as to obstruct, impede or injure other vessels or the navigation thereof, and whenever a vessel is sunk in the designated anchorage areas or channel, it shall be the duty of the owner or other person having the care, charge, custody or control thereof to immediately mark it with a buoy during the day and by lantern or other light by night, and to maintain such markings until the sunken vessel or obstruction is removed, and the neglect or failure of such owner or person to do so is unlawful. The owner thereof shall immediately commence the removal of the obstruction and prosecute the removal diligently to completion and any failure to do so shall constitute abandonment of such vessel. Whenever the navigation of any of the waters, including moorings and berths, within the designated anchorage areas shall be obstructed or endangered by any vessel or other obstruction, which obstruction or danger has existed for a period longer than 10 days, or whenever the abandonment of a vessel or other obstruction can be legally established in a less space of time, the vessel or other obstruction shall be subject to be removed, sold or otherwise disposed of by the Port Director as directed by law without liability for any damage to the owner of same, and at the expense of the owner, who shall pay the cost of such removal, sale or disposition.

48.16.080 Mooring limitations.
It is unlawful to make fast or tie any vessel to a mooring belonging to another vessel, or to make fast or tie to a vessel already occupying a mooring, or to anchor so close to the vessel occupying a mooring that the other vessel is endangered.

48.16.090 Speed – Reasonable or prudent.
No person shall operate a vessel, boat or other watercraft upon Glorietta Bay at a speed greater than is reasonable or prudent, having due regard for other vessels, property and persons on the bay, and in no event at a speed which endangers the safety of persons or property.

48.16.100 Speed limit.
No person shall operate a vessel or boat or other watercraft at a speed in excess of five nautical miles per hour upon that portion of Glorietta Bay known as the Turning Basin and lying westerly of a line drawn between Stations 155 and 162 of the established United States bulkhead line; provided, however, that such speed limit shall not apply to any speedboat races, public exhibitions or regattas conducted for public entertainment and regulated pursuant to a permit issued by the Port Director.

48.16.110 Authority of Port Director.
The Port Director shall have the following authority in addition to any other authority imposed upon him by this chapter or by other local, State or Federal laws:

A. To designate the areas within which vessels of different sizes and classes shall be anchored or moored;

B. To assign anchorage or moorings to vessels within such designated areas;

C. To assign berths or landing places to vessels coming alongside of floats, wharves and piers;

D. To order any vessel improperly anchored, moored, berthed or tied up to change its position as more particularly set forth in CMC 48.16.020 and 48.16.030.

Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon, the Port Director, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by an assistant of the Port Director, or such other person as may be designated by the Port Director for the enforcement of these regulations.

48.16.120 Permit required.
It is unlawful to place, erect or construct moorings in the designated anchorage areas without a permit first having been issued by the Port Director.

48.16.130 Plans and specifications for moorings.
No permit shall be issued by the Port Director for a mooring structure until plans and specifications for the mooring have been submitted to him by the applicant showing the construction of the proposed mooring together with the location thereof, which plans and specifications shall have first been approved by the City Council.

48.16.140 Conditions of permit – Cancellation.
Any permit issued by the Port Director shall provide that the permit may be canceled at any time by the Port Director by giving five days’ written notice to the occupant.

48.16.150 Removal upon cancellation.
It shall be the duty of the owner of the mooring to immediately remove the same, and if he should fail to move the same within 30 days the mooring may be removed by the Port Director and the cost thereof shall be paid by the occupant of the mooring place, and the same may be collected in any court of competent jurisdiction.

48.16.160 Temporary use of unoccupied mooring.
The permit shall further provide that the Port Director may at his discretion permit any vessel to use an unoccupied mooring on a temporary basis for a period not to exceed one week, unless satisfactory showing is made to the Port Director in advance.

48.16.170 Loss by nonuser.
Such permit shall further provide that any mooring not used by the owner for a period of six consecutive months out of any 12 months becomes the property of the City and may be sold or removed by the Port Director after proper notice.

48.16.180 Annual inspection – Fee.
The permit shall further provide for an annual inspection of moorings and the mooring fee.

48.16.190 Adjustments.
The City reserves the right to adjust fees at any time.

48.16.200 Fees.
The owner of every vessel in the designated anchorage areas having a mooring permit shall pay to the Port Director an initial permit fee, as established from time to time by resolution of the City Council, payable upon issuance of permit, and thereafter shall pay the Port Director a yearly fee as established by the resolution, such fee due and payable on January 1st of each year and shall be paid in advance.

48.16.210 Quarterly permit.
The Port Director may issue permits on a quarterly basis, but in no event shall the permit be for less than a quarter.

48.16.220 Nonpayment of fees – Loss of mooring.
The permit shall further provide that when the owner is in arrears for a period of 30 days, the Port Director may at his option take over such mooring and convert it to use by the City and further when such owner has been in arrears for a period of six months or more the title to the mooring shall revert to the City; provided, however, that at any time within the period of six months, the owner shall have the privilege of redeeming such mooring by paying the total accrued charges.

48.16.230 Documentation or registration of vessels.
The permit shall further provide that the vessel to be anchored or moored within the designated mooring areas shall be duly registered with the City.

48.16.240 Transfer of mooring.
Transfer of any mooring shall be permitted upon the payment of $1.00 transfer fee, and presentation of a bona fide bill of sale to the Port Director, and then only when the new owner of the mooring is the actual owner of the vessel to be moored.

48.16.250 Application.
Application for transfer shall state the size of vessel and type of mooring.

48.16.260 Construction – Permission.
It is unlawful to erect or construct any mooring to any area of Glorietta Bay without first obtaining permission to do so from the City Council and shall conform to the specifications set forth in CMC 48.16.270 and 48.16.280.

48.16.270 Anchors – Materials.
Anchors of all moorings shall be made of iron or steel or such other material satisfactory to the Port Director.

48.16.280 Weight – Chain.
For single or bow moorings held by dead weight, the amount of weight and size of chain shall be as follows:

Length

of Boat

Weight of Mooring

Size of Chain

20 feet and under

500 pounds

1/2 inch

21 to 25 feet

650 pounds

1/2 inch

26 to 30 feet

750 pounds

1/2 inch

31 to 35 feet

1,000 pounds

5/8 inch

36 to 40 feet

1,500 pounds

5/8 inch

41 to 45 feet

2,000 pounds

5/8 inch

46 to 50 feet

2,000 pounds

5/8 inch

51 to 55 feet

2,500 pounds

3/4 inch

56 to 60 feet

3,000 pounds

3/4 inch

61 to 65 feet

3,000 pounds

1 inch

66 to 70 feet

3,500 pounds

1 inch

71 to 75 feet

4,000 pounds

1 inch

76 to 90 feet

5,000 pounds

1 inch

91 feet and over

As determined by the Port Director

In the event an approved mushroom type anchor is used, the above weights may be decreased at the discretion of the Port Director. Where bow and stern moorings are specified, the weight and size of the stern mooring may not be less than 75 percent of the above weights and sizes.

48.16.290 Buoy construction.
The buoys shall be constructed of materials satisfactory to the Port Director and shall be so constructed that the smallest allowable mooring buoy will extend out of water at least 12 inches. Plans and specifications detailing buoy construction shall first have been approved by the Port Director.

48.16.300 Buoy chains and fastenings.
All chains and fastenings shall be of sufficient size and strength as to stand a breaking strain of at least six times the weight of the mooring.

48.16.310 Buoy colors and numbering.
The mooring buoys shall be painted white or aluminum in color above the water, and there shall be painted on the buoy and be legible at all times the number allocated to the mooring by the Port Director, and the Port Director shall allocate a number to each mooring in the designated anchorage areas.

48.16.320 Buoy maintenance.
All moorings shall be kept in good and serviceable condition at all times; the painters, chains and fastenings shall be so arranged that when dropped they will immediately sink.

48.16.330 Regulation of anchorage areas.
All vessels using moorings in the designated anchorage areas shall be firmly anchored in such a manner as to prevent the vessels from swinging or turning or drifting, except in such areas as the Port Director may designate as single mooring areas.

48.16.340 Length of mooring chains.
Length of mooring chains shall be approved by the Port Director in accordance with the depth of water, length and weight of vessel, and type of mooring to be used.

48.16.350 Construction – Operation by City.
The City Council may acquire or cause to be constructed such floats, wharves, piers and other harbor facilities in the designated anchorage areas as may be required, and the City Council may rent or lease in whole or in part such floats, wharves, piers and other harbor facilities to individuals, nonprofit associations and such other organizations as it may determine. The City Council may further, by resolution, establish additional charges for the use of future floats, wharves, piers and harbor facilities that may be acquired by the City.

48.16.360 Permit.
It is unlawful to occupy any such float, wharf, pier or other harbor facility, as set forth in CMC 48.16.350, in the designated anchorage areas without a permit first having been issued by the Port Director.

48.16.370 Unlawful occupancy of floats, etc.
It is unlawful to make fast more than two vessels abreast at any float, wharf, pier or other harbor facility without first having obtained permission from the Port Director.

48.16.380 Watch – Fire equipment.
When permission has been granted to moor more than two vessels abreast, the Port Director may, at his discretion, require that a 24-hour watch be maintained and that fire extinguishing equipment be placed in such a standby position so as to be available in case of emergency.

48.16.390 Lighting facilities.
The Port Director may require any occupant of any float, wharf, pier or other harbor facility to install and maintain lighting facilities on such float, wharf, pier or other harbor facility when in the discretion of the Port Director such installation is required as a safety measure.

48.16.400 Additional regulations.
In addition to the above, the uses and regulations set forth in CMC 48.16.410 through 48.16.580 shall control Glorietta Bay.

48.16.410 Anchorage areas – Commercial vessels.
Anchorage areas are reserved generally for yachts and other recreational small craft. The City Council reserves the right to refuse docking space to anyone who operates a commercial vessel that does not meet the above requirements. In such cases, the Port Director shall recommend to the City Council that commercial craft be removed. The Port Director reserves the right to refuse docking space or rights to any commercial vessel.

48.16.420 Sale of petroleum products.
The storage, handling, keeping, use or sale of gasoline, distillate, or any liquid petroleum products on floats, wharves, piers, and other harbor facilities is prohibited except as provided for herein. Sale of the petroleum products may be made only from specific locations designated by the City Council. Sale or delivery of such products to vessels shall be by pipelines and hose, suitably equipped and provided with closed connections and valves. It is unlawful to conduct any welding or burning operations whatsoever aboard any vessel while moored in any marine service station or any other facility without permission from the Port Director.

48.16.430 Storage of gasoline.
It is unlawful for any person to keep in storage any gasoline, fuel, explosive or flammable gases whatsoever, or empty containers which previously contained such gases or products, on any float, wharf, pier or other harbor facility or aboard any vessel while tied up or at anchor. The Port Director may order the removal of such products or containers at any time in the interests of public safety.

48.16.440 Fire protection equipment.
The Port Director may require the installation of fire protection equipment at any location where in his opinion fire equipment is needed, on any float, wharves, piers or other facilities, including those under lease by yacht clubs, associations and public anchorages. It shall be the duty of the Port Director to see that all fire protection equipment is of standard make and in good workable condition at all times. Representatives of the Fire Department may inspect the fire protection equipment at any time they deem advisable.

48.16.450 Storage of fuel containers.
Empty drums, tanks, barrels or other containers used for the transportation of fuel, gasoline, distillate, kerosene or other flammable products shall not be allowed to remain on any float, wharf, pier or other harbor facility, nor shall they be left on any shoreline, roadway, or parkway.

48.16.460 Use of landing floats, piers, etc.
Floats, wharves, piers, and other harbor facilities are provided by the City for the loading and unloading of passengers, supplies, boating gear and for purposes in connection with serving the public use thereof and shall not be used for the handling of commercial cargo in any manner which is unlawful and strictly prohibited. The Port Director shall have the authority to control the use of any and all facilities and to regulate the time and manner said use for the purpose of maintaining such facilities for use by the public.

48.16.470 Obstruction of access to floats, etc.
It is unlawful for any person to obstruct the free and easy access to any float, wharf, pier, landing, bulkhead, roadway or leave any vehicle parked in any manner which will obstruct such public facilities.

48.16.480 Refuse disposal.
It is unlawful to dispose of any refuse, material, garbage, timbers, sewage or other waste matter into the waters of Glorietta Bay, and any person violating this provision shall be subject to the penalty provided hereinafter, and in addition thereto, the Port Director may remove with or without notice any vessel which may violate this section.

48.16.490 Disposal of oil, paints, etc.
It is unlawful for any vessel to discharge or dump any oil, spirits, gasoline, distillate, kerosene or other petroleum or paints, rubbish, cleanings, or any other offensive articles in the water or leave standing on any float, wharf, pier or upon any shoreline, roadway or parkway.

48.16.500 Causing fill or excavation in harbor.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to cause any fill or make any excavation in Glorietta Bay without permission from the Port Director. Plans and specifications for any work whatsoever shall be approved by the City Council.

48.16.510 Safety of vessels – Storm warnings.
It shall be the duty of every owner or operator or other person in charge of a vessel to apprise themselves of weather conditions and to heed storm warnings, and to take such steps as are necessary under the circumstances to ensure the safety of such vessels in the event of unusual tide and weather conditions. It shall also be the duty of every owner or person in charge of a vessel to inspect the moorings, bilges and appurtenances of such vessels at reasonable intervals to preclude hazards common to vessels and ensure seaworthiness.

48.16.520 Intoxication – Liquor.
It is unlawful for any person to operate any vessel upon the waters of Glorietta Bay while under the influence of intoxicating liquor.

48.16.530 Malicious mischief, etc.
No person shall, with intent of malicious mischief, board any vessel, yacht, or other watercraft moored, tied, or anchored in Glorietta Bay, nor shall any person board any vessel without the consent of the owner or person in charge of the vessel, yacht or watercraft. No person shall tamper with or in any way molest or interfere with the moorings or anchorage of any vessels, yachts or watercraft without the consent of the owner or person in charge of the vessel, yacht or watercraft.

48.16.540 Water skiing areas.
A. The following area is hereby designated as a water skiing area and shall be used exclusively for water skiing:

That portion of Glorietta Bay within the City limits between the following points: south of the south side of the San Diego-Coronado Bridge piers between the shoreline and Pier 14 of the Bay Bridge with a line extending from Pier 14 to the red “N2” buoy of the marked Glorietta Bay channel (coordinates 32, 41' 10"N, 117, 09' 42"W) and a line extending from the red “N2” buoy to the red “N6” buoy of the Glorietta Bay channel (coordinates 32, 40' 42"N, 117, 10' 00"W) used as the west inbound boundary of the Glorietta Bay channel and west to the shoreline with a line from the red “N6” buoy to the shoreline.

B. It shall be unlawful to anchor in the described area. However, beaching or short-term anchoring of vessels then involved in water skiing within the ski area, as close to the shoreline as practicable, is not prohibited.

C. It shall be unlawful to water ski under, through or between Bridge Piers 2 through 14. (Ord. 1667)

48.16.550 Bathing, swimming and surf boarding.
It shall be unlawful for any person to bathe, swim or use or ride a surf board or similar device in that portion of Glorietta Bay described in CMC 48.16.540(A), or in any area of the marked channel for Glorietta Bay, except:

A. When participating in a City sanctioned public exhibition or meet;

B. When swimming in a posted swim area extending 100 yards into the bay off of the shoreline of Glorietta Bay Park. However, it shall be unlawful to swim within 50 feet of the boat launching pier or within 15 feet of the Naval Amphibious Base;

C. When participating in wind surfing; or

D. When swimmers are naval personnel or other local, State or Federal employees involved in a training exercise. (Ord. 1667; Ord. 1578)

48.16.555 Glorietta Bay anchorage areas.
The following areas are designated as anchorage areas within Glorietta Bay and shall be depicted on a map approved by the City Council and maintained by the City:

A. The A-5 72-hour anchorage.

B. The area north of the north side of the San Diego Coronado Bridge piers between the shoreline and Pier 15 of the Bridge, with a line extending from Pier 15 to the shoreline utilizing the existing inbound south shipping channel lane boundary. It shall be unlawful to travel within this area at a speed exceeding five miles per hour or a speed creating a wake, whichever is less. (Ord. 1667)

48.16.560 General rules and regulations for water skiing.
A. No person shall operate any boat or ride or use any water skis, surfboards or similar device within 100 feet of another boat, canoe, paddle board, float, swimmer, fisherman, or the shoreline except when taking of or landing in prescribed areas which have been posted by the City.

B. All boats shall be operated in a counter clockwise pattern regardless of the number of boats in the harbor.

C. At the continuous sound of a siren, all boats shall beach immediately.

D. Whenever a person or a hazard object is in the water ahead of or in the vicinity of a boat, the operator of the boat shall signal such fact by extending an arm above his head.

E. The operator of all boats shall stop the motor thereof when picking up a person from the water.

F. All boats towing water skis, surfboards or similar devices shall be manned by at least two persons one of whom shall operate the boat and the other shall act as observer.

G. All towing lines shall not be longer than 75 feet.

H. No operator of a boat shall overtake or follow in the wake of another boat which is towing a waterskier, or surfboarder or person using a similar device, at a distance closer than 200 feet.

48.16.570 Miscellaneous rules.
A. No person shall willfully damage or mark any buoys or markers, or cause any watercraft to be moored thereto.

B. No person shall throw litter from a boat or watercraft.

C. No person shall jump, dive or otherwise propel themselves into the water from the Glorietta Bay sea wall, nor use any wheeled riding device upon the sea wall.

D. No person shall operate a boat or watercraft without the consent of the owner thereof. (Ord. 1719)

48.16.580 Penalty for violation.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or who fails to comply with any regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 1400)

1
For statutory provisions authorizing cities to regulate all matters related to watercraft within their jurisdiction, see Harbors and Nav. Code Section 660. For provisions related to watercraft, see the Harbors and Nav. Code Section 650 et seq. For provisions concerning the San Diego Unified Port District, see Harbors and Nav. Code Appendix 1.


Chapter 48.20
SAN DIEGO BAY
Sections:

48.20.010    Anchoring or mooring in shallow water.

48.20.020    Putting rubbish into bay.

48.20.030    Penalty for violation.

48.20.010 Anchoring or mooring in shallow water.1
No person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, tenant or occupant of any houseboat, yacht, launch or watercraft of any kind equipped with a cabin or accommodations for the habitation of such craft by human beings, shall anchor or moor, or cause to be anchored or moored, any such craft within that portion of the San Diego Bay bordering the shoreline of this City between the westerly boundary of this City and the southeasterly boundary of this City in such a manner that the water under such houseboat, yacht, launch or other watercraft used for habitation by human beings shall be less than three feet in depth at low tide.

48.20.020 Putting rubbish into bay.
No person shall dispose, or cause or permit to be disposed, any rubbish, sewage, garbage or table refuse in that portion of San Diego Bay bordering the shore of this City and within the City limits.

48.20.030 Penalty for violation.
Any person who violates a provision of this chapter or who fails to comply with any regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 1400)

1
For provisions concerning the San Diego Unified Port District, see Harbors and Nav. Code, Appendix 1.


Chapter 48.24
MUNICIPAL TENNIS COURTS
Sections:

48.24.010    Definitions.

48.24.020    Access and use.

48.24.030    Penalty for violation.

48.24.010 Definitions.
“Tennis court” means a designated area designed and constructed for the purpose of playing the game of tennis.

“City of Coronado tennis court” means a tennis court that is owned, operated, or maintained by the City of Coronado. (Ord. 1968 § 1, 2005)

48.24.020 Access and use.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to use any City of Coronado tennis court for any sport or activity other than playing or practicing the game of tennis, except as authorized in writing by the Director of Recreation Services or his/her designee.

B. It shall be unlawful to mark, disfigure, injure, alter, tamper with or displace or remove any structure, equipment, facilities or other City property, either real or personal, at City of Coronado tennis courts.

C. It shall be unlawful for any person to use City of Coronado tennis courts between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., except as authorized in writing by the Director of Recreation Services or his/her designee. (Ord. 1968 § 1, 2005)

48.24.030 Penalty for violation.
Any person who violates a provision of this chapter or who fails to comply with any regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor except that, notwithstanding such designation, any such violation, in the discretion of the Attorney having prosecutorial functions, may be charged and prosecuted as an infraction. (Ord. 1968 § 1, 2005)

Chapter 48.28
MUNICIPAL LAWN BOWLING GREEN
Sections:

48.28.010    Definitions.

48.28.020    Access and use.

48.28.030    Penalty for violation.

48.28.010 Definitions.
“City of Coronado lawn bowling green” means the lawn bowling green that is owned and operated by the City of Coronado located at the corner of Seventh Street and D Avenue in Coronado.

“Lawn bowling” means a game played on a level lawn or green in which players roll bowls as close as possible to a smaller target ball.

“Lawn bowling green” means a designated area designed and constructed for the purpose of playing the game of lawn bowling, also known as bowling on the green. (Ord. 2006 § 1, 2010)

48.28.020 Access and use.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to use the City of Coronado lawn bowling green for any sport or activity other than playing or practicing the game of lawn bowling, except as authorized in writing by the Director of Recreation Services or his/her designee.

B. It shall be unlawful to mark, disfigure, injure, alter, tamper with, or displace or remove any structure, equipment, facilities or other City property, either real or personal, at the City of Coronado lawn bowling green, except in the course of lawn bowling activities.

C. It shall be unlawful for any person to use the City of Coronado lawn bowling green between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., or after nightfall, except as authorized in writing by the Director of Recreation Services or his/her designee. (Ord. 2006 § 1, 2010).

48.28.030 Penalty for violation.
Any person who violates a provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor except that, notwithstanding such designation, any such violation, in the discretion of the attorney having prosecutorial functions, may be charged and prosecuted as an infraction. (Ord. 2006 § 1, 2010)

Title 52
CITY RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND PUBLIC PROPERTY
Chapters:

52.01    General Provisions for Public Rights-of-Way

52.04    Public Rights-of-Way and Public Property

52.06    Public Improvements

52.08    Encroachments

52.10    Permit Requirements

52.32    Trees in the Public Rights-of-Way

52.40    Telecommunications

52.44    Video Franchises

Chapter 52.01
GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Sections:

52.01.010    Purpose and intent.

52.01.020    Definitions.

52.01.030    Administration by City Engineer.

52.01.032    Other code requirements.

52.01.040    Work requiring City Council authorization.

52.01.050    Appeals from decisions of the City Engineer.

52.01.010 Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of this title to establish standards and requirements for public rights-of-way and improvements installed in such rights-of-way or on other City property and to provide for the orderly administration of public and private contract work in the public right-of-way or on other City owned property. (Ord. 1795)

52.01.020 Definitions.
Whenever the following words are used in this title they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section:

“City contract” means an agreement between the City and a contractor to perform work covered by this title.

“Civil engineer” means an engineer registered by the State of California to practice in the field of civil engineering.

“Contractor” means a contractor licensed by the State of California to do work covered by this title. A contractor may be authorized to act for a property owner in doing any such work.

“Encroachment” or “encroachment structure” means privately owned facilities or structures in the public right-of-way, or on other public property, constructed and maintained by a property owner or other private party.

“Franchise” means a special privilege granted privately owned companies to construct and operate utilities in public rights-of-way. A franchise may be granted by either the City or the State of California.

“Permit” means written authority for a private party to do public improvement or encroachment work in the public right-of-way or on other public property. Ordinarily, such a permit will be issued in accordance with the provisions of this title, but may upon occasion consist of other written authority, such as a subdivision improvement agreement.

“Permittee” means any person to whom a permit is issued.

“Private contract” means an agreement between a property owner or other private party and a contractor to perform work for which a permit is required by this title.

“Property owner” means the owner of real property which will be benefitted by public improvements or encroachments. A lessee or operator of a facility may act as the owner’s agent with respect to work covered by this title.

“Public improvement” means publicly owned works, structures or facilities, including construction thereof, in the public rights-of-way or on other City property designed for public use, safety, or general welfare and maintained by the City.

“Public property” means land owned in fee by the City or dedicated for public use.

“Public rights-of-way” means easements granted to the City or other governmental entity for street alleys or other public use. Also government land dedicated as public right-of-way. (Ord. 1625; Ord. 1465)

52.01.030 Administration by City Engineer.
The City Engineer shall administer and enforce provisions of this title pertaining to public improvements and encroachment work, and in discharging this responsibility the City Engineer shall:

A. Determine the extent, type and requirements of the work to be done, the kind of application and permit required and the fees applicable.

B. Upon application by qualified persons, issue permits for work when all applicable conditions established for such permits have been met.

C. Inspect all work done to ensure compliance with provisions of the permit and certify when such work is properly completed.

D. Fix the time for completion of the work when a permit is issued, and may, upon request of the permittee, and for good cause shown, extend the time for completion for a sufficient period which, in the opinion of the City Engineer, will enable the permittee to finish the work.

E. Cancel a permit, suspend work under a permit, or require the plans to be amended when it is in the interest of public health, safety or general welfare. A cancellation, suspension or modification of a permit may occur under, but not necessarily limited to, any of the following situations:

1. Upon request of the permittee.

2. When facts are not as presented by the permittee in the application.

3. When work as constructed or as proposed to be constructed creates a hazard to public health, safety or general welfare.

F. Take appropriate action to cause work covered by a permit to be completed when it has not been done within the allotted time period and a determination is made that it is in the public interest that the work be done in accordance with the provisions of the permit.

G. Cause all work covered by this title that is being done without a permit be stopped until a permit is obtained; or as an alternative, require that such work done without a permit be removed or corrected at the expense of the responsible persons.

52.01.032 Other code requirements.
When the nature of the work requested by an applicant is such that it is subject to other requirements of this code, or administrative regulations issued pursuant thereto, or affects the operations of any other department of the City, the City Engineer shall adhere to the other requirements and shall be governed by the recommendations of such departments in determining disposition of the application. Applications which are not in the interest of the public health, safety or general welfare or do not constitute a reasonable use of land as indicated by the existing zoning or approved land use plan shall be denied.

52.01.040 Work requiring City Council authorization.
Notwithstanding the provisions of CMC 52.01.030, the City Council may designate by resolution types or categories of improvement work which require specific authorization by the Council. For such projects the City Engineer shall submit the applications, together with recommendations thereon, to the City Manager for presentation to the Council. A permit subsequently issued for the proposed improvement shall be in accordance with the conditions established by the Council in its authorization of the work.

52.01.050 Appeals from decisions of the City Engineer.
In the event that an applicant is dissatisfied with a decision of the City Engineer relating to a permit required by this title, an appeal as provided herein may be directed to the City Council.

A. Appeals shall be filed in writing within 15 days following the action of the City Engineer to which exception is taken. Appeals shall be delivered to the City Clerk, and they shall state the nature and basis for the appeal.

B. The City Clerk, upon receipt of an appeal, shall place the matter on the Council docket for a hearing within 15 days or at the next succeeding regular Council meeting unless the appellant consents to a continuance.

C. At the hearing, Council shall receive testimony of the appellant and any other persons desiring to be heard in the matter. Upon conclusion of the hearing, unless the appellant and the Council mutually agree that additional time is needed for further consideration, the Council shall within 30 days declare its findings based upon the testimony and documents placed before it. The Council may sustain, modify, reject or overrule the recommendations or rulings of the City Engineer and shall make findings that:

1. The proposed work is (not) inconsistent with the State or local laws.

2. The proposed work, or deferment of the work, is (not) detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare.

3. The work will (not) constitute an unreasonable use of the land as indicated by the existing zoning or approved land use plan.

4. The work, if required, will cause (no) unreasonable burden upon the property or its owner.

Chapter 52.04
PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND PUBLIC PROPERTY
Sections:

52.04.010    Requirements for work in public rights-of-way.

52.04.020    Painting or disfiguring City streets prohibited.

52.04.030    Trade or obstructions on sidewalks prohibited.

52.04.032    Display of goods prohibited on streets and sidewalks.

52.04.038    Loading and unloading of goods.

52.04.040    Obstructing access to business places.

52.04.050    Dedication of rights-of-way.

52.04.060    Urinating/defecating in public prohibited.

52.04.010 Requirements for work in public rights-of-way.
No person shall place, remove or replace any item within the public right-of-way or on public property nor shall a person do or cause to be done any work in the public right-of-way or on public property covered by this title without first having obtained a permit, a City contract or a franchise right to do so. All activities performed under this title shall be done in accordance with conditions of the required permit, City contract or franchise and shall conform to the approved plans, standard drawings, standard specifications, general provisions and other conditions determined by the Director of Public Services as being applicable to the project. This title, however, shall not affect the requirements of any other title of the Municipal Code requiring permits, the payment of fees or the granting of franchises.

52.04.020 Painting or disfiguring City streets prohibited.
Unauthorized persons shall not paint, daub sticky substance, deface, mar or place any sign or advertisement upon any public property or public street or alley.

52.04.030 Trade or obstructions on sidewalks prohibited.
Pedestals, signs, posts, barber poles, railings, barricades and all other obstructions on sidewalks or curbs are hereby prohibited. Nothing in this section, however, shall be deemed to apply to any public utility facilities. (Ord. 2090 § 6 (Exh.), 2019)

52.04.032 Display of goods prohibited on streets and sidewalks.
It is unlawful for any person to set out for exhibition, show or otherwise maintain or allow any goods, wares or merchandise upon any sidewalk or curb, and no person shall place goods, wares, merchandise or other thing of whatever nature between the outer edge of the sidewalk or curb and the property line; provided, however, that the City Council may, at its discretion, permit by resolution such encroachments and make such charges for such permits as it deems advisable.

52.04.038 Loading and unloading of goods.
Nothing contained in CMC 52.04.030 and 52.04.032 shall prohibit the right of any person to load or unload any goods, wares or merchandise in front of the place of business of such person and to leave such goods, wares and merchandise upon the sidewalk or curb for such length of time as is necessary for the purpose of loading or unloading the same.

52.04.040 Obstructing access to business places.
No persons shall block, impede or obstruct any public place or entrance, exit or approach to any place of business in or upon any public place in a manner calculated or with the intent to prevent, delay or interfere with the free passage therealong or therethrough of any other person who is entering, occupying or leaving any place of business, or who is performing any services or labor, purchasing, selling, using, delivering, transporting or receiving any goods, wares, merchandise, services, entertainment, accommodations or articles, or who is attempting or seeking to do any of the foregoing, or to prevent, delay, hinder or interfere with the free passage therealong or therethrough of any vehicle or conveyance operated by or in the custody of any such person, or in which any such other person is riding or attempting to ride.

52.04.050 Dedication of rights-of-way.
No public rights-of-way shall be offered for dedication unless such offer includes the necessary slope easements required for ultimate development of the right-of-way for its intended use, nor shall such an offer or an earlier reservation be accepted for dedication by the City until improvements are reconstructed therein pursuant to this title or their construction is assured.

52.04.060 Urinating/defecating in public prohibited.
A. It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in or upon any street, sidewalk, alley, plaza, park, beach, public building or publicly maintained facility, or in any place open to the public, or in a place the person is exposed to public view.

B. Subsection A of this section does not apply to a person:

1. Who is urinating or defecating in any restroom or other permanent or portable facility designed for the purpose of sanitary disposal of human waste; or

2. Who is unable to comply with subsection A of this section because of a disability or medical condition. (Ord. 1860)

Chapter 52.06
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
Sections:

52.06.010    Standard specifications and drawings.

52.06.012    City Engineer to maintain standard specifications and drawings.

52.06.020    Public improvements subject to desuetude or damage.

52.06.030    Public improvements incidental to a building or structure.

52.06.040    Charges for prior improvements.

52.06.010 Standard specifications and drawings.
To facilitate design and construction the following standard specifications and plans are adopted for use in public works construction with the City of Coronado when any such documents have been filed in the Office of the City Clerk by the City Engineer.

A. Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction prepared and promulgated by the Joint Cooperative Committee of the Southern California Chapter of the American Public Works Association (APWA) and the Southern California District of the Associated General Contractors of California (AGC).

B. Standard Special Provisions for Use with the APWA/AGC Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction approved and recommended by the San Diego Regional Standards Committee.

C. San Diego Area Regional Standard Drawings approved and recommended by the Regional Standards Committee.

D. Standard Special Provisions of the City of Coronado.

E. Standard drawings of the City of Coronado.

52.06.012 City Engineer to maintain standard specifications and drawings.
The City Engineer is charged with maintaining City standard specifications and drawings and keeping them in conformance with current engineering practice. In the discharge of this responsibility the City Engineer shall:

A. As new editions of the documents listed in CMC 52.06.010 become available, determine the date when they shall become effective within the City of Coronado and file such new documents in the Office of the City Clerk prior to the effective date established.

B. Develop and approve additional standard specifications and drawings which may expand or modify the standards enumerated in CMC 52.06.010 whenever, in his judgment, sound engineering practice requires such additions or changes; and these City of Coronado standard specifications and drawings shall become effective when filed by the City Engineer in the Office of the City Clerk.

52.06.020 Public improvements subject to desuetude or damage.
There shall be no certification of the completion of a building or other permitted work until any public improvements damaged or subject to desuetude have been restored to current standards for such improvements.

A. Where, in the development of private property, public improvements are damaged, removed, disconnected or dislocated, the property owner shall, at no cost to the City, repair or replace such public improvements to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.

B. Where, in the development of private property, a driveway is abandoned or is no longer suited for vehicle use, the property owner shall remove the depressed curb section and apron and restore the right-of-way to the standards normally required for an improved street.

C. Unless a permit had already been issued for the necessary work, the City Engineer shall notify the property owner in writing of any such desuetude or damage and the property owner shall take corrective action within 30 days of receipt of the notice. (Ord. 1626)

52.06.030 Public improvements incidental to a building or structure.
No building or structure shall be erected or enlarged, and no building permit shall be issued therefor, on any privately owned lot or building site unless the streets and alleys adjacent to such parcel have been dedicated and improved along the abutting frontage to the current standards of the City of Coronado for streets and alleys of their classifications; and provided further, that other public improvements and associated easements which benefit or serve the property shall also be installed or reconstructed to current City standards and necessary easements granted prior to the issuance of such a building permit.

A. Street improvements shall consist of curbs, gutters, sidewalk and half width paving, and alley improvements shall consist of full width paving.

B. Where required improvements do not exist, a building permit may nevertheless be issued under any of the following circumstances after needed public easements have been granted:

1. When a public improvement or other permit for the required work has been issued in accordance with the provisions of this code.

2. When improvements constructed to a lesser standard exist and the City Engineer finds that they are in substantial conformance with the requirements of this section.

3. When the required improvements do not exist or, when existing, improvements not to acceptable standards are to be relocated and the City Engineer determines that the amount of work associated with the requested building permit is of such limited scope that it should be deferred until such time as adjacent improvements are installed; provided, however, that no building permit shall be issued under these circumstances until the property owner executes a waiver of his, or any successor in interest, right to protest a future assessment project for installation of the required improvements. The waiver of the right to protest a future assessment project for the installation of the required improvements shall be recorded against the property on which the building permit is issued.

C. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the construction of accessory structures and, also, shall not apply to the construction of accessory buildings or alterations to existing buildings where the proposed improvements have a total value, as estimated by the Building Official of $3,000 or less.

D. The requirements of this section may be waived or modified by the City Council upon appeal as provided for by CMC 52.01.050 after a finding that there are unusual circumstances which make its application an unreasonable burden upon the property or its owner.

52.06.040 Charges for prior improvements.
Whenever a street, alley, sewer, storm drain or other public improvements has been constructed by other than public improvements proceedings for which assessments are levied, and the cost thereof shall have been paid by only a portion of the property owners benefitted, the City Council may establish a cost recovery district in accordance with the following procedures:

A. The City Engineer shall, upon completion of the work, determine the cost of such improvements, the boundary of the area of all property benefitted and an allocation of the cost to the various parcels of benefitted property in accordance with current City public improvement financing policies. After this determination, the City Engineer shall notify all property owners who may be benefitted and subject to cost recovery charges of the total identified with their property not less than 10 days prior to the City Council’s consideration of the establishment of a district.

B. Once the allocation of the cost has been approved by a resolution of the City Council, it shall constitute a statement of charges due from the owners of the various parcels of property within the district as their share of the improvement costs. The resolution shall include the legal description and the amount of charges for each lot or parcel within the district; and, also, shall establish an annual interest rate to be applied to the unpaid balance of any such charges from the date the district was created until payment is made. The City Clerk shall record this resolution with the County Recorder.

C. If, during the 10-year period following formation of the cost recovery district, any person either files a tentative map or a tentative parcel map or applies for a building permit on a lot or parcel for which a charge for public improvements has been established in accordance with this section, and such person or his predecessor in interest has not paid such charges to the City, the established charge shall be paid prior to the filing of the final map or parcel map, or the issuance of the building permit; provided, however, such payment shall not be required in connection with building permits having a total improvement value of $3,000 or less.

D. All moneys collected under the provisions of this section shall be deposited by the City Treasurer into an improvement trust fund, and the treasurer shall refund to the person or persons who paid for the improvements for which the charges were collected, or to their assignees, moneys so collected; except, however, that five percent of all such moneys collected shall be retained by the City to defray expenses incurred in administering the trust fund.

Chapter 52.08
ENCROACHMENTS
Sections:

52.08.010    City Engineer to act upon encroachment applications.

52.08.020    Encroachment removal agreement.

52.08.030    Encroachments requiring City Council approval.

52.08.040    Encroachments that interfere with repair or relocation of public improvements.

52.08.050    Driveways.

52.08.060    Fees.

52.08.010 City Engineer to act upon encroachment applications.
The City Engineer shall receive and review applications for encroachments and no such application shall be approved if a determination is made that the encroachment structure will adversely affect the public health, safety or general welfare.

52.08.020 Encroachment removal agreement.
Unless the City Council has exempted the proposed work from the permit requirement, applications for encroachments shall not be approved unless the property owner or other applicant executes an encroachment maintenance and removal agreement. Maintenance and removal agreements for approved permits may be recorded in the Office of the County Recorder as an obligation upon the land involved. This agreement shall be prepared by the City Engineer and shall contain the following provisions and such other conditions as may, in the opinion of the City Engineer, afford protection to the property owner, City and public utilities affected.

A. The encroachment shall be abandoned, removed or relocated by the owner or applicant upon demand in writing by the City Engineer.

B. The encroachment shall be installed and maintained in a safe and sanitary condition at the sole cost, risk, and responsibility of the owner and successors in interest.

C. The owner shall agree at all times to indemnify and save the City free and harmless from, and pay in full, any and all claims, demands, losses, damages or expenses, that the City may sustain or incur in any manner resulting from the construction, maintenance, use, state of repair, or presence of the structure installed hereunder; including any loss, damage or expense, arising out of (1) loss of or damage to property, and (2) injury to or death of person; excepting any loss damage or expense and claims for loss, damage or expense resulting in any manner from the negligent act or acts of the City, its contractors, officers, agents or employees.

D. If necessary to protect the public interest, the permittee shall be required to file a certificate of insurance evidencing coverage of bodily injury or property damage liability. (Ord. 1671)

52.08.030 Encroachments requiring City Council approval.
The following encroachments require approval by the City Council prior to the issuance of a permit:

A. Underground structures which extend into the public right-of-way.

B. Structures built over the public right-of-way.

C. Other encroachments which, in the opinion of the City Engineer, are of sufficient public interest to require Council approval.

52.08.040 Encroachments that interfere with repair or relocation of public improvements.
Where encroachments interfere with the repair or relocation of public improvements, the following provisions shall apply unless provision has otherwise been made in an encroachment maintenance and removal agreement:

A. In the event the City needs to place, replace or maintain a public improvement over or under that which the owner has constructed an encroachment structure, the owner shall pay the City that portion of the cost of placement, replacement or maintenance caused by the construction or existence of the encroachment structure.

B. The owner shall pay the City all the cost of placing, replacing or maintaining the public improvement within a public right-of-way when the City’s facility has failed as a result of the construction or existence of the owner’s encroachment.

C. The cost of placing, replacing or maintaining the public improvement shall include the expense of obtaining any necessary alternate easement.

D. The owner shall pay the City or public utility affected for all cost of relocation, replacement or protection resulting from construction of the encroachment.

52.08.050 Driveways.
A. Driveways serving private property are encroachments requiring a permit for construction, reconstruction, removal or repair, but no encroachment removal agreement shall be required for their installation. See CMC 52.06.020 regarding abandoned driveways.

B. The minimum width of any driveway shall be 10 feet at the property line of the lot served. No driveway approach shall cross over a line extended from the lot corner on a bearing perpendicular to the curb line without approval of the City Engineer. Driveways shall not be located or constructed in a manner which endangers public safety or causes undue inconvenience to the public. Their number and location together with specifications for their construction shall be determined by the City Engineer.

52.08.060 Fees.
No encroachment permit application shall be processed by the City Engineer until the applicant has paid the prescribed fee to cover the cost to the City for the work associated therewith. The City Engineer shall determine the fee to be charged and the fee shall become effective upon Council adoption of a resolution providing for enactment of the prescribed fee.

Chapter 52.10
PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
Sections:

52.10.010    Permits required.

52.10.020    Permit application.

52.10.030    Contractor qualifications.

52.10.032    Performance bond.

52.10.034    Payment bond.

52.10.040    Permit time.

52.10.050    Plans and specifications.

52.10.052    Inspection.

52.10.060    Traffic control around the work site.

52.10.062    Prosecuting the work.

52.10.070    Storage of equipment or materials.

52.10.080    Warranty.

52.10.090    Suspension or cancellation of permit.

52.10.100    Work done without a permit.

52.10.110    Fees.

52.10.112    Refunding permit fee.

52.10.120    Effect of chapter upon other permits and fees.

52.10.010 Permits required.
In accordance with other chapters of this title, it is unlawful for anyone to place, remove or replace any item within the public right-of-way or on public property or to do any work in the public right-of-way or on public property without first having obtained a permit, City contract or franchise right to do so. Permits are issued by the City Engineer and are not transferable; but a contractor may act as the agent of an owner in obtaining a permit and complying therewith. Permits issued under this title shall not be construed to change, lengthen or in any sense or manner given an indeterminate permit or franchise to any public utility or other agency or firm over and above any right or franchise with which it may possess at the time the permit is issued or thereafter. (Ord. 1626)

52.10.020 Permit application.
Applications for permits shall be made on forms provided or approved by the City Engineer. The applicant shall complete the application in such a manner that all information required by the City Engineer is provided and is true and correct. Failure to so furnish the information prescribed shall be grounds for rejecting the application until it is complete.

52.10.030 Contractor qualifications.
Permits to perform work pursuant to this title will be issued only to contractors licensed by the State of California. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the applicant shall file and maintain with the City a valid and current policy or policies or sufficient certificate or certificates evidencing said policy or policies of liability insurance covering all operations of the applicant and/or his contractor, agents, employees and subcontractors, and whether liability is attributable to the contractor or to the City. The policy or policies shall contain an endorsement naming the City as additional insured and providing that the coverage is primary insurance and not contributing with other insurance available to the City, and shall protect against such risks and shall be in such form as shall be satisfactory to the City Attorney, with the following minimum limits:

Bodily injury

(including death)

$250,000 each person

$500,000 each occurrence

Property damage

$100,000 each occurrence

$250,000 each aggregate

52.10.032 Performance bond.
Prior to the issuance of any permit required by this title, the applicant shall provide the City with a financial deposit guaranteeing completion of the work in accordance with the requirements of the permit. Such faithful performance bond shall be a cash deposit, or as alternatives, a surety bond, letter of credit or deposit agreement approved as to form by the City Attorney. A surety bond may be for the specific project or an annual and continuing bond filed with the City and covering the cost of several projects. A person may use an annual and continuing bond for more than one permit, providing the aggregate bonded amount of the permits outstanding does not exceed the total amount of the bond.

A. The amount of the performance bond shall be 100 percent of the estimated cost of the work to be performed as approved by the City Engineer.

B. In the event the permittee fails to complete the work covered by the permit, the City Engineer may cause the work to be done and the faithful performance bond described herein shall be used to pay the cost involved. Any portion of a deposit made to the City to cover the cost of such work which is not used to complete the project shall be returned to the person who made the deposit.

52.10.034 Payment bond.
Prior to the issuance of any permit required by this title, the applicant shall provide the City with a financial deposit to satisfy claims of material suppliers and of mechanics and laborers employed by the permittee on the project. Such payment bond shall be a cash deposit, or as alternatives, a surety bond, letter of credit or deposit agreement. A surety bond may be for the specific project or an annual and continuing bond filed with the City and covering the cost of several projects. A person may use an annual and continuing bond for more than one permit, providing the aggregate bonded amount of the permits outstanding does not exceed the total amount of the bond.

A. The amount of the payment bond shall be 50 percent of the estimated cost of the work to be performed as approved by the City Engineer.

B. In the event the permittee fails to pay any material supplier or mechanic or laborer employed by the permittee on the project, the City shall, after having received proper and legal notice of such nonpayment, use the payment bond described herein to make such payments as are required by law.

52.10.040 Permit time.
Permits to perform work pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for a period of time prescribed by the City Engineer, but not to exceed six months from the day issued. The expiration of the permit shall terminate all work activity and/or encroaching operation and no work will be permitted or accepted without the applicant having acquired further formal City approval.

A. The renewal of a permit or an extension of time for completion of a permit may be conditioned upon the payment of an additional permit fee.

B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to an encroachment for utility purposes for a public utility which holds, at the time of the application for the permit, a valid franchise authorizing the use of streets, highways, or roads in Coronado for a public utility installation.

52.10.050 Plans and specifications.
All permit work shall be performed in accordance with plans and specifications for the project approved by the City Engineer and any special provisions or conditions included in the permit as issued, and shall be done to the satisfaction of the City Engineer or his authorized representative. Permits shall make reference to the appropriate standard specifications and drawings applicable to the job, and, where appropriate, these may be the only plans and specifications required. When specific plans and specifications for the project are required by the City Engineer, they shall be prepared by a civil engineer registered to practice by the State of California.

52.10.052 Inspection.
Permit work will be inspected by the City Engineer or his authorized representative, and it is the responsibility of anyone doing work under this title to arrange for such inspection. The permittee shall notify the City Engineer’s Office 24 hours before work is to commence and before the time set for a scheduled inspection, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays. If any work, including that for public agencies, requires inspection other than during regular City working hours, the permittee shall pay the wage and other expense of the inspector at the rate determined by the City Engineer. Work completed without the required inspection will not ordinarily be accepted by the City. City inspection of public utility company construction shall be limited to location, pavement removal and replacement, backfill and traffic safety measures. Inspection of utility structures and other utility owned installations shall be the responsibility of the owner.

52.10.060 Traffic control around the work site.
Permittee shall place and maintain all necessary barriers, guards, lights, signs, flagmen and watchmen to adequately control vehicular and pedestrian traffic around the work site and to advise the public of detours and construction hazards. Such control devices shall be installed to the satisfaction of the City Engineer; and where the permittee fails to satisfactorily control traffic and warn of safety hazards he may cause additional control devices to be erected at the expense of the permittee.

52.10.062 Prosecuting the work.
Work for which a permit is granted shall be prosecuted with due diligence so as not to obstruct the street or travel thereon or otherwise interfere with the regular use of the public right-of-way or other public property more than is reasonably required to perform the work. Failure to prosecute the work to the satisfaction of the City Engineer shall constitute grounds for canceling or suspending the permit.

52.10.070 Storage of equipment or materials.
A permittee or other person may not store equipment or materials at the work site or elsewhere in the public right-of-way or on public property without separate approval from the City Engineer. Failure to obtain such approval shall constitute authority for the City Engineer to order the removal of such equipment or material at the expense of the permittee.

52.10.080 Warranty.
The permittee shall be deemed and held to warrant any and all work against all defects in materials and workmanship performed pursuant to the requirements of this chapter for a period of one year from the date of acceptance by the City Engineer. In particular, the permittee shall be deemed to have agreed to pay any additional and extra costs to the City made necessary by the refilling or resurfacing of any trench involved in the work; provided, that the earth fill sinks or a depression occurs within one year from the date the work was accepted by the City Engineer.

52.10.090 Suspension or cancellation of permit.
Whenever the City Engineer issues a directive suspending or canceling a permit, the permittee shall immediately cease all work until authority is granted to proceed or a new or revised permit is issued. The permittee will, however, maintain all traffic control and warning devices around the work site as may be necessary to direct and protect the public until their removal is authorized by the City Engineer.

52.10.100 Work done without a permit.
Any work for which a permit is required by this title that is done without having obtained such a permit shall be promptly halted when so directed by the City Engineer, and any permit subsequently issued for the performance of such work shall be subject to the fee penalty prescribed in CMC 52.10.110. As an alternative to halting work underway until a permit has been obtained, the City Engineer may direct that work already done be removed or corrected at the expense of the responsible persons. When so ordered, those responsible for the unlawful work shall promptly comply with the instructions regarding removal or corrective action.

52.10.110 Fees.
No permit required by this title shall be issued until the applicant has paid the prescribed fee or made the required deposit to cover the cost to the City for work associated therewith. The City Engineer shall determine the fee to be charged in accordance with the following schedule:

A. Where the work to be done does not require preparation and approval of separate plans and specifications and drawings, the total fee is to be computed on the basis of a flat charge for the individual items of work such as curbs, gutters, sidewalk, driveways, subgrade preparation, paving sewer connections, manholes, catch basins, pipe installation and backfill. The amount of such flat charge shall be established by resolution of the City Council.

B. If the City restores the pavement after the permittee’s backfill operations, a fee will be charged computed at a rate per square foot of surface established by resolution of the City Council.

C. Where the work to be done requires preparation of specific plans and specifications for the job and their approval by the City, the City Engineer may either use the method prescribed in subsection A of this section to compute the permit fee or establish that the fee shall consist of the actual expenses accumulated by the City for investigation, plan checking, permit processing, inspection and other work associated with the project. In the event the actual expenses option is selected, the City Engineer shall require the applicant to deposit with the City the estimated total of such expenses to be incurred, and the salary costs and other expenses of the City shall be charged against the deposit. Whenever it appears that total City costs may exceed money remaining on deposit, the City Engineer shall require that an additional deposit be made before the work may proceed, and no project shall be accepted by the City as completed until the permittee has deposited sufficient funds to defray any remaining City costs associated with the job. When the permit fee consists of actual City costs incurred, any money remaining on deposit after all City charges have been paid shall be returned to the permittee.

D. Where a work or installation is commenced, carried on or completed prior to obtaining a permit required by this title, charges prescribed by this section shall be doubled, and such doubled fee shall be in addition to any other penalty prescribed by law.

E. When a permit application is received which requires an investigation to determine its feasibility or requirements for approval, the City Engineer may estimate the cost to the City in making such an investigation and require that the applicant either pay this amount as an investigation fee or deposit this sum as an advance on an actual cost fee prior to undertaking the necessary investigation.

52.10.112 Refunding permit fee.
In the event a permittee requests a refund of a permit fee either prior to commencing any work or prior to commencing the project, the City Engineer shall determine whether or not it is in the public interest to allow the permittee to abandon the work. If it is determined to be in the public interest, the City Engineer may cancel the permit and refund that portion of the permit fee or deposit in excess of the costs which the City has incurred in connection with the project to the date of cancellation.

52.10.120 Effect of chapter upon other permits and fees.
The permits and fees provided by this chapter are only for the construction and inspection of work specified by this title of the Municipal Code. The provisions of this code and other ordinances of the City relating to permits, fees, charges and inspections in connection with other work at locations outside of public rights-of-way and on public property are not affected by this chapter. The fees required by this chapter are distinct from the connection fees and service charges imposed by other provisions of this code and other ordinances. The fees imposed by this chapter for permits which is by or on behalf of public agencies, except the cost of inspection performed on an overtime basis, are waived, and the permit for such work which is required by this chapter shall be issued without payment of the fees imposed hereby.

Chapter 52.32
TREES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Sections:

52.32.010    General.

52.32.020    Jurisdiction.

52.32.030    Public policy regarding trees.

52.32.040    City of Coronado Community Development Department responsibilities.

52.32.050    City of Coronado Department of Engineering and Project Development responsibilities.

52.32.060    City-approved tree list.

52.32.070    Determination of appropriate trees.

52.32.080    Tree planting procedures.

52.32.090    Tree planting permits.

52.32.100    Removals of public trees and palms.

52.32.110    Requests for public tree and palm removals.

52.32.120    Maintenance.

52.32.130    Protection of public trees and palms.

52.32.140    Construction.

52.32.150    Penalties and restoration.

52.32.160    Trees on private property.

52.32.010 General.
A. Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of this chapter is to set forth the policies, regulations and standards necessary to ensure that the City of Coronado (“City”) will continue to realize the benefits provided by its urban forest. The City Council of Coronado (“City Council”) has determined that the protection of trees on public property within the City is not only desirable but essential to the present and future health and well-being of all citizens.

B. Provisions. This chapter provides full power and authority over all trees, palms and shrubs located within public rights-of-way, parkways, parks and other public places of the City. The provisions of this chapter are enacted to:

1. Establish and maintain the maximum sustainable amount of tree cover on public lands in the City;

2. Maintain City trees in a healthy and nonhazardous condition through approved arboricultural practices; and

3. Establish and maintain appropriate diversity in tree species and age classes to provide a stable and sustainable urban forest.

C. Definitions. The words below shall have the following meanings:

“City Arborist” shall mean an employee of the City of Coronado Department of Public Services, or such other person appointed by the City Manager, holding a current ISA arborist certification, who is responsible for the planting and care of all public trees, palms and shrubs within the City of Coronado’s public places or public areas.

“Director” shall mean the Director of the City of Coronado Department of Public Services (“Department of Public Services”).

“Frontage strip” shall mean the strip of land from the edge of the sidewalk furthest from the street to the residential or commercial property line.

“Hazard tree” shall mean a tree or palm identified with defects that may cause imminent unsafe conditions for the public. The severity of a hazard tree or palm shall be evaluated in order to apply the proper remedy, such as pruning or removal, to eliminate such defect or public hazard.

“Irrigation” shall mean to supply a tree, palm or shrub with water by sprinklers or manual means of watering.

“ISA” shall mean International Society of Arboriculture, an international organization whose members are deemed to be professionally trained and certified experts on tree care practices.

“Maintenance,” when used in reference to public trees and palms, shall mean pruning of branches or fronds, root pruning, tree removal, spraying, mulching, fertilizing, cultivating, supporting, treating for disease or injury or any other similar act which promotes life, growth, health or beauty of public trees and palms.

“Median” shall mean the paved or planted strip of ground dividing the opposing lanes of traffic.

“Palm” shall mean a single-stemmed plant producing large pinnately or palmately shaped fronds from the apex of the plant.

“Park tree” shall mean any tree planted on park property owned by or under the control of the City of Coronado.

“Parkway” shall mean that portion of the public right-of-way between the curb and sidewalk.

“Pruning” shall mean removal of tree branches or palm fronds. All pruning of public trees or palms shall be done according to International Society of Arboriculture standards.

“Public place” or “public area” shall mean any area owned by or under the control of the City of Coronado.

“Public right-of-way” shall mean both the street and area between the curb and the residential or commercial property line, as well as all alleys.

“Public tree” shall mean any tree planted in a public area owned by or under the control of the City of Coronado.

“Shrub” shall mean a multistemmed, woody plant with a branching habit near the ground.

“Topping” shall mean the indiscriminate cutting of large branches from the canopy of a tree, leaving large, leafless stubs, which subsequently alters the normal growth habit and may result in the death of a tree.

“Tree” shall mean a plant with a woody, self-supporting main stem or trunk that typically, at maturity, has a spreading canopy at a considerable height from the ground.

The Director of Public Services shall have the authority to interpret all foregoing definitions. (Ord. 1967 § 2, 2005)

52.32.020 Jurisdiction.
A. The City of Coronado shall have control of all public trees, palms, shrubs and other plantings in any parkway, public right-of-way, park, golf course, or other public property within the City limits.

B. The Department of Public Services shall be responsible for the planting, care and removal of public trees, palms and shrubs on public rights-of-way. (Ord. 1967 § 2, 2005)

52.32.030 Public policy regarding trees.
It is the public policy of the City of Coronado to maintain existing trees and to provide for and encourage the planting of new trees within the City to the greatest extent possible for the enjoyment and betterment of the community. (Ord. 1967 § 2, 2005)

52.32.040 City of Coronado Community Development Department responsibilities.
The Community Development Department, prior to approval of any building plans, shall identify the location and condition of any existing parkway trees or palms that may be impacted by the proposed construction. Location and condition shall be verified with an on-site inspection by the City Arborist to determine the worthiness of said trees or palms for preservation efforts. (Ord. 1967 § 2, 2005)

52.32.050 City of Coronado Department of Engineering and Project Development responsibilities.
A. The City of Coronado Engineering and Project Development Department shall consult with the Department of Public Services prior to any public or private construction projects that may interfere or have an impact upon public trees or palms. The City shall utilize employees of the Department of Public Services if pruning is necessary on public trees or palms, and, if deemed necessary, the City Arborist shall be on site to oversee such tree work as it is being performed.

B. Any encroachment permit which allows the removal of any public tree shall require the property owner to mitigate the loss by replanting a tree of equal value or pay an amount of compensation for the value of the tree to a fund that will be used to plant a tree in a different location. (Ord. 1967 § 2, 2005)

52.32.060 City-approved tree list.
The Department of Public Services, with the input of the Coronado Street Tree Committee (“Street Tree Committee”), shall establish and maintain a list of trees that are approved for public rights-of-way, parkways, parks and other public areas of the City. Copies of the tree list shall be maintained by the Department of Public Services and made available to the public upon request. (Ord. 1967 § 2, 2005)

52.32.070 Determination of appropriate trees.
Prior to the planting of any trees or palms on public property, the following determinations shall be made to ensure the appropriate tree is selected for the proposed planting site:

A. The mature height of the tree shall be considered to avoid interference with overhead power lines, roof lines, signage or the like;

B. The mature breadth of the tree and its branching habit shall be considered to avoid obstruction of sidewalks and streets; and

C. The potential invasiveness of tree roots shall be considered to avoid such common problems as buckling of planters, sidewalks or curbs. (Ord. 1967 § 2, 2005)

52.32.080 Tree planting procedures.
A. It shall be the policy of the City of Coronado to replace trees on public property that have died or have been removed for any reason. No person other than City employees, City-authorized contractors, City-authorized agents or volunteers organized and supervised by the Street Tree Committee shall plant any tree within a public right-of-way or on public property without first obtaining a tree planting permit from the Director of Public Services. Selected trees shall be from the City-approved street tree list.

B. Any property owner desiring to plant a tree or trees in the parkway strip abutting their property shall comply with the terms and conditions of this chapter and such tree or trees, once planted, shall be strictly subject to management by the City to include pruning and removal as necessary to protect the public’s heath and safety. Any unauthorized planting shall be removed at the discretion of the Department of Public Services. Planting on the parkway cannot be such that it obstructs public access between the street and sidewalk, or access along the street or sidewalk. (Ord. 1967 § 2, 2005)

52.32.090 Tree planting permits.
Any property owner desiring to plant a tree or trees in the parkway strip abutting their property shall apply for and obtain a tree planting permit from the City of Coronado Department of Public Services. (Ord. 1967 § 2, 2005)

52.32.100 Removals of public trees and palms.
Trees or palms on public property are to be removed at the discretion of the Department of Public Services. Trees and palms on public property are to be removed if they present a condition that is hazardous, are in declining or poor health and the condition cannot be corrected by pruning or any other means. Removal is warranted if the cost of maintaining the tree or palm is greater than its value. (Ord. 1967 § 2, 2005)

52.32.110 Requests for public tree and palm removals.
All requests for public tree or palm removals are to be reviewed by the City Arborist and/or the Street Tree Committee. The City Arborist shall have the authority to order removal of public trees or palms that present an imminent hazard. Request for removals for reasons other than hazardous conditions are normally referred to the Street Tree Committee for consideration. Concerns including property damage, landscape renovation, maintenance problems, declining tree health, nonapproved tree species and environmental issues are typical reasons for requesting tree removal. The Director of Public Services, after considering the recommendations of the City Arborist and/or the Street Tree Committee, shall have the authority to issue or not issue a removal permit. This decision can be appealed to the City Council by submitting a written request to the Director of Public Services, asking that the matter be placed on a City Council agenda. (Ord. 1967 § 2, 2005)

52.32.120 Maintenance.
A. Pruning. Public requests for pruning shall be reviewed by employees of the Department of Public Services and prioritized accordingly. The public will not dictate the pruning practices or priorities by virtue of complaints or requests. All tree pruning shall be performed to ISA standards as adopted by the City. It shall be the responsibility of the Department of Public Services or their authorized representative to perform all pruning on City-owned trees. Only authorized persons or parties shall prune or trim any tree planted within any public area of the City. Tree pruning permits are issued by the Department of Public Services to authorized persons.

B. Tree Topping. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to top any tree on public property.

C. Severely Damaged Trees or Palms. Public trees or palms severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees or palms under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical, may be exempted from the provisions of this chapter at the determination of the Director of Public Services.

D. Watering. It shall be the responsibility of each property owner to provide adequate water to a public tree or palm planted adjacent to their property to ensure its proper establishment and ongoing health.

E. Pest Control. Any control measures taken to reduce insect pests, disease problems or suppress fruit production on public trees or palms shall be performed by a qualified applicator from the City, or, if contracted by the City, by a certified pest control operator. (Ord. 1967 § 2, 2005)

52.32.130 Protection of public trees and palms.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or public entity to attach or place any sign, poster, advertisement, notice or the like on any public tree or palm without permission of the Department of Public Services;

B. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or public utility to attach or place any rope, wire, swing seat, tree house or the like on any public tree or palm without permission of the Department of Public Services; and

C. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or public utility to place salt, brine, petroleum products, herbicides or other substances in such amounts as to be toxic or injurious to the health, growth or vitality of any public tree or palm. (Ord. 1967 § 2, 2005)

52.32.140 Construction.
A. No person, firm, corporation or public utility shall excavate any ditches, tunnels, trenches or install any driveway apron or paved walkway within a radius of 10 feet from any public tree or palm without first obtaining a written permit from the Director of Public Services.

B. The Director of Public Services shall certify all City permits for construction, installing, altering, moving or raising of all buildings, utilities, sidewalks, sewers or other operations where public trees or palms are involved.

C. No person, firm, corporation or public utility shall place or maintain within the parking strip or public right-of-way any stone, mortared brickwork, cement, sidewalks or other materials which impede the free access of air and water to the roots of any public tree or palm or likewise impact a potential tree planting site without first obtaining an encroachment permit from the City of Coronado Department of Engineering and Project Development.

D. Any public utility maintaining any overhead wires or underground pipes or conduits shall obtain a written permit from the Director of Public Services before performing any maintenance work on wires, pipes or conduits which may cause injury to any public tree or palm. The public utility shall in no way injure, deface, prune or scar any public tree or palm until their plans and procedures have been approved by the Director of Public Services.

E. As a condition to allowing a permittee to remove any public tree or palm, the Street Tree Committee may require that the permittee plant, at his or her expense, another tree or palm in place of the one removed. The Street Tree Committee, in such cases, shall direct the type, size and location of the tree or palm to be planted and the time frame within which the work shall be done. (Ord. 1967 § 2, 2005)

52.32.150 Penalties and restoration.
A. Any property owner who damages, tops, prunes or removes any tree from public property will restore the environment by planting one or more trees in such quantity and size that the Director of Public Services designates as a restoration planting. The restorative plan will be based on planting sufficient trees as are necessary to provide an amount of foliage reasonably equal to that which was unlawfully removed. In the case of unlawful removal of any public tree or trees, the restoration plan shall require planting a tree or trees of similar size or additional trees such that the total of the circumference of the trees to be planted shall be equal to the circumference of the tree or trees unlawfully removed.

B. Any property owner who causes or allows damage to the base of a public tree or palm with mowing or weed-whipper equipment sufficiently to cause its death shall be required to fund the purchase and planting costs of a replacement tree or palm.

C. Any property owner who causes or allows the unlawful removal of any public tree or palm may be fined or subject to penalties as prescribed under existing laws or ordinances of the City of Coronado.

D. In addition to any other remedies set forth in this section, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter may be required to pay an administrative fine in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.10 CMC. (Ord. 1967 § 2, 2005)

52.32.160 Trees on private property.
A. Any tree, palm or shrub growing on private property which overhangs or projects into the public right-of-way shall be pruned so as to prevent the obstruction of any driver’s view of a street intersection and/or sign. Adequate clearance shall be maintained so as to provide free and safe movement of pedestrians and vehicles on the public right-of-way.

B. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property from which the tree, palm or shrub originates to maintain the same in compliance with the above requirements. The Director of Public Services shall have the authority to notify the private property owner to abate any hazardous condition. Said notice shall allow 30 days for compliance. At the end of 30 days, the Director may enter the private property to prune or remove any tree, palm or shrub that is considered to be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the public. The costs of such abatement shall be assessed to the property owner.

C. In the event of an imminent hazardous condition, the Director may remedy the situation immediately and assess the costs to the property owner. (Ord. 1967 § 2, 2005)

Chapter 52.40
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Sections:

52.40.010    General.

52.40.020    Business license for carriers and providers.

52.40.030    Telecommunications license.

52.40.040    Telecommunications franchise.

52.40.050    Cable franchise.

52.40.060    Fees and compensation.

52.40.070    Conditions of grant.

52.40.080    Construction standards.

52.40.010 General.
A. This chapter may be known and cited as the “Telecommunications Regulatory Ordinance for the City of Coronado.”

B. Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of this chapter is to set forth the City policy regarding telecommunications providers and services, to establish clear guidelines, standards, and time frames for the exercise of local authority, to promote competition in telecommunications, to minimize unnecessary local regulation, to permit and manage reasonable access to the public right-of-way, to assure that the City’s current and ongoing costs of granting and regulating private access to and use of the public ways are fully paid by the persons seeking such access and causing such costs, to secure fair and reasonable compensation to the City for permitting private use of the public ways, and to assure that the City can continue to fairly and responsibly protect the public health, safety, and welfare.

C. Applicable Laws. This chapter shall be construed in accordance with the applicable Federal and State laws governing telecommunications carriers, telecommunications services, telecommunications systems, and telecommunications facilities.

D. Scope. This chapter shall apply within the geographical limits of the City including any areas subsequently annexed by the City.

E. Severability. If any word, phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection, or other portion of this chapter, or any application thereof to any person or circumstance, is declared void, unconstitutional, or invalid for any reason, then such word, phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection, or other portion, or the proscribed application thereof, shall be severable, and the remaining provisions of this chapter, and all applications thereof, not having been declared void, unconstitutional or invalid, shall remain in full force and effect.

F. Definitions. For purposes of this chapter, and where not otherwise inconsistent with the context of a particular section, the defined terms, phrases, words, abbreviations, and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section. Where not defined herein, terms shall be as defined in the Act and the Cable Act. When not inconsistent with the context, words in the present tense include the future tense, words used in the plural number include words in the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word “shall” is mandatory and not merely directory.

“Act” means the Telecommunications Act of 1996, as amended from time to time.

“Affiliated person” or “affiliates” means each person who falls into one or more of the following categories: (1) each person having, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest in a telecommunications carrier; (2) each person in which a telecommunications carrier has, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest; (3) each officer, director, general partner, limited partner holding an interest of five percent or more, joint venture, or joint venture partner in a telecommunications system in the City; and (4) each person, directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by, or under common control with a telecommunications carrier; provided, that “affiliated person” excludes the City, any limited partner holding an interest of less than five percent in a telecommunications carrier, or any creditor of a telecommunications carrier, solely by virtue of its status as a creditor, and which is not otherwise an affiliated person by reason of owning a controlling interest in, being owned by, or being under common ownership, common management, or common control with a telecommunications carrier.

“Amplifier” shall mean an electronic device which increases or magnifies an electronic signal within the telecommunications system.

“Applicant” means a person submitting an application or proposal to the City for a license or franchise to provide telecommunications services or operate a telecommunications system under the terms and conditions set forth in this chapter and any required State or Federal regulations.

“Application” or “proposal” are synonymous for the purposes of this chapter. An “application” or “proposal” means the process by which the applicant submits a request for an initial request, not inclusive of a renewal proposal, and indicates a desire to be granted a telecommunications license or franchise (where required) for all, or a part, of the City. An application or proposal includes all written documentation, and verbal statements and representations, in whatever form or forum made by an applicant to the City concerning the construction, rendering of services, maintenance, or any other matter pertaining to the proposed telecommunications system.

“Assignment” or “transfer” means any assignment, transfer, sale or other transaction of a franchised or licensed telecommunications system, or its corporate or partnership parent, which has the effect of changing the operational, managerial, or financial control of the telecommunications system or the telecommunications carrier.

“Cable Act” means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection Act of 1992, all of which are amendments to the Communications Act of 1934, and any other subsequent amendments.

“Cable operator” means any person or group of persons who:

1. Provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a controlling interest in such cable system; or

2. Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system.

“Cable service” means:

1. The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming, or other programming service; and

2. Subscriber interaction, if any, or other programming which is required for the selection or use of such video programming service.

“Cable system” or “cable television system” means a facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service as defined in the Cable Act and which is provided to multiple subscribers within the City. However, such terms do not include the following:

1. A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more broadcast stations; or

2. A facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way; or

3. A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of Section 621(c) of the Cable Act, codified at 47 USC 541) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video, voice, or data programming or services directly to subscribers; or

4. Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility.

“CEQA” shall mean the California Environmental Quality Act, Section 21000 et seq., of the Public Resources Code of the State of California.

“City” means the City of Coronado, California.

“City Council” means the City Council of the City of Coronado, California.

“City Engineer” means the City of Coronado Director of the Engineering and Project Development Department or his designee.

“City Manager” means the chief administrative officer of the City.

“City property” means and includes all real property owned by the City, other than public streets and utility easements as those terms are defined herein, and all property held in a proprietary capacity by the City, which are not subject to right-of-way licensing and franchising as provided in this title.

“Communication plan” shall mean the public communication plan described in CMC 52.40.070(GG).

“Construction plan” shall mean the construction plan describing the telecommunications system and telecommunications facilities, areas to be served, and an estimated time schedule for such construction.

“Consultant” shall mean the entity hired by the telecommunications carrier under the supervision of the City to inspect construction and to locate utilities.

“Control” or “controlling interest” means actual working control in whatever manner exercised, including, without limitation, working control through ownership, management, debt instruments, or negative control, as the case may be, of the telecommunications system or the telecommunications carrier. A rebuttable presumption of the existence of control or a controlling interest shall arise from the beneficial ownership, directly or indirectly, by any person or group of persons acting in concert (other than underwriters during the period in which they are offering securities to the public) of 20 percent or more of any person (which person or group of persons is referred to as “controlling person”), or being a party to a management contract.

“County” means the County of San Diego, California.

“CPUC” means the California Public Utilities Commission.

“Easement” means and shall include any public easement or other compatible use created by dedication, or by other means, to the City for public utility purposes or any other purpose whatsoever including cable service or any telecommunications service. Easement shall include a private easement used or usable for the provision of cable service or any other telecommunications service.

“Encroachment permit” means the written authority for a private party to construct, operate and maintain privately owned facilities or structures in the public right-of-way, or on other public property.

“Engineering Department” means the City of Coronado Engineering and Project Development Department.

“Excess capacity” means the volume or capacity in any existing or future duct, conduit, manhole, handhole, or other utility facility within the public way that is or will be available for use for additional telecommunications facilities.

“FCC” or “Commission” means the Federal Communications Commission and/or such other Federal regulatory agency as now or in the future may have jurisdiction to oversee telecommunications carriers.

“Fiber cable” or “fiber optic cable” means very thin and pliable cylinders, or strands of glass or plastic, or any future functional equivalent, used to carry wide bands of multiple frequencies.

“Franchise” means an authorization or subsequent renewal granted by the City in order for a person to construct, operate, and/or maintain a telecommunications system which provides telecommunications services in all or part of the City.

“Franchise agreement” means the separate contract by which the City grants a telecommunications carrier the right to operate a telecommunications system within all, or a part, of the City.

“Franchise expiration” or “franchise agreement expiration” means the date of expiration or the end of the term of a franchise agreement.

“Franchise fee” means a fee or charge that the City requires as payment for the privilege of using the streets, public rights-of-way, and easements of the City in order to construct, maintain and operate a telecommunications system and provide telecommunications services to residents of the City.

“Franchised telecommunications carrier” means a person that is awarded a franchise by the City to construct or operate a telecommunications system within all or part of the City.

“Franchising Authority” means the City Council for the City of Coronado, California.

“Functional equivalent” or “functionally equivalent” with respect to a specifically named or referenced piece of telecommunications equipment means another piece of telecommunications equipment that has either:

1. The same or substantially similar characteristics, qualities, operational capabilities, design functions as the original, specifically named or referenced piece of telecommunications equipment; or

2. Operates in substantially the same form and fashion as the original specifically named or referenced piece of telecommunications equipment; or

3. Operates in a technologically superior manner to the original, specifically named or referenced piece of telecommunications equipment.

“Grantee” means any person who has been granted a telecommunications license or franchise pursuant to this title.

“Gross annual revenue” or “gross annual receipts” or “gross receipts” means all revenue, as determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, which is received, directly or indirectly, by a telecommunications carrier and by each affiliated person from or in connection with the distribution of any telecommunications service, and any other service which may, under now or then applicable Federal or State law, be included in the definition for the purpose of calculating and collecting the maximum allowable franchise fee for operation of the telecommunications system, directly or indirectly, from or in connection with the distribution of any telecommunications service. It is intended that all revenue collected by the telecommunications carrier, and by each affiliated person, from the provision of telecommunications service over the telecommunications system, whether or not authorized by the franchise, be included in this definition. “Gross annual revenue” also specifically includes: (1) the fair market value of any nonmonetary (i.e., barter) transactions between telecommunications carrier and any person, other than an affiliated person, but not less than the customary prices paid in connection with equivalent transactions; (2) the fair market value of any nonmonetary (i.e., barter) transaction between telecommunications carrier and any affiliated persons, but not less than the customary prices paid in connection with equivalent transactions conducted with persons who are not affiliated persons; and (3) any revenue received, as reasonably determined from time to time by the City, through any means which is intended to have the effect of avoiding the payment of compensation that would otherwise be paid to the City for the franchise granted. Gross annual revenue also includes any bad debts recovered. Gross annual revenue also includes all advertising revenue which is received directly or indirectly by telecommunications carrier, any affiliated person, or any other person from or in connection with the distribution of any telecommunications service over the system or the provision of any telecommunications service-related activity in connection with the system. “Gross annual revenue” does not include: (1) the revenue of any person to the extent that said revenue is also included in the gross annual revenue of the telecommunications carrier; (2) taxes imposed by law on subscribers which the telecommunications carrier is obligated to collect; and (3) amounts which must be excluded pursuant to applicable law.

“License” means an authorization to construct a telecommunications system in the City which does not provide telecommunications services to residents of the City.

“License fee” means an annual fee or charge that the City requires as payment for the privilege of using streets, public rights-of-way, and easements to constrict, maintain and operate a telecommunications system which does not provide telecommunications services to residents of the City.

“Mayor” means the Mayor for the City of Coronado, California.

“Municipal Code” shall mean the Coronado Municipal Code.

“Nodes” shall mean the cabinet and equipment, including power supply, fans, gas generators, batteries and optical to electrical converters, located in the neighborhoods, which serve homes, businesses, and institutions, and which is the point where fiber facilities and coaxial facilities are connected.

“Ordinance” means the regulatory ordinance codified in this chapter for the City of Coronado, California.

“Other ways” means the highways, streets, alleys, utility easements or other rights-of-way within the City, but under the jurisdiction and control of a governmental entity other than the City.

“Overhead facilities” means utility poles, utility facilities, and telecommunications facilities located above the surface of the ground, including the underground supports and foundations for such facilities.

“Pedestal” shall mean an aboveground enclosure which houses active and/or passive equipment relating to the telecommunications system.

“Person” means and includes corporations, companies, associations, joint stock companies or associations, firms, partnerships, limited liability companies, and individuals, and includes their lessors, trustees, and receivers.

“Personal wireless service facilities” means facilities for the provision of personal wireless services.

“Personal wireless services” means commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless services, and common carrier wireless exchange access services.

“Power supply” shall mean an electronic device designed to provide electrical power to all or a portion of the telecommunications system.

“Private communications network” or “PCN” or “private communications system” means any ancillary or aligned component of a telecommunications system consisting of communications lines, cables, equipment or facilities which are used to provide telecommunications service that in any manner uses or occupies the streets, easements, public ways, or rights-of-way within the City (as annexed). However, “private communications network” does not include any part of a State or FCC licensed local exchange telephone company or any part of a Federal, State, County or local government owned telecommunications system.

“Project overview” shall mean the assessment described in CMC 52.40.080(G) to be performed by the telecommunications carrier for use by the City in its review of the construction of the telecommunications system and the telecommunications facilities.

“Proposed abandonment of telecommunications service” or “proposed withdrawal of telecommunications service” or “proposed cessation of telecommunications service” means the actual or imminent, or expected (either voluntary or involuntary) disruption, discontinuance, desertion or removal of a telecommunications carrier’s operation and provision of telecommunications service from all, or part, of the City for a projected period exceeding four months in duration.

“Public, educational, and government (PEG)” access to local cable television is provided to communities who want it by virtue of the 1984 Cable Act via channels set aside for these purposes. Public access is an important principle which needs to apply to all telecommunications and information systems and services used by the public, which are paid for in part by public funds and taxes or franchise fees.

“Public property” means and includes all real property owned by the City, other than streets, public rights-of-way, sidewalks and easements, and all property held in a proprietary capacity by the City, which are not subject to right-of-way licensing and franchising as provided in this chapter.

“Public way” means and includes all public streets and utility easements, as those terms are defined herein, now or hereafter owned by the City, but only to the extent of the City’s right, title, interest, or authority to grant a license or franchise to occupy and use such streets and easements for telecommunications facilities.

“PUC” means the California Public Utilities Commission.

“Pull box” shall mean a flush mounted or aboveground housing which encloses one or more conduit openings.

“Revocation” or “termination” or “nonrenewal” means an official act by the Franchising Authority that removes, repeals or rescinds previously approved authorization for a licensed or franchised telecommunications carrier to operate a telecommunication system within the City.

“State” means the State of California.

“Street” means the surface of, and the space above and below, a public street (or any path or thoroughfare designated for vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic), or other easement now or hereafter held by the City (including any street, as defined, which is acquired by eminent domain) for the purpose of public travel.

“Subscriber” means a person lawfully receiving or using a telecommunications service delivered by a telecommunications carrier over a telecommunications system.

“Surplus space” or “surplus capacity” means that portion of the usable space on a utility pole or other telecommunications facilities which has the necessary clearance from other users, as required by the orders and regulations of the California Public Utilities Commission (PUC) to allow its use by a telecommunications carrier.

“Tap” means an electronic pathway, by way of wire, coaxial, fiber, or otherwise between that portion of the telecommunications system located in the public rights-of-way and the subscriber’s residential, commercial, or industrial structure.

“Telecommunications” means the transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user’s choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as set and received.

“Telecommunications carrier” means any owner, by way of fee ownership or lease, of any telecommunications system or telecommunications facilities, direct or indirect provider of telecommunication services whether the telecommunication service is offered by the owner of the telecommunications system, an affiliate, or a related entity, by way of ownership, lease, control, or operation of a telecommunications system. A person shall be deemed a telecommunications carrier, even if it does not directly provide telecommunications services, if it rents or leases a telecommunications system and/or telecommunications facilities to another person which provides telecommunications services.

“Telecommunications equipment” means equipment, other than customer premises equipment, used by a carrier to provide telecommunications services, and includes software integral to such equipment (including upgrades) which are not located, in whole or in part, in, above, or below streets, public rights-of-way or other public property.

“Telecommunications facilities” shall mean any equipment located, in whole or in part, in, above, or below streets, public rights-of-way, or other public property used by the telecommunications carrier in its telecommunications system including, without limitation, conduits, cables, cabinets, nodes, structures, headend equipment, receive only earthstations, down link equipment and antennas, electronics, fiber cable, coaxial cable, drops and switching equipment whether part of a stand-alone system or in conjunction with or as part of a cable system.

“Telecommunications provider” means and includes every person who provides telecommunications service over telecommunications facilities without any ownership or management control of the facilities.

“Telecommunications service” means the offering of telecommunications for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used.

“Telecommunications system” means an operating system which is located, in whole or in part, on, in, above, or below streets, public rights-of-way, or other public property in the City of Coronado which is designed and utilized, in whole or in part, by a telecommunications carrier to provide telecommunications services. A telecommunications system may be built in conjunction with, or be part of, a cable system.

“Telephone company” means every person within the scope of Public Utilities Code Section 7901 who has constructed or may construct telegraph or telephone lines.

“Traffic control plan” shall mean the traffic control plan described in CMC 52.40.080(F).

“Underground facilities” means utility and telecommunications facilities located under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground foundations or supports for overhead facilities.

“Usable space” means the total distance between the top of a utility pole and the lowest possible attachment point that provides the minimum allowable vertical clearance as specified in the regulations and orders of the California Public Utilities Commission.

“USC” means United States Code.

“User charge” means a charge used in place of a franchise fee that the City requires as payment for the privilege of using public property to construct, maintain and/or operate a telecommunications system or telecommunications facilities.

“Utility easement” means any easement owned by the City or acquired, established, dedicated, or devoted for public utility purposes not inconsistent with telecommunications facilities.

“Utility facilities” means the plant equipment and property, including but not limited to the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cables, wires, plant, and equipment located under, on, or above the surface of the ground within the public ways of the City and used or to be used for the purpose of providing utility or telecommunications services.

“Wired” is a term used to describe communications over wires. The three major types of wired communications are copper wire (telephones), coaxial cable (cable TV), and fiber optics (transmission using light).

“Wireless” is a term used to describe communications without wires, such as local cellular phones, microwave transmissions, and satellite networks.

G. Administration – Declaration of Powers and Authority.

1. The City Manager is designated the officer of the City that is responsible for the continuing administration of this chapter and matters related to telecommunications service.

2. Unless prohibited by Federal, State or local law, the City Manager may further delegate his powers and authority to a duly authorized representative with respect to administering this chapter or an applicable franchise.

H. Applicability of This Chapter to a Telecommunications Carrier.

1. With respect to all provisions contained within this chapter, these provisions shall be applicable to a telecommunications carrier unless such telecommunications carrier is either hereunder exempted from this chapter (or any applicable provision), granted relief from any applicable provision of this chapter, or exempted under applicable Federal or State law.

2. Subsection (H)(1) of this section is not intended to repeal, and does not have the effect of repealing, any current franchise agreement that presently exists between the City and a franchised telecommunications carrier.

3. The provisions of this chapter shall have no effect on an existing franchise agreement until the expiration of such existing agreement or until one of the following occurs:

a. Prior to the franchise agreement expiration date, the City and the affected franchised telecommunications carrier either execute an amended franchise agreement in which both parties agree to be bound by the term of this chapter (except as specifically granted relief, exemption, clarification, or comparable policy status); or

b. Prior to the franchise agreement expiration date, the City and the affected franchised telecommunications carrier execute a franchise renewal agreement; or

c. Both parties agree to a specific date for expiration of said existing franchise which is prior to the present franchise expiration date.

I. Exemption from This Chapter for Certain Telecommunications Carriers.

1. Telecommunications carriers who are exempted from complying with the provisions of this chapter (“exempt carriers”) are as follows:

a. A telecommunications carrier that is exempted from this chapter as a result of Federal or State law;

b. A telecommunications carrier that is exempted from this chapter as a result of an applicable FCC or PUC ruling;

c. A telecommunications carrier that is exempted from this chapter as a result of an applicable final judicial ruling from which no subsequent appeal can be taken;

d. A telecommunications carrier which is also a cable operator and/or owns or controls all or part of a cable system which is utilized in, or is part of, the telecommunications system if, and only if, the telecommunications carrier, directly or through an affiliate, pays a franchise fee on all revenues generated to the telecommunications carrier from its cable service and noncable service activities and operations relating to the cable system, including, but not limited to, lease or rental fees paid to the cable operator, or any related entity, by any person for use of the cable system, or a portion thereof, or telecommunications facilities which are common to the cable system and a telecommunications system. If franchise fees are not paid on noncable services pursuant to its cable franchise, a separate franchise pursuant hereto is hereby required.

2. It is expressly understood that exempt carriers remain exempted only as long as they meet one or more of the criteria of this particular section.

3. An exempt carrier is exempt only from this chapter. Consequently, such exempt carriers shall abide by, and comply with, any other applicable local, State or Federal laws and regulations, including any applicable Federal, or State consumer protection, or customer service laws and regulations.

J. Telecommunications Carriers Seeking Relief from This Chapter.

1. Any telecommunications carrier governed by this chapter may file a written petition, at any time, with the City Council seeking relief from one or more provisions of this chapter. A telecommunications carrier may specifically request the exemption from or delay in implementation of one or more provisions of this chapter. Also, the telecommunications carrier may request that a specific provision of this chapter apply to such telecommunications carrier for a specified length of time or duration. The petition shall set forth the relief requested and the basis thereof with such supporting information and material as may be applicable and as requested by the City.

2. In order to receive any relief from one or more of the provisions of this chapter, a telecommunications carrier must demonstrate and prove to the City Council’s reasonable satisfaction that at least one of the following facts exist:

a. That compliance with a particular provision and/or requirement would be commercially impracticable and creates a substantial or unreasonable financial burden; or

b. That the telecommunications carrier has its own construction, maintenance, operation or customer service policies, which the City Council deems comparable to, or which exceed, any provision and/or requirement from which the telecommunications carrier seeks relief; or

c. That the health, safety and welfare interests of the City otherwise warrant the granting of such relief.

3. As an alternative to seeking an exemption, or requesting relief, a telecommunications carrier may petition for clarification concerning the precise intent and effect that one or more provisions or sections of this chapter has on the petitioning telecommunications carrier.

4. In those instances in which a telecommunications carrier submits a petition for relief or clarification in accordance with this section, the City may charge the petitioning telecommunications carrier with the actual and reasonable costs for processing such a petition including costs incurred by outside consultants who are retained by the City to review a petition.

K. Failure of the City to Enforce This Chapter. A telecommunications carrier shall not be excused from complying with any of the requirements of this chapter, or any subsequently adopted amendments to this chapter, by any failure of the City on any one or more occasions to seek, or insist upon, compliance with such requirements or provisions.

L. Telecommunications Carriers or Its Assignees Subject to Present and Future Ordinances and/or Resolutions.

1. Any telecommunications carrier, its assignee, or transferee shall be subject to, and expected to comply with, all applicable ordinances and/or resolutions now or hereafter adopted and in effect within the City, including this chapter, to the extent that said telecommunications carrier has not received an exemption or relief from said ordinance(s) and/or resolution(s).

2. Any telecommunications carrier, its assignee, or transferee shall be subject to all Federal and State laws and with all rules and regulations issued by all applicable regulatory agencies now or hereafter in existence.

3. Any telecommunications carrier, its assignee, or transferee shall be subject to all enactments which constitute lawful exercises of the City’s police power.

M. Resolution of Inconsistencies with Federal or State Rules, Regulations or Laws. In any case of an actual inconsistency between any provision or section of this chapter and any provision or section of a Federal or State rule, regulation, or law, the Federal or State rule, regulation or law shall supersede the effect of this chapter unless such Federal or State rule, regulation or law does not preempt, supersede, or make invalid the inconsistency.

N. Resolution of Conflicts between This Chapter and a Subsequent Franchise Agreement or License.

1. Where there is a conflict between this chapter and a subsequently granted franchise agreement or license, this chapter shall control and prevail, unless administratively or judicially determined invalid, unenforceable, or unconstitutional, or unless the provisions of subsection (N)(2) of this section apply to the telecommunications carrier and its franchise agreement or license.

2. Where a telecommunications carrier receives an exemption, relief, or clarification from one or more provisions or section of this chapter, or has one or more of its policies deemed comparable to a provision contained in this chapter, the franchise agreement or license shall specifically note such exemption, relief, clarification or comparable policy. As a result, to the extent that such an exemption, relief, clarification or comparable policy is inconsistent with a provision contained in this chapter, then the specifically noted exemption, relief, clarification or comparable policy language contained in the franchise agreement or license shall control.

O. Force Majeure. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, a telecommunications carrier shall not be held in violation or material breach, default, or noncompliance of this chapter or a franchise agreement, nor suffer any enforcement or penalty relating thereto (including where applicable, termination, cancellation or revocation of a franchise or franchise agreement or license), where such violation, breach, default or noncompliance occurred or was caused by the force of an earthquake, flood, tidal wave, hurricane, or similar act of nature, or other event that is beyond a telecommunications carrier’s ability to reasonably anticipate and control.

P. Notices.

1. Both the City and each telecommunications carrier shall provide the other with the name and address of the contact designated to receive notices, filings, reports, records, documents and other correspondence. All notices shall be delivered to each party’s contact by certified mail, return receipt requested, personal service with a signed receipt of delivery, overnight with receipt verification, or facsimile. All other filings, reports, records, documents and other correspondence may be delivered by any legally permissible means including, but not limited to, facsimile transmission, personal service, overnight mail, or package delivery. The delivery of all notices, reports, records and other correspondence shall be deemed to have occurred at the time of receipt unless otherwise designated by State law.

2. If the telecommunications carrier is required to maintain a franchise, then the designation of such contact person for notice purposes may be contained within a franchise agreement or license.

Q. Telecommunications License. Except as otherwise provided therein, any telecommunications carrier desiring to construct, install, operate, maintain, or otherwise locate telecommunications facilities in, under, over, or across any public way of the City for the purpose of providing telecommunications service to persons and areas outside the City shall first obtain a license granting the use of such public ways from the City pursuant to CMC 52.40.030.

R. Telecommunications Franchise. Except as otherwise provided herein, any telecommunications carrier desiring to construct, install, operate, maintain, or otherwise locate telecommunications facilities in, under, over, or across any public way of the City, and to also provide telecommunications service to persons or areas in the City, shall first obtain a franchise granting the use of such public ways from the City pursuant to CMC 52.40.040.

S. Cable Television Franchise. Except as otherwise provided herein, any telecommunications carrier desiring to construct, install, operate, maintain, or otherwise locate telecommunications facilities in, under, over, or across any public way of the City for the purpose of providing cable service to persons in the City shall first obtain a cable franchise from the City as provided in Chapter 20.90 CMC.

T. Application to Existing Franchise Ordinance and Agreements. This chapter shall have no effect on any existing franchise ordinance or franchise agreement until:

1. The expiration of said franchise ordinance or agreement.

2. An amendment to an unexpired franchise ordinance or franchise agreement, unless both parties agree to defer full compliance to a specific date not later than the present expiration date.

U. Enforcement and Penalties. Enforcement and penalties shall be as defined in Chapter 86.54 CMC (Administration and Enforcement).

V. Other Remedies. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any judicial remedies that the City may have, at law or in equity, for enforcement of this chapter.

W. Agreement May Supersede This Chapter upon Four-Fifths Vote. The terms and conditions of this chapter shall govern any license or franchise issued pursuant thereto; provided, that in the event of a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and any express provision of an agreement, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail unless the agreement expressly states within its express terms that the express terms of the agreement shall supersede the terms and conditions of this chapter and said agreement was approved by no less than four-fifths vote of the City Council.

52.40.020 Business license for carriers and providers.
All telecommunications carriers and providers that offer or provide any telecommunications service for a fee directly to the public, either within the City, outside the corporate limits from telecommunications facilities located within the City, or whose facilities traverse through the City, shall obtain a City business license pursuant to Chapter 12.16 CMC.

52.40.030 Telecommunications license.
A. Telecommunications License. A telecommunications license shall be required of any telecommunications carrier desiring to occupy specific public ways of the City for the purpose of providing telecommunications services to persons or areas outside the City.

B. License Application. Any person that desires a telecommunications license pursuant to this section shall file an application with the City Engineer which shall include the following information:

1. The identity of the license applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant.

2. A detailed description of the telecommunications services that are or will be offered or provided by licensee over its telecommunications facilities.

3. A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the licensee to offer or provide such telecommunications services.

4. Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the facilities to be located within the City, all in sufficient detail to identify:

a. The location and route requested for applicant’s proposed telecommunications facilities.

b. The location of all overhead and underground public utility, telecommunication, cable, water, sewer drainage and other facilities in the public way along the proposed route.

c. The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the telecommunications facilities of other telecommunications carriers.

d. The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities, and obstructions, if any, that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or relocate.

5. If applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence that surplus space is available for locating its telecommunications facilities on existing utility poles along the proposed route.

6. If applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing ducts or conduits within the public ways, information in sufficient detail to identify:

a. The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits before installation of applicant’s telecommunications facilities.

b. The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant’s telecommunications facilities.

7. If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts or conduits to be constructed within the public ways:

a. The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits.

b. The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant’s telecommunications facilities.

c. Location of any new aboveground service cabinets.

8. A preliminary construction schedule and completion date.

9. A preliminary traffic control plan in accordance with the Work Area Traffic Control Handbook (WATCH Manual).

10. Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles demonstrating the applicant’s financial ability to construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities.

11. Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant’s technical qualifications, experience, and expertise regarding the telecommunications facilities and services described in the application.

12. Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other governmental approvals, permits, and certificates to construct and operate the facilities and to offer or provide the telecommunications services.

13. An engineering plan showing the engineering design of the applicant’s telecommunications system within the entire County.

a. Whether the applicant intends to provide cable service, video dial tone service or other video programming service, and sufficient information to determine whether such services are subject to cable franchising.

b. An accurate map showing the location of any existing telecommunications system(s) in the City that applicant intends to use or lease.

c. A description of the telecommunications services or telecommunications facilities that the applicant will offer or make available to the City and other public, educational and governmental institutions.

d. A description of applicant’s access and line extension policies.

e. The area or areas of the City the applicant desires to serve and, if applicable, a schedule for build-out to the entire franchise area.

14. All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to CMC 52.40.060.

15. Such other and further information as may be required by the City.

C. Determination by the City. Within 120 days after receiving a complete application under subsection B of this section, the City shall issue a written determination granting or denying the application in whole or in part, applying the following standards:

1. The financial and technical ability of the applicant.

2. The applicant’s compliance with statutory and regulatory legal requirements.

3. The capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant’s proposed facilities.

4. The capacity of the public ways to accommodate additional utility and telecommunications facilities if the license is granted.

5. The amount of damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities, improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the license is granted.

6. The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of construction within the public ways.

7. The types of services that applicant will provide to the community and region.

8. The effect, if any, on public health, safety, and welfare if the license is granted.

9. The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed facilities.

10. Applicable Federal and State telecommunications laws, regulations, and policies.

11. Such other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use the public ways will serve the community interest.

D. Agreement. No license granted hereunder shall be effective until the applicant and the City have executed a written agreement setting forth the particular terms and provisions under which the license to occupy and use public ways of the City will be granted.

E. Nonexclusive Grant. No license granted under this chapter shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license, or franchise to occupy or use the public ways of the City for delivery of telecommunications services or any other purposes.

F. Rights Granted. No license granted under this chapter shall convey any right, title, or interest in the public ways, but shall be deemed a license only to use and occupy the public ways for the limited purposes and term stated in the license; further, no license shall be construed as any warranty of title.

G. Term of Grant. Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, a telecommunications license granted hereunder shall be in effect for a term of five years.

H. License Route. A telecommunications license granted under this chapter shall be limited to a grant of specific public ways and defined portions thereof.

I. Location of Facilities. Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, all facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with the following terms and conditions:

1. Telecommunications facilities shall be installed within an existing underground duct or conduit whenever sufficient excess capacity exists within such utility facility.

2. A licensee with permission to install overhead facilities shall install its telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing utility poles only, and then only if sufficient surplus space is available.

3. Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public way, a licensee with permission to occupy the same public way must also locate its telecommunications facilities underground.

4. Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within a public way, a grantee that currently occupies the same public way shall relocate its facilities underground within a reasonable period of time, which shall not be later than the end of the grant term. Absent extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as determined by the City Engineer, such relocation shall be made concurrently to minimize the disruption of the public ways.

5. Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the capacity of a public street or utility easement to reasonably accommodate future telecommunications carriers or facilities, the grantee shall provide additional ducts, conduits, manholes and other facilities for nondiscriminatory access to future telecommunications carriers.

6. Wireless telecommunication facilities to be installed on public property are subject to review by the Design Review Commission in accordance with Chapter 70.12 CMC.

J. Undergrounding and Mitigation of Visual Impacts.

1. Underground Facilities. In those areas of the City where utility service or communications facilities are presently located underground, telecommunications carrier agrees to place its telecommunications facilities underground. This requirement shall include telecommunications carrier’s performance of all necessary construction and backfilling of main line and service construction and furnishing any imported backfill material required, restoration of landscaping to its condition prior to construction and restoration of street and sidewalk pavement to then applicable City standards. Telecommunications carrier agrees to obtain and maintain photographs of the condition, prior to and after construction, of private and public property affected by underground construction.

2. Coordination with Other Utilities. Previously installed aerial cable shall be undergrounded in concert with utilities pursuant to the general ordinances of the City and applicable State law or on a voluntary basis by all utilities. This coordinated undergrounding shall be performed on a cost-sharing basis by telecommunications carrier and the public utilities involved.

3. Aboveground amplifiers, power supplies and pedestals shall be set back at least one foot from the sidewalk edge in order to avoid any hazard to the public and to minimize the possibility of damage to the amplifiers, power supplies and pedestals. Telecommunications carrier shall take necessary steps, at its expense, to reduce the visual impact of all aboveground equipment, such as installing landscaping and barriers as approved by the City. Telecommunications carrier shall be responsible for maintaining all aboveground components in good condition, free of graffiti and other markings, undamaged and concealed from the public and property owner’s view as long as the components remain. Telecommunications carrier assumes all responsibility for damage or injury resulting from placement or maintenance of any aboveground component.

4. Location of Pedestals.

a. Private Property Location. Telecommunications carrier shall locate its equipment underground within otherwise underground areas and within lawful utility easements. Telecommunications carrier shall resolve all conflicts with other utilities and private property owners prior to final design and construction.

b. Public Rights-of-Way Location. Telecommunications carrier shall locate its equipment within lawful utility easements at a location(s) to be prior approved by the City. If no utility easements exist, then telecommunications carrier shall negotiate with the City to establish one.

5. Private Land and Public Rights-of-Way.

a. Permits Required. Prior to the installation of equipment on private property, streets, public right-of-way or other public property, telecommunications carrier shall obtain necessary permits and approvals as specified herein.

b. Inspection. Telecommunications carrier shall not provide complete installation of any equipment without obtaining approval of all necessary inspections as determined by the City.

6. Design/Dimension of Above and Belowground-Mounted Equipment.

a. Belowground-mounted equipment: The equipment cover of a pull box shall be flush with the adjacent surface grade of the land.

b. Aboveground-mounted equipment: Equipment shall be mounted on concrete footings, or other mounting system approved by the City Engineer or Building Official. The footings must be adequate to assure that the equipment will remain in its original vertical alignment over time.

c. Miscellaneous:

i. All above and belowground-mounted equipment shall have the provider’s name and emergency telephone number permanently affixed or molded into the cover/door.

ii. All underground conduit/cable shall be installed to provide for continuous and sealed runs between pull boxes so as to preclude the ingress into the conduit/cable system of liquids and/or other foreign materials.

iii. The minimum depth of conduit/cable shall be 18 inches below grade.

iv. All installations shall comply with relevant provisions of the Uniform Electrical Code and the rules, regulations, standards and orders of the PUC.

7. Location and Setbacks of Equipment.

a. All aboveground equipment shall be located outside the sight distance triangle or line of sight.

b. All above and belowground equipment shall be located within a utility easement or public right-of-way as close to the side and front property lines as possible and positioned to ensure that the location of the equipment does not cause a safety hazard.

c. In instances where existing buildings or structures are set back from the streets and public right-of-way, all equipment shall be located adjacent to, or as close as possible to, fences/walls or garages.

d. As a goal, in instances where existing landscaping, paved areas, irrigation systems or other major obstacles exist, equipment should be located so as to minimize damage to the existing improvements.

e. No equipment shall be permitted in any location where it may create a safety hazard as determined by the City.

f. No equipment shall be located on the sidewalk or in driveways.

g. Where possible, equipment shall be placed so that normal maintenance does not interfere with traffic.

8. Security of Equipment. All equipment shall have some type of mechanism to secure the lid/door to the main body of the storage container to deter theft and vandalism.

9. Maintenance of Equipment.

a. All equipment installed prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be brought into conformance with all sections of this agreement at the time of replacement of the original equipment. The only exception is when equipment is replaced due to circumstances beyond the control of telecommunications carrier.

b. Telecommunications carrier shall repair any above or belowground-mounted equipment within five days of the initial report. Telecommunications carrier shall immediately respond to any report of a condition which may be construed as creating a hazard to the public. Any such hazardous condition must be rendered safe by the telecommunications carrier prior to the end of the work day in which the report was received.

10. Deviation Procedure for Nonconforming Situations.

a. In instances where telecommunications carrier cannot conform to any of the regulations of this chapter, telecommunications carrier may apply for a deviation.

b. A request for a deviation shall be submitted and approved prior to the submittal of any electrical, encroachment or miscellaneous permit for installation of any equipment.

c. The deviation will be reviewed and a determination made by the City Manager.

d. A deviation request shall be submitted by letter form to the City Manager and contain the following:

i. An exhibit showing the proposed location and type of equipment to be installed.

ii. The names and telephone numbers of any property owner, tenant or homeowners’ association that may be affected by the deviation request.

iii. Documentation that any property owner, tenant, or homeowners’ association that may be affected by the deviation request has been contacted and informed about the deviation request.

iv. A detailed explanation and justification for the proposed deviation request and references to the appropriate section(s) of this chapter from which relief is being requested.

e. A deviation shall be reviewed and a determination made based on the following findings:

i. That the proposed request is in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare.

ii. That the proposed request cannot conform to the regulations of this chapter due to extenuating circumstances beyond the control of telecommunications carrier, such as but not limited to: (A) existing location of utilities from another utility provider; or (B) existing conditions which prohibit installation (e.g., walls/fences or existing structures).

iii. That the proposed request does not cause the accumulation of equipment in close proximity.

f. The decision of the City Manager may be appealed to the City Council pursuant to subsection T of this section.

g. The timeframe to process and approve or disapprove a deviation request will be 30 working days.

11. Installation Measures. Telecommunications facilities shall be installed in accordance with the standard practice for the installation of telecommunications facilities by telecommunications carrier so as to minimize interference with the proper use of the streets and public right-of-way and with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners whose property adjoins any affected street and public right-of-way. Overhead drops shall be in accordance with normal practices to minimize visual clutter and interference with the use of private property by residents. Telecommunications carrier shall use only chalk-based paint of appropriate USA color to mark streets to avoid long-term visual impacts.

K. Facility Agreements. No franchise or license shall relieve the telecommunications carrier of any obligations involved in obtaining pole or conduit space from any department of City, any utility company, or from others maintaining utilities in City’s streets.

L. Erection of Poles Prohibited. The telecommunications carrier shall not erect any pole on or along any street or public way. If additional poles in an existing aerial route are required, the telecommunications carrier shall negotiate with the public utility for their installation. Any such installation shall require the advance written approval of the City.

M. Encroachment Permits. All licensees are required to obtain encroachment permits for telecommunications facilities as required in CMC 52.40.080; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall prohibit the City and a licensee from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and construction procedures in a license agreement, provided such alternative procedures provide substantially equivalent safeguards for responsible construction practices.

N. Compensation to City. Each license granted under this chapter is subject to the City’s right, which is expressly reserved, to annually fix a fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for the property rights granted to the licensee; provided, nothing in this section shall prohibit the City and a licensee from agreeing to the compensation to be paid.

O. Service to City Users. A licensee may be permitted to offer or provide telecommunications services to persons or areas within the City upon submitting an application for approval pursuant to CMC 52.40.040.

P. Amendment of Grant.

1. A new license application and grant shall be required of any telecommunications carrier that desires to extend, expand or locate its telecommunications facilities in public ways of the City which are not included in a license previously granted under this chapter.

2. If ordered by the City to locate or relocate its telecommunications system in streets and public rights-of-way not included in a previously granted license, the City shall grant a license amendment to facilitate the location or relocation without further application.

Q. Renewal Applications. A grantee that desires to renew its license under this chapter shall, not more than 180 days nor less than 90 days before expiration of the current license, file an application with the City for renewal of its license which shall include the following information:

1. The information required pursuant to subsection B of this section.

2. Any information required pursuant to the license agreement between the City and the grantee.

R. Renewal Determination. Within 90 days after receiving a complete application under subsection P of this section, the City Engineer shall issue a written determination granting or denying the renewal application in whole or in part, applying the standards set forth in subsection C of this section.

S. Obligation to Cure as a Condition of Renewal. No license shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the licensee’s performance of the license agreement, or of the requirements of this title, have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the grantee has been approved by the City.

T. Appeals. An applicant may appeal the denial of a license or a condition imposed in a license to the City Council. Such appeal shall be filed in writing with the City Clerk by 5:00 p.m. on the tenth business day following the date of mailing of the City’s written decision that is being appealed. The appeal shall be accompanied by a fee as established from time to time by resolution of the City Council. The City Council shall schedule a hearing on the appeal within 30 days of the filing of the appeal. The City Council’s decision on the appeal shall be final.

52.40.040 Telecommunications franchise.
A. Telecommunications Franchise. A telecommunications franchise shall be required of any telecommunications carrier desiring to occupy public ways of the City and to provide telecommunications services to any person or area in the City.

B. Franchise Applications. Any person desiring a telecommunications franchise pursuant to this chapter shall file an application with City Engineer which shall include items set forth in CMC 52.40.030(B).

C. Determination by the City. Within 120 days after receiving a complete application under subsection B of this section, the City shall issue a written determination granting or denying the application in whole or in part in accordance with the standards set forth in CMC 52.40.030(B).

D. Agreement. No franchise shall be granted hereunder unless the applicant and the City have executed a written franchise agreement setting forth the particular terms and provisions under which the franchise will occupy and use public ways of the City will be granted.

E. Nonexclusive Grant. No franchise granted under this chapter shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public ways of the City for delivery of telecommunications services or any other purposes.

F. Term of Grant. Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a telecommunications franchise granted hereunder shall be valid for a term of 10 years.

G. Rights Granted. No franchise granted under this chapter shall convey any right, title or interest in the public ways, but shall be deemed a franchise only to use and occupy the public ways for the limited purposes and term stated in the grant. Further, no franchise shall be construed as any warranty of title.

H. Franchise Territory. A telecommunications franchise granted under this chapter shall be limited to the specific geographic area of the City to be served by the franchise grantee, and the specific public ways necessary to serve such areas.

I. Location of Facilities. Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, all facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with the terms set forth in CMC 52.40.030(I).

J. Encroachment Permits. All franchisees are required to obtain encroachment permits for telecommunications facilities as required in CMC 52.40.080; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the City and a franchisee from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and construction procedures in a franchise agreement, provided such alternative procedures provide substantially equivalent safeguards for responsible construction practices.

K. Compensation to City. Each franchise granted under this section is subject to the City’s right, which is expressly reserved, to annually fix a fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for the property rights granted to the franchisee; provided, nothing in this section shall prohibit the City and a franchisee from agreeing to the compensation to be paid.

L. Nondiscrimination. A franchisee shall make its telecommunications services available to any customer within its franchise area who shall request such service, without discrimination as to the terms, conditions, rates or charges for grantee’s services; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a franchisee from making any reasonable classifications among differently situated customers.

M. Service to the City. A franchisee shall make its telecommunications services available to the City at its most favorable rate for similarly situated users, unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement.

N. Amendment of Grant.

1. A new franchise application and grant shall be required of any telecommunications carrier that desires to extend its franchise territory or to locate its telecommunications facilities in public ways of the City which are not included in a franchise previously granted under this chapter.

2. If ordered by the City to locate or relocate its facilities in streets and public rights-of-way not included in a previously granted franchise, the City shall grant a franchise amendment without further application.

O. Renewal Applications. A grantee that desires to renew its franchise under this chapter shall, not more than 240 days nor less than 120 days before expiration of the current franchise, file an application with the City for renewal of its franchise which shall include the following information:

1. The information required pursuant to CMC 52.40.030(B).

2. Any information required pursuant to the franchise agreement between the City and the grantee.

P. Renewal Determination. Within 90 days after receiving a complete application under subsection N of this section, the City Engineer shall issue a written determination granting or denying the renewal application in whole or in part, applying the standards set forth in CMC 52.40.030(C).

Q. Obligation to Cure as a Condition of Renewal. No franchise shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the grantee’s performance of the franchise agreement, or of the requirements of this chapter, have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the grantee has been approved by the City.

R. Appeals. An applicant may appeal the denial of a franchise or a condition imposed in a franchise to the City Council. Such appeal shall be filed in writing with the City Clerk by 5:00 p.m. on the tenth business day following the date of mailing of the City’s written decision that is being appealed. The appeal shall be accompanied by a fee as established from time to time by resolution of the City Council. The City Council shall schedule a hearing on the appeal within 30 days of the filing of the appeal. The City Council’s decision on the appeal shall be final.

52.40.050 Cable franchise.
Community antenna television (CATV) franchise shall be in accordance with Chapter 20.90 CMC.

52.40.060 Fees and compensation.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide for the payment and recovery of all direct and indirect, current and ongoing costs and expenses of the City related to the enforcement and administration of this chapter.

1. A telecommunications carrier shall obtain, at its own expense, all permits and licenses required by local law, rule, regulation or ordinance, and maintain the same, in full force and effect, for as long as required by the City.

2. As a condition of obtaining all necessary permits and licenses, the telecommunications carrier shall pay all applicable fees and, in addition, all of the City’s direct labor and supervisory costs, including customary and reasonable overhead (the “labor payment”). The City Council, may, from time to time by resolution, establish the amount of said fees. To the extent not inconsistent with applicable law, the fees shall be sufficient to reimburse the City for its costs, including the costs of staff, independent consultants, and related overhead, to review the proposed project, processing permits, plan check, inspecting the project including the costs of an outside inspector and, where applicable, the costs of an outside soils engineer or compaction testing expert, and the costs of any required testing to ensure that the construction adheres to standards of this chapter, any franchise agreement, any license, any permit, and any other requirement of the City.

3. Both telecommunications carrier and City may hire contractors, at telecommunications carrier’s sole expense, to carry out any work under this agreement. Telecommunications carrier shall make payment within 10 days of billing from the City. Telecommunications carrier shall be responsible for any damage caused by the construction including, but not limited to, damage to the public right-of-way, private property, streets, existing utilities, curbs, gutters and sidewalks. Telecommunications carrier shall pay the City any costs incurred as a result of such damages including repairs made by the City except for costs incurred as a result of the City’s negligence or its employees’ and agents’ negligence. Telecommunications carrier shall complete restoration of, or repairs to, any damage caused by the construction within 10 days from the date of written notice from the City.

4. In lieu of the inspection portion of the labor payment or permit fees described in subsection (A)(2) of this section, at the City’s sole option, the City may require telecommunications carrier, at telecommunications carrier’s sole expense, to hire a consultant (“consultant”), who is acceptable to and under the supervision of the City, to inspect the installation of the telecommunications facilities on behalf of the City, or provide other services as mutually agreed to by the parties.

B. Application and Review. Any applicant for a license or franchise pursuant to CMC 52.40.030 and 52.40.040 shall pay a nonrefundable application and review fee of $1,000.

C. Construction Inspection Fee. In addition to other costs and fees, all license or franchise grantees shall pay a construction inspection fee in accordance with the schedule established from time to time by resolution of the City Council and available in the Engineering and Project Development Department.

D. Other City Costs. All license or franchise grantees shall, within 30 days after written demand therefor, reimburse the City for all direct and indirect costs and expenses incurred by the City in connection with any modification, amendment, renewal or transfer of the license or franchise or any license or franchise agreement.

E. Roadway Degradation Mitigation Fee. All license or franchise grantees shall pay a roadway degradation mitigation fee in accordance with the schedule established from time to time by resolution of the City Council and available in the Engineering and Project Development Department.

F. Annual Franchise Fees. Unless otherwise agreed in a franchise grant agreement, each franchise grantee shall pay an annual fee to the City equal to five percent of gross annual revenue from operations in or through Coronado.

G. Annual License Fees. Unless otherwise agreed in a license grant agreement, each license grantee shall pay an annual fee to the City at a rate determined from time to time by resolution of the City Council.

H. Payment of Franchise Fees or License Fees.

1. A telecommunications carrier shall file with the City, within 45 days after the expiration of each of its fiscal quarters, a detailed revenue report clearly showing the franchise fee or license fee due for the preceding quarter together with the bases of the calculations thereof. Such statement shall be certified by a certified public accountant or officer of a telecommunications carrier attesting to the accuracy, completeness and veracity of the revenue figures. Such statement shall be in the form and format determined by the City and shall include revenue from whatever source, directly or indirectly derived from, or allowed, or caused to be derived from or applicable to the operation of the telecommunications system, or the provision of any service by or using the telecommunications system. Revenue will be reported by service category, type and level showing computations and using incremental billing rates for all sources, levels, tiers, clusters, types of service and other revenue sources by kind and type.

2. The telecommunications carrier shall pay quarterly 25 percent of the franchise or license fee. Payment of this quarterly portion of the franchise fee shall be rendered to the City at the time the revenue report is filed.

3. In the event that payment is not made by the due date then such telecommunications carrier may be declared in default of the franchise or license, and should the amount owed remain unpaid for an additional 60 days, then the franchise or license may be revoked, terminated or canceled as noted elsewhere in this chapter.

4. In the event a payment is not received on or before the due date herein provided, carrier shall pay to the City a late charge on the unpaid rent or portion thereof at the rate of 10 percent per month or portion thereof. Should there be an extenuating circumstance for not making the payment on or before the due date, upon written request, the City may, in its sole discretion, waive the late charge on the unpaid rent.

5. The City reserves the right to audit a franchised telecommunications carrier’s books, if the City deems it necessary. If such audit discovers an underpayment of franchise fees or license fee in an amount greater than one percent of the total franchise fee, then the affected telecommunications carrier shall reimburse the City for the cost of such audit.

6. If an audit, or other research, discovers that franchise fee or license fee have been either underpaid or not paid for a period exceeding six months from the original due date, then the City may seek full recovery of the underpaid or nonpaid fees, plus interest, not to exceed 10 percent in the case of underpaid fees and 15 percent in the case of unpaid fees per year or the maximum allowable under State law.

7. All annual reports due and pertaining to the payment of franchise fees or license fees will be certified by an officer of the telecommunications carrier, and will be provided in the form, format and detail applicable to quarterly reports under subsection (H)(1) of this section. Such telecommunications carrier shall maintain records used in the preparation of said reports, to be produced in their originality and totality upon request or demand by the City.

8. No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as a release of, or an accord, or satisfaction of, any claim that the City might have for further or additional sums payable under the terms of this chapter, or for any other performance or obligation of a telecommunications carrier hereunder.

9. Payments of compensation made by a telecommunications carrier to the City shall be considered in addition to, and exclusive of, any and all authorized taxes, permit fees, business license fees, other fees, other levies or assessments presently in effect, or subsequently adopted.

10. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the City to impose a fee or other assessment of any kind, on any person (other than a franchised or licensed telecommunications carrier) with respect to telecommunications service by such person over a telecommunications system for which charges are assessed to subscribers but not received by a franchised or licensed telecommunications carrier. For purposes of illustration only, this subsection shall include the situation(s) where a premium service directly bills a subscriber, or the franchised or licensed telecommunications carrier acts as collection agent for a premium service billing directly to a subscriber, or where a person leases a channel for commercial use and sells advertising or goods on that channel, and receives the money directly or through a third party.

I. Cable Fees. Cable television franchisees shall be subject to the franchise fees, payments and costs provided in Chapter 20.90 CMC.

J. Regulatory Fees and Compensation Not a Tax. The regulatory fees and costs provided for in this chapter, and any compensation charged and paid for the public ways provided for in this section, are separate from, and additional to, any and all Federal, State, and local taxes as may be levied, imposed or due from a telecommunications carrier or provider, its customers or subscribers, or on account of the lease, sale, delivery or transmission of telecommunications services.

52.40.070 Conditions of grant.
A. Extent of Grant of Franchise or License.

1. Upon an award of a franchise or license, a telecommunications carrier may construct, erect, install, maintain, operate, repair, replace, remove or restore a telecommunications system within the geographical limits set forth in the franchise agreement or license.

2. The telecommunications system may be located in, upon, along, across, over and under the streets, public rights-of-way, easements, and public property of the City.

3. A telecommunications carrier shall be responsible for obtaining any required easements or licenses for private property (including privately owned utility or street light poles).

4. A telecommunications carrier, through a separate pole or utility easement agreement with an affected utility, may locate the telecommunications system on, or within, the property of such utility company upon receipt of a franchise or license.

B. Term of Franchise. The term of an initial or renewal franchise shall be as specified therein and shall not exceed 10 years from the date that a franchise is approved by the City Council and executed by both the City and the affected telecommunications carrier.

C. Location of Facilities. All facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with the terms and conditions set forth in CMC 52.40.030(I) and (J), unless otherwise specified in a license or franchise agreement.

D. Reservation of Street Rights. Nothing in a franchise or license shall prevent the City from constructing, repairing, or altering any public work. All such work shall be done, insofar as practicable, in such manner as not to unnecessarily obstruct, injure or prevent the free use and operation of any property of the telecommunications carrier. However, if any property of the telecommunications carrier shall interfere with the construction, maintenance, or repair of any public improvement, that property shall be removed or replaced in such manner as directed by City so that the same shall not interfere with the public work, and such removal or replacement shall be at the expense of the telecommunications carrier.

E. Use of Public Property. From and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install, or maintain in any street, public right-of-way, public place within City’s territory, or upon any easement owned or controlled by a public utility, or within any other public property of City, or within any privately owned area within City’s jurisdiction which is not yet, but is designated as, a proposed public place on a tentative subdivision map approved by City, any equipment, telecommunications facilities, or system for distributing signals or services through a telecommunications system unless a franchise or license has first been obtained hereunder and is in full force and effect.

F. Compliance with USA. All license or franchise grantees shall, before commencing any construction in the public ways, comply with all regulations of the Underground Service Alert (USA).

G. Encroachment Permits. All license or franchise grantees are required to obtain encroachment permits for telecommunications facilities as required in CMC 52.40.080.

H. Interference with the Public Ways. No license or franchise grantee may locate or maintain its telecommunications facilities so as to unreasonably interfere with the use of the public ways by the City, by the general public or by other persons authorized to use or be present in or upon the public ways. All such facilities shall be moved by the grantee, temporarily or permanently, as determined by the City Engineer at no cost to the City.

I. Damage to Property. No license or franchise grantee nor any person acting on a grantee’s behalf shall take any action or permit any action to be done which may impair or damage any City property, public ways of the City, other ways or other property located in, on or adjacent thereto.

J. Notice of Work. Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, no license or franchise grantee, nor any person acting on the grantee’s behalf, shall commence any nonemergency work in or about the public ways of the City or other ways without 10 working days’ advance notice to the City.

K. Emergency Repair Capability. It shall be the telecommunications carrier’s responsibility to assure that its qualified repair personnel are available at all reasonable times and that they are supplied with keys, equipment location instructions, and technical information necessary to begin repairs upon notification of the need to maintain or restore continuous service to the telecommunications system.

L. Repair and Emergency Work. In the event of an unexpected repair or emergency, a grantee may commence such repair and emergency response work as required under the circumstances, provided the grantee shall notify the City as promptly as possible, before such repair or emergency work or as soon thereafter as possible if advance notice is not practicable.

M. Maintenance of Facilities. Each license or franchise grantee shall maintain its facilities in good and safe condition and in a manner that complies with all applicable Federal, State and local requirements.

N. Technical and Performance Standards. It shall be the responsibility of any telecommunications carrier to comply with the most current FCC, PUC, Federal, and State technical standards.

O. Reservation of Right to Inspect Construction, Documents Related to Construction, and Tests Related to Performance, Technical Integrity and Quality of Signal, Preventive Maintenance and Safety. In order to verify that a telecommunications carrier has constructed and maintained the telecommunications system in the manner required by this chapter, and conducted the various performance, technical integrity, preventive maintenance and safety tests required by Federal, State and local laws, the City reserves the right to inspect, at the expense of the telecommunications carrier, all facets of a telecommunications carrier’s construction, as well as to inspect documents related to construction, and inspect test results related to performance, technical integrity, preventive maintenance and safety.

P. Relocation or Removal of Facilities. Within 30 days following written notice from the City a license or franchise grantee shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any telecommunication facilities within the public ways whenever the City shall have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for:

1. The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any City or other public improvement in or upon the public ways.

2. The operations of the City or other governmental entity in or upon the public ways.

Q. Removal of Unauthorized Facilities. Within 30 days following written notice from the City, any grantee, telecommunications carrier, or other person that owns, controls or maintains any unauthorized telecommunications system, facility or related appurtenances within the public ways of the City shall, at its own expense, remove such facilities or appurtenances from the public ways of the City. A telecommunications system or facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:

1. Upon expiration or termination of a grantee’s telecommunications license or franchise.

2. Upon abandonment of a facility within the public ways of the City.

3. If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a telecommunications license or franchise.

4. If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the prior issuance of a required encroachment permit.

5. If the system or facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the grantee’s telecommunications license or franchise.

R. Emergency Removal or Relocation of Facilities. The City retains the right and privilege to cut or move any telecommunications facilities located within the public ways of the City, as the City may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency.

S. Damage to Grantee’s Facilities. Unless directly and proximately caused by the willful, intentional or malicious acts by the City, the City shall not be liable for any damage to or loss of any telecommunications facility within the public ways of the City as a result of or in connection with any public works, public improvements, construction, excavation, grading, filling or work of any kind in the public ways by or on behalf of the City.

T. Vacation or Abandonment. In the event any street, alley, public highway, or portion thereof used by the telecommunications carrier shall be vacated by the City, or the use thereof discontinued by the telecommunications carrier, upon reasonable notice the telecommunications carrier shall forthwith remove its facilities therefrom unless specifically permitted to continue the same. On the removal thereof, the telecommunications carrier shall restore, repair or reconstruct the area where such removal has occurred, to such condition as may be required by the City, but not in excess of the original condition. In the event of any failure, neglect or refusal of the telecommunications carrier, after 30 days’ notice by the City, to do such work, City may cause it to be done, and the telecommunications carrier shall, within 30 days of billing, pay to City the actual costs incurred.

U. Abandonment in Place. City may, upon written application by the telecommunications carrier, approve the abandonment of any property in place by the telecommunications carrier under such terms and conditions as City may approve. Upon City approved abandonment of any property in place, the telecommunications carrier shall cause to be executed, acknowledged, and delivered to City such instruments as City shall prescribe and approve transferring and conveying the ownership of such property to City.

V. Restoration of Public Ways, Other Ways and City Property.

1. When a license or franchise grantee, or any person acting on its behalf, does any work in or affecting any public ways, other ways or City property, it shall, at its own expense, promptly remove any obstructions therefrom and restore such ways or property to as good a conditions as existed before the work was undertaken, unless otherwise directed by the City. Any damages not repaired or restored by the grantee, or any person acting on its behalf, will be assessed to the grantee.

2. If weather or other conditions do not permit the complete restoration required by this section, the grantee shall temporarily restore the affected ways or property. Such temporary restoration shall be at the grantee’s sole expense and the grantee shall promptly undertake and complete the required permanent restoration when the weather or other conditions no longer prevent such permanent restoration.

3. A grantee or other person acting in its behalf shall use suitable barricades, flags, flagmen, lights, flares and other measures required for the safety of all members of the general public and to prevent injury or damage to any person, vehicle or property by reason of such work in or affecting such ways or property.

W. Facilities Maps. Each license or franchise grantee shall provide the City with an accurate map or maps certifying the location of all telecommunications facilities within the public ways. Each grantee shall provide updated maps annually. Maps shall be in format acceptable to the City.

X. Retention and Submission of Reports and Records.

1. A telecommunications carrier shall maintain and retain such records and reports reasonably necessary for the City to determine compliance with the obligations imposed on it by this chapter.

2. Upon request, a telecommunications carrier shall submit to the City a list of files, reports, records, data or other information that the telecommunications carrier periodically, customarily, and/or regularly files with the FCC, or another Federal or State agency. For any other filing that a telecommunications carrier files with another Federal or State agency (and that has a direct impact on the operation of the telecommunications system), then the telecommunications carrier shall notify the City of such filing within 60 days of said filing. Said notice shall inform the City of the nature and scope of the filing, as well as the recipient (name, address, department, division, and phone number) of the filing. For any matter related to the administration and enforcement of a franchise or license, the City may specifically request that it be provided with any, or all listed reports, records, data, or other information that were filed with the FCC, the Securities and Exchange Commission, or another Federal or State agency.

Y. Inspection and Review of Books, Records and Other Data.

1. A telecommunications carrier shall keep complete and accurate books of accounts, and records of the business and operations under, and in connection with, the telecommunications system.

2. The City shall have the right to review (either by mail or at the telecommunications carrier’s local office) all records needed for the administration and enforcement of this chapter and/or franchise agreement or license upon receipt of seven days’ written request. Such review shall occur within the telecommunications carrier’s regular office hours unless a different time is otherwise mutually agreed upon or administratively or judicially ordered.

3. The City shall have the right to hire, at its own expense, an independent certified public accountant, or other business or financial expert, to review the books and records of a telecommunications carrier. If after a financial audit it is determined that the telecommunications carrier has underpaid amounts owed to the City by an amount exceeding one percent of what was actually paid, then the City may require the telecommunications carrier to reimburse the City for the actual cost of the audit.

4. A false entry into the books and/or records of a telecommunications carrier, made by a telecommunications carrier, of a material fact shall constitute a material violation of this chapter.

5. A telecommunications carrier shall provide to the City upon its request complete and accurate books and records of the key aspects of the telecommunications system’s operation for at least the preceding three years in such a manner that all matters pertaining to the City can be easily produced and/or verified at the request of the City. Also, the telecommunications carrier shall provide upon request any other applicable records and information that may be required by any other Federal or State agency having jurisdiction over one or more classes of telecommunications carrier.

Z. Availability of Technical Data.

1. All technical data shall be available for City’s inspection during normal business hours and upon reasonable notice. In the event of system failure or other operating emergency, the technical data will be made available at any time, so long as the provision of said data does not unreasonably interfere with the telecommunications carrier’s operations.

2. Technical data includes, but is not limited to, all information pertaining to the carrier’s operation of the telecommunications equipment and provision of telecommunications services in the City of Coronado. It includes proprietary information to the extent that the information is used in the telecommunications operation in the City. It excludes personnel data and financial data unrelated to the operations within the City. The City shall not release any proprietary information without the written consent of the carrier.

AA. Leased Capacity. A license or franchise grantee shall have the right, without prior City approval, to offer or provide capacity or bandwidth to its customers; provided:

1. Grantee shall furnish the City with a copy of any such lease or agreement.

2. The customer or lessee has complied, to the extent applicable, with the requirements of this chapter.

BB. Liability Insurance.

1. Except as provided in or as supplemented by any franchise agreement or license, a telecommunications carrier shall secure and maintain public liability, property damage insurance, and umbrella coverage in at least the following amounts:

a. Public liability: $2,000,000 per person/per occurrence;

b. Property damage: $2,000,000 per any one claim;

c. Umbrella liability: $5,000,000.

2. The public and personal liability and property damage insurance policy shall specifically include the City, its employees, agents, and members of the City Council as additional insureds.

3. The public and personal liability and property damage insurance policies shall be issued by an agent or representative of an insurance company licensed to do business in the State and which has one of the three highest or best ratings from the Alfred M. Best Company.

4. The public liability and property damage insurance policies shall contain an endorsement obligating the insurance company to furnish the City with at least 30 days’ written notice in advance of the cancellation of the policy.

5. Renewal or replacement policies or certificates shall be delivered to the City at least 15 days before the expiration of the insurance which such policies are to renew or be replaced.

6. Before a telecommunications system provides telecommunications service to subscribers, the telecommunications carrier shall deliver the policies or certificates representing the insurance to the City as required herein.

7. Worker’s compensation within statutory limits and employer’s liability insurance with limits of not less than $1,000,000.

8. The liability insurance policies required by this section shall be maintained by the grantee throughout the term of the telecommunications license or franchise. The policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until 90 days after receipt by the City, by registered mail, of a written notice addressed to the City Engineer of such intent to cancel or not to renew. Within 60 days after receipt by the City of said notice, the grantee shall obtain and furnish to the City replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section.

9. Grantee shall provide the City with evidence of insurance for each of the coverage’s described above at least 10 days prior to construction and/or occupancy of any site subject to this chapter.

CC. General Indemnification. Except as provided in or as supplemented by any franchise agreement or license, and to the maximum extent permitted by applicable law, a telecommunications carrier shall at all times defend, indemnify, protect and save harmless and exempt the City, members of the City Council and the City’s officers, employees, agents, servants, attorneys and representatives from and against any and all penalty, damages, charges, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or as a result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the grantee or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the location, construction, operation, performance, maintenance, repair or removal, replacement, or restoration of its telecommunications system within the City based upon any act or omission of a telecommunications carrier, its agents or employees, contractors, subcontractors, independent contractors, or representatives, or in providing or offering telecommunications services over the facilities or network, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this title or by a grant agreement made or entered into pursuant to this title. With respect to the penalties, damages or charges referenced herein, reasonable attorneys’ fees, consultants’ fees, and expert witness fees are included as those costs which shall be recovered by the City.

DD. Security.

1. Within 30 days after the effective date of any franchise or license, the telecommunications carrier shall deposit into a bank account established by the telecommunications carrier for the benefit of City, and shall maintain on deposit through the term of any franchise or license, a sum specified in the franchise agreement or license as security for the faithful performance by the telecommunications carrier of all of the provisions of the franchise agreement or license, this chapter, and with all orders, permits and directions of the City or any designated representative of the City having jurisdiction over the telecommunications carrier’s acts or defaults under the franchise or license or this chapter, and as security for the payment by the telecommunications carrier of all claims, fees, liens, or taxes due the City which arise by reason of the construction, operation or maintenance of the telecommunications system pursuant to any franchise agreement or license or this chapter, and to satisfy any actual or liquidated damages arising out of a franchise or license breach.

2. Except as otherwise provided in any franchise or license, if the telecommunications carrier fails, after 20 days’ written notice, to pay to the City any fees that are due and unpaid, or fails to repay within such 20 days any damages, costs or expenses which the City is compelled to pay by reason of any act or default of the telecommunications carrier in connection with its franchise or license, or if the telecommunications carrier fails to comply with any provision of the franchise or license or this chapter and the City determines that such failure was without just cause and, if the City reasonably determines it can be remedied by a withdrawal from the security fund or is nevertheless subject to liquidated damages, then, in any such event, the City may immediately withdraw the amount thereof from the security fund, with interest and any liquidated damages. Upon such withdrawal, the City shall notify the telecommunications carrier of the amount and the date of withdrawal.

3. Within 30 days after notice to the telecommunications carrier that any amount has been withdrawn by City from the security fund, the telecommunications carrier shall deposit a sum of money sufficient to restore such security fund to the original amount.

4. The telecommunications carrier shall be entitled to the return of the security fund, or portion thereof, with interest, that remains on deposit at the expiration or termination of the franchise or license once all amounts due to the City have been paid.

5. The rights reserved to the City with respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the City, and no action, proceeding, or exercise of a right with respect to such security fund shall affect any other right the City may have.

EE. Construction and Completion Bond.

1. Performance Bond. Prior to the issuance of any permit for construction, the grantee shall provide the City with a financial deposit guaranteeing the completion of the work in accordance with the requirements of the permit. Such faithful performance bond shall be a cash deposit, or as alternatives, a surety bond, letter of credit or deposit agreement approved as to form by the City Attorney. A surety bond may be for the specific project or an annual and continuing bond filed with the City and covering the cost of several projects. The grantee may use an annual and continuing bond for more than one permit, providing the aggregate bonded amount of the permits outstanding does not exceed the total amount of the bond.

a. The amount of the performance bond shall be 100 percent of the estimated cost of the work to be performed as approved by the City Engineer.

b. In the event the permittee fails to complete the work covered by the permit, the City Engineer may cause the work to be done and the faithful performance bond described herein shall be used to pay the costs involved. Any portion of a deposit made to the City to cover the cost of such work which is not used to complete the project shall be returned to the grantee.

2. Payment Bond. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the grantee shall provide the City with a financial deposit to satisfy claims of material suppliers and of mechanics and laborers employed by the grantee on the project. Such payment bond shall be a cash deposit, or as alternatives, a surety bond, letter of credit or deposit agreement approved as to form by the City Attorney. A surety bond may be for the specific project or an annual and continuing bond filed with the City and covering the cost of several projects. The grantee may use an annual and continuing bond for more than one permit, providing the aggregate bonded amount of the permits outstanding does not exceed the total amount of the bond.

a. The amount of the payment bond shall be 50 percent of the estimated cost of the work to be performed as approved by the City Engineer.

b. In the event the grantee fails to pay any material supplier or mechanic or laborer employed by the grantee on the project, the City shall, after having received proper and legal notice of such nonpayment, use the payment bond described herein to make such payments as are required by law.

3. Letter of Credit.

a. At the option of the City, the telecommunications carrier may be required, in lieu of creating a security fund and/or posting a faithful performance bond, to post an irrevocable letter of credit, issued by a bank approved by the City, in the amount specified in the franchise agreement or license. Said letter of credit shall incorporate wording approved by the City enabling it to draw from time to time such funds as the City may determine to be necessary to satisfy any material defaults of the telecommunications carrier or to make any payments due City under or in connection with this chapter or the franchise agreement or license, upon 10 days’ written notice to the issuer of the letter of credit. Said letter of credit shall further provide for 60 days’ written notice by certified mail from its issuer to City of any pending expiration or cancellation, and said notice shall without further cause constitute reason for the City to draw the full sum to be held in its own accounts until such letter of credit is re-established in a form satisfactory to City.

b. If City requires such a letter of credit, the telecommunications carrier shall pay all fees or other charges required to keep it in force and shall, within 30 days of any draw by City, restore its face value to the original amount.

c. All provisions herein applicable to faithful performance bonds or security funds shall also apply to letters of credit.

FF. Coordination of Construction Activities. In order to establish minimum uniform standards for all users of streets, public rights-of-way, and public property, any telecommunications carrier shall adhere to the following minimal construction schedule and construction-related requirements:

1. By February 1st of each year, grantees shall provide the City with a schedule of their proposed construction activities in, around, or that may affect the public ways.

2. Each grantee shall meet with the City, other grantees and users of the public ways annually or as determined by the City to schedule and coordinate construction in the public ways. To the extent permitted by codes and regulations, grantees shall use joint poles, conduits, trenches, crossings, etc., to minimize disruption to the public ways.

3. All construction locations, activities and schedules shall be coordinated, as ordered by the City Engineer, to minimize public inconvenience, disruption or damages.

4. The grantee shall belong to the Underground Service Alert (USA) and provide field mark-outs of facilities as required and adhere to the following construction standards:

a. Construct, install, maintain and repair the telecommunications system in accordance with this chapter, all Building Codes, the National Electrical Code as adopted by the City, San Diego Regional Standards (Coronado Annotations), Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, and all construction standards imposed by the FCC, the PUC, and any other governmental agency;

b. Use the streets and public rights-of-way as set forth in this chapter and any franchise agreement or license;

c. Remove telecommunications facilities as set forth in this chapter and any franchise agreement or license;

d. Adopt and implement construction standards as set forth in this chapter and any franchise agreement or license;

e. Pay all permit fees and inspection fees as set forth herein, in any franchise agreement or license, and in any other ordinance or resolution of the City;

f. Maintain all permits as otherwise required; and

g. Adhere to all standards and guidelines contained in the “San Diego Regional Standard Drawings and Specifications” which shall be adopted and amended from time to time by resolution of the City Council.

GG. Public Communication Plans.

1. Telecommunications carrier agrees to develop a public communication plan (“communication plan”) within 60 days prior to the commencement of construction and submit it to the City for the City’s review. The City shall approve or disapprove the communication plan within 10 business days of its receipt. The communication plan shall include the following:

a. A written notification of property owners adjacent to nodes and amplifiers not less than 45 days prior to the installation indicating the proposed location, a photograph of all aboveground pedestals and other visible equipment from which their size must be apparent, and a detailed description of the equipment included within the node including: the electronic components, natural gas generator, electrical fans, and the anticipated noise levels during winter and summer months and emergency backup operations. Telecommunications carrier will provide its nontoll telephone number and a telephone number of the City which may be called if the property owner is concerned about the installation.

b. A mailing to all residents in a construction area 30 days in advance of construction activity.

c. The hanging of door hangers on all residences seven days prior to immediate construction activity.

d. A second written notice to the adjacent property owner(s) not less than 15 days prior to installation of such node, amplifiers and taps which shall have the same information as set forth in subsection (GG)(1)(a) of this section as well as the actual date of the installation of such node, amplifiers and taps.

2. Telecommunications carrier must provide the homeowner with a written notice of their rights to refuse to have telecommunications carrier trench or dig up their yard without their written consent. At the bottom of the form it should have a statement that reads:

I am the owner of record of the property located at (blank to be filled in by property owner) in the City of Coronado.

o By signing this card, I authorize ________________ to trench in my yard to install telecommunication wiring and attach a box to the side of my house.

o By not signing this card, I refuse to allow ______________ to trench in my yard.

The homeowner may select a choice by placing an “x” in the appropriate box. If the homeowner does not sign the card, the telecommunications carrier is not authorized to trench on that individual’s private property.

3. Telecommunications carrier shall furnish the City with the specific proposed locations of any nodes, amplifiers and taps at least 60 days in advance of the installation of the nodes, amplifiers or taps. Telecommunications carrier agrees to participate in any public hearings or meetings scheduled by the City and will be prepared to answer questions concerning proposed construction of the telecommunications facilities or the telecommunications system. Telecommunications carrier shall have available at such meetings visual aids as appropriate such as slides, maps and diagrams. The proposed node, amplifier or tap locations in the City must be approved by the City prior to construction of the underground cable plant. Depending upon health and safety issues, and input from residents, the City, at its sole discretion, may require proposed node, amplifiers and taps sites be relocated by telecommunications carrier.

4. Telephone Contact. During construction, telecommunications carrier shall provide the City a 24-hour telephone contact number, and staff it during regular business hours, to enable the City to report any concerns regarding construction of the facilities. After business hours such calls will be routed to an on-call supervisor. In the event that the City reports any concerns to telecommunications carrier, telecommunications carrier shall respond in a timely manner. Telecommunications carrier shall correct within two business days any adverse impact to the City’s use or operations or the use or operations of a third party caused by telecommunications carrier construction activities in the streets and public right-of-way at no cost to the City.

HH. Assignment, Transfer, or Sale of Grant.

1. Control or controlling interest of a telecommunications system, license or franchise may not, directly or indirectly, be transferred, assigned or disposed of by sale, lease, merger, consolidation or other act of the grantee, by operation of law or otherwise, without the prior written consent of the City, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed, as expressed by ordinance and then only on such reasonable conditions as may be prescribed therein.

2. Any assignment or transfer, or any change in control, without the City’s prior written consent shall constitute a default which will cause a franchise or license to terminate.

3. No grant shall be assigned or transferred in any manner within 12 months after the initial grant of the license or franchise, unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement.

4. Absent extraordinary and unforeseeable circumstances, no grant, system or integral part of a system shall be assigned or transferred before construction of the telecommunications system has been completed.

5. At least 120 days before a proposed assignment or change in control of the franchise or license is scheduled to become effective, the telecommunications carrier shall request in writing the City’s consent. The telecommunications carrier shall submit to the City (concurrently with the submission of its written request):

a. Complete information setting forth the nature, terms and conditions of the proposed assignment, transfer or sale;

b. Any other information or documentation required by the State or Federal government;

c. The information referenced in this chapter;

d. Unedited and unreduced copies of the sale or transfer documents with all schedules and exhibits thereto;

e. Information regarding the financial ability and stability of the proposed assignee with respect to being able to perform all obligations of the existing franchise or license.

6. No transfer shall be approved unless the assignee or transferee has the legal, technical, financial and other requisite qualifications to own, hold and operate the telecommunications system pursuant to this title.

7. Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, the grantee shall reimburse the City for all direct and indirect fees, costs, and expenses reasonably incurred by the City in considering a request to transfer or assign a telecommunications license or franchise.

8. The City shall not unreasonably withhold its consent to such an assignment or change in control. However, in evaluating the request for assignment, transfer, sale, or change in control, the City may, in its sole discretion and among other things, undertake a technical inspection and audit of the telecommunications system to determine whether the telecommunications system complies with all applicable technical and safety codes, and with this chapter, the franchise, or license.

9. If the City determines (as a result of the technical inspection and audit) that the telecommunications system does not comply with Federal, State, or local standards, then the telecommunications carrier shall be provided with an opportunity to correct or cure the noncompliance. In the alternative and in the discretion of the City Council, the City may work with both the current and proposed telecommunications carrier to cure the noncompliance.

10. Before an assignment or change in control is approved by the City, the proposed assignee, transferee, or buyer shall execute an affidavit acknowledging that it has read, understood, and will abide by both this chapter and the applicable franchise or license.

11. In the event of any approved assignment or change in control, the assignee or transferee shall assume all obligations and liabilities of the former telecommunications carrier relating to the franchise or license unless specifically relieved by the City at the time the assignment or change in control is approved.

12. Reimbursement of Processing and Review Costs. The telecommunications carrier shall reimburse City for City’s reasonable processing and review expenses in connection with a transfer of the franchise or license or a change in control of the franchise or license, including, without limitation, costs of administrative review, financial, legal, and technical evaluation of the proposed transferee, costs of consultants (including technical and legal experts), notice and publication costs, and document preparation expenses. City may send the telecommunications carrier an itemized description of all such charges, and the telecommunications carrier shall pay such amount within 20 days after the receipt of such description.

13. Violation. If the telecommunications carrier violates any provision of this subsection, the franchise or license shall automatically terminate.

II. Possessory Interest. By accepting any franchise or license granted pursuant to this chapter, telecommunications carrier acknowledges that notice is and was hereby given to telecommunications carrier pursuant to California Revenue and Taxation Code Section 107.6 that use or occupancy of any public property taxes levied upon such interest. Telecommunications carrier shall be solely liable for, and shall pay and discharge prior to delinquency, any and all possessory interest taxes or other taxes levied against its right to possession, occupancy or use of any public property pursuant to any right of possession, occupancy or use created by any franchise or license.

JJ. Cost Sharing. Concurrent with telecommunications carrier’s installation of underground construction infrastructure on a given job, the City may elect to place its own conduit or cable in the trenches of the telecommunications carrier for the City’s own use at City’s sole expense. In order for the City to determine whether to have conduit placed in telecommunications carrier’s trench, telecommunications carrier must provide the City maps showing the location for all trenching. These maps are to be provided to the City 60 days in advance of any trenching activities. Telecommunications carrier shall impose no fee or charge upon City for placement of said conduit and/or cable in open trenches.

KK. Transactions Affecting Control of Grant. Any transactions which singularly or collectively result in a change of 10 percent or more of the ownership or working control of the grantee, of the ownership or working control of a telecommunications license or franchise, of the ownership or working control of affiliated entities having ownership or working control of the grantee or of a telecommunications system, or of control of the capacity or bandwidth of grantee’s telecommunication system, facilities or substantial parts thereof, shall be considered an assignment or transfer requiring City approval pursuant to subsection HH of this section. Transactions between affiliated entities are not exempt from City approval.

LL. Enforcement Mechanism.

1. Notice and Hearing for Franchise Default. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter or in the franchise agreement or license, prior to formal consideration by City of termination, revocation, or forfeiture of the telecommunications carrier’s franchise or license, or any other penalty or administrative remedy available to the City, including liquidated damages, attributable to the telecommunications carrier’s failure, willful, negligent, or otherwise, to adhere to the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement or license or this chapter, City shall make written demand on the telecommunications carrier to correct the alleged default. City and telecommunications carrier shall expeditiously meet to discuss the alleged default, at which time the telecommunications carrier shall indicate, in writing, the amount of time necessary to resolve the alleged problem. Giving due consideration to the telecommunications carrier’s request, City shall, in writing, state the amount of time City will allow the telecommunications carrier to resolve the problem. During this time period, but in no event less than 10 days before the final date for correction, the telecommunications carrier may request additional time to correct the problem, and City shall grant said request if City determines, in the exercise of its discretion, that such time is necessary due to delays beyond the telecommunications carrier’s control. If the default continues for a period of 10 days following the deadline for corrections, plus any extension thereof, a hearing shall be scheduled by City on such franchise termination, revocation, forfeiture, or any other penalty or administrative remedy.

The City Manager shall provide written notice of such hearing, including the grounds for the proposed action, to the telecommunications carrier no less than 30 days before the hearing on the matter. In addition, the City Manager, as part of said written notification, shall state the procedures to be followed by the City to determine whether cause for termination, revocation, forfeiture, or other penalty exists. At a minimum, said procedures shall afford the telecommunications carrier adequate notice and a fair opportunity for full participation, including the right to introduce evidence, to require the production of evidence, to question witnesses, and to obtain a transcript of the proceeding at the telecommunications carrier’s expense. Within 10 days after the receipt of said notice, the telecommunications carrier shall file any written objections to said procedures. The Administrative Officer shall notify the telecommunications carrier of any modification to the procedures and provide another 10-day objection period. Any objections not raised within said 10-day periods shall be deemed waived. At the hearing, City shall hear the telecommunications carrier, and any person interested in the matter, and shall determine, at that or subsequent meetings, an appropriate course of action for enforcement or termination of the telecommunications carrier’s franchise or license.

2. Revocation. Consistent with applicable law, and in addition to any rights set out elsewhere in this chapter, the City reserves the right to revoke a franchise or license, in the event that:

a. The telecommunications carrier willfully or negligently violates any material provision of its franchise or license.

b. The telecommunications carrier’s construction schedule, as set forth in this franchise or license, is materially delayed.

3. Forfeiture. Upon failure of the telecommunications carrier to comply with any material term of its franchise or license, the City declares a forfeiture. The telecommunications carrier may be required to remove its structures or property from the City’s streets and to restore those streets to their prior condition within a reasonable period of time. Upon failure to do so, the City may perform the work and collect all costs, including direct and indirect costs, from the telecommunications carrier. At City’s discretion, the cost thereof may be placed as a lien upon all plant, property, or other assets of the telecommunications carrier.

MM. Revocation or Termination of Grant. A license or franchise granted by the City to use or occupy public ways of the City may be revoked for the following reasons:

1. Construction or operation in the City or in the public ways of the City without a license or franchise grant of authorization.

2. Construction or operation at an unauthorized location.

3. Unauthorized substantial transfer of control of the grantee.

4. Unauthorized assignment of a license or franchise.

5. Unauthorized sale, assignment or transfer of grantee’s franchise or license assets, or a substantial interest therein.

6. Misrepresentation by or on behalf of a grantee in any application to the City.

7. Abandonment of telecommunications facilities in the public ways.

8. Failure to relocate or remove facilities as required in this chapter.

9. Failure to pay taxes, compensation, fees or costs when and as due the City.

10. Insolvency or bankruptcy of the grantee.

11. Violation of any material provision of this chapter.

12. Violation of the material terms of a license or franchise agreement.

NN. Notice and Duty to Cure. In the event that the City believes that grounds exist for revocation of a license or franchise, it shall issue the grantee written notice of the apparent violation or noncompliance, providing a short and concise statement of the nature and general facts of the violation or noncompliance, and providing the grantee a reasonable period of time not exceeding 30 days to furnish evidence:

1. That corrective action has been, or is being actively and expeditiously pursued to remedy the violation or noncompliance.

2. That rebuts the alleged violation or noncompliance.

3. That it would be in the public interest to impose some penalty or sanction less than revocation.

OO. Duty to Remove Telecommunications Facilities from Streets, Public Rights-of-Way, Easements and Public Property.

1. Whenever the following occurs:

a. A telecommunications carrier ceases to operate all, or part of the telecommunications system for a continuous period of six months;

b. A telecommunications carrier ceases and fails to complete construction of the telecommunications system outlined in the franchise agreement or license;

c. The City elects not to renew any franchise or license pursuant to the provisions set forth in this chapter; or

d. The telecommunications carrier’s franchise or license is revoked pursuant to the provisions set forth in this chapter; unless the City or another telecommunications carrier uses such telecommunications system in accordance with any temporary continuity of service provisions, the affected telecommunications carrier shall at its expense promptly remove its telecommunications system from the streets, public rights-of-way, and public property located within the City unless otherwise directed by the City.

2. If not removed voluntarily by a telecommunications carrier, then the City may notify such telecommunications carrier that should removal of the property not be accomplished within 270 days, or substantial progress towards removal not be made within 210 days, the City may direct its officials or representatives to remove such telecommunications system property at that telecommunications carrier’s expense. The faithful performance bond, letter of credit, or security fund required as set forth in this chapter shall be available to pay for such work.

3. If officials or representatives of the City remove a telecommunications system, and such telecommunications carrier does not claim the property within 120 days of its removal, then the City may take whatever steps are available under State law to declare the property surplus, and sell it, with the proceeds of such sale (if permitted by State law) going to the City.

4. When such telecommunications carrier removes its telecommunications system from the streets, public rights-of-way and public property located within the City, the telecommunications carrier shall at its own expense, and in a manner approved by the City, replace and restore such public property to a condition comparable to that which existed before the work causing the disturbance was done.

5. Removal of Deactivated Equipment. Telecommunications carriers shall maintain the deactivated telecommunications facilities at no cost the City until removed by the telecommunications carrier. The telecommunications carrier shall provide a written list to the City of all deactivated telecommunications facilities located within the City at quarterly intervals. The telecommunications carrier shall remove or disable nonuseful telecommunications facilities in accordance with its normal practice. However, aboveground level telecommunications facilities which are no longer used or useful shall be removed within the period specified by the City and may not be left in the public right-of-way without the permission of the City. The telecommunications carrier shall provide the City a list of the specific telecommunications facilities to be removed and their locations. The telecommunications carrier shall remove all these telecommunications facilities within 90 days after an underground system is activated.

PP. Hearing. In the event that a grantee fails to provide evidence reasonably satisfactory to the City Manager as provided in subsection NN of this section, the Manager shall refer the apparent violation or noncompliance to the City Council. The City Council shall provide the grantee with notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard concerning the matter.

QQ. Standards for Revocation or Lesser Sanctions. If persuaded that the grantee has violated or failed to comply with any provision of this title, or of a franchise or license agreement, the City Council shall determine whether to revoke the license or franchise, or to establish some lesser sanction and cure, considering the nature, circumstances, extent and gravity of the violation as reflected by one or more of the following factors:

1. Whether the misconduct was egregious.

2. Whether substantial harm resulted.

3. Whether the violation was intentional.

4. Whether there is a history of prior violations of the same or other requirements.

5. Whether there is a history of overall compliance.

6. Whether the violation was voluntarily disclosed, admitted or cured.

52.40.080 Construction standards.
A. General. No person shall commence or continue with the construction, installation, maintenance or operation of telecommunications facilities within the City except as provided in this section.

B. Construction Codes.

1. Telecommunications facilities shall be constructed, installed, operated and maintained in accordance with all applicable Federal, State and local codes, rules and regulations including but not limited to the Uniform Building Code, the National Electrical Code, the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction and the San Diego Regional Standard Drawings (Coronado’s Annotations).

2. All construction, installation, maintenance and repair shall treat the aesthetics of the property as a priority, shall not substantially affect the appearance or the integrity of the structure, and shall not be installed on the bias across the property or side of a residence or other structure without the property owner’s permission.

3. All underground drops shall follow (to the greatest extent possible) property lines, and cross property only at right angles unless otherwise permitted by the property owner, or required due to the physical characteristics of the subsurface, or required under applicable law. The City may, either by way of a generally applicable resolution or through the imposition of routing conditions in any franchise agreement or license or permit, determine the routing or placement of cable, conduit, nodes, pedestals, power supplies, vaults, and other equipment relating to the telecommunications system.

4. No encroachment permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of telecommunications facilities within the City unless the telecommunications carrier has filed a business license application with the City pursuant to CMC 52.40.020.

5. No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of telecommunications facilities in the public way unless the telecommunications carrier has applied for and received a license or franchise agreement pursuant to CMC 52.40.030 or 52.40.040.

6. The telecommunications carrier shall strictly adhere to all building and zoning codes currently or hereafter in force and shall obtain all necessary permits. The telecommunications carrier shall arrange its lines, cables, and other appurtenances, on both public and private property, in such a manner as to cause no unreasonable interference with the use of said property by any person. In the event of such interference, the City may require the removal of the telecommunications carrier’s lines, cables, and appurtenances from the property in question. The telecommunications carrier shall give at least 48 hours’ advance notice to all property owners and to the City prior to installing any aboveground or underground structures upon easements located on private property.

C. Application for Encroachment Permit. Applications for encroachment permits to construct telecommunications facilities shall be submitted upon forms to be provided by the City and shall be accompanied by scaled drawings, plans, and specifications of sufficient detail to clearly define construction standards, location and route of the proposed facilities.

D. Engineer’s Certification. All encroachment permit applications shall be accompanied by the certification of a registered professional engineer in the State of California that the drawings, plans and specifications submitted with the application comply with all applicable technical codes, rules and regulations.

E. Construction Plan. Within 90 days prior to commencement of construction, and from time to time thereafter, telecommunications carrier shall file with the City Manager or other designated employees of the City a general construction plan describing in detail the telecommunications system and telecommunications facilities, areas to be served, and an estimated time schedule for such construction (“construction plan”). Telecommunications carrier may modify or change its construction plan at any time in its sole discretion, provided telecommunications carrier provides written notice to the City within five business days subsequent to any modification. Any modifications to construction plans must be reviewed and approved by the City before modifications can be implemented by telecommunications carrier.

1. Notice to the City. The City shall have 30 days following receipt of the construction plan, or changes thereto, to approve or disapprove the construction plan.

2. Notice to Other Providers. Telecommunications carrier shall provide the City with general engineering base maps identifying existing underground and aerial utility routes, streets, parcels, poles, and construction needs including points of connections for existing residences, potential trench routes, and potential locations for nodes, amplifiers, and taps at least one month in advance of any underground construction, unless otherwise agreed to, which may be reviewed in advance by any interested party for the purpose of reducing the impact on the City’s infrastructure and for the public convenience.

3. Telecommunications carrier, with the City’s assistance, shall develop a special construction schedule and submit it to the City at least 20 days prior to the start of work. Prior to the underground construction of any of the telecommunications facilities, unless otherwise agreed to, telecommunications carrier shall furnish detailed plans of the proposed construction and changes thereto to the City. The proposed node sites in the City must be approved by the City prior to construction of the underground plant. Depending on health and safety issues, and input from residents, the City, at its sole discretion, may require proposed Node sites to be relocated by telecommunications carrier. In the installation of the telecommunications facilities, telecommunications carrier shall comply with the City’s standard construction requirements relating to telephone facilities and other comparable utility installations.

F. Traffic Control Plan. All encroachment permit applications which involve work on, in, under, across or along any public ways shall be accompanied by a traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed, consistent with the Uniform Manual of Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic. The traffic control plan shall be approved in writing by the City Engineer prior to the commencement of any construction and shall follow the Work Area Traffic Control Handbook. Telecommunications carrier shall furnish detailed traffic control plans (the “traffic control plan”), which shall include site-specific hours of construction, to the City Engineer no later than seven days prior to the commencement of any construction activities which may incommode traffic. The City Engineer shall provide (if any) comments within two business days of receipt. No construction-related activities may be conducted in the public right-of-way without a City approved traffic control plan.

G. Construction Schedule.

1. The telecommunications carrier shall complete system construction and offer telecommunications service and any other service authorized by the franchise agreement or license no later than the date specified in the franchise agreement or license.

2. The permittee shall submit a written construction schedule to the City Engineer 10 working days before commencing any work in or about the public ways. The schedule shall identify anticipated: start date, finish date, working hours and key construction milestones.

3. Project Overview. No later than 10 days after the filing of any permit application, telecommunications carrier shall file with the City Manager or other designated employee of the City a project overview which shall contain an assessment of the operation of any nodes, including without limitation a noise study prepared by a licensed engineer approved by the City documenting noise generated from any nodes.

The City’s Community Development Department will prepare an initial study to determine the appropriate level of environmental review. Telecommunications carrier will submit the final engineering plans to the City for review and approval prior to the issuance of a permit. The Community Development Department and Engineering Department will review and approve the locations for all telecommunications facilities to be located in the streets and public rights-of-way. These facilities include any nodes, pedestals, pull boxes, amplifiers, power supplies, and taps.

4. Telephone Contact. During construction, telecommunications carrier shall provide the City a telephone contact number, and staff it during regular business hours, to enable the City to report any concerns regarding construction of the facilities. After business hours such calls will be routed to an on-call supervisor. In the event that the City reports any concerns to telecommunications carrier, telecommunications carrier shall respond in a timely manner. Telecommunications carrier shall correct within two business days any adverse impact to the City’s use or operations or the use or operations of a third party caused by telecommunications carrier construction activities in the streets and public right-of-way at no cost to the City.

5. Daily Notice. Every working day during construction, telecommunications carrier shall notify the designated City staff member of the location of that next day’s construction activities. The number of concurrent construction locations may be limited by the City.

6. Maps and Plans. Telecommunications carrier shall maintain accurate maps and improvement plans of the telecommunications system and telecommunications facilities, in a manner consistent with telecommunications industry standards and which can be integrated into the City’s Geographic Information System (GIS). Telecommunications carrier shall furnish to the City two complete sets of as-built construction drawings and a copy of the drawings in AUTOCAD usable format within 60 days of completion of the construction of the facilities. Maps and improvement drawings shall be furnished to the City and other parties interested in performing work within the streets and public right-of-way, upon request, at no cost to the City. Telecommunications carrier shall pothole its telecommunications facilities, at its expense, within 15 days of receipt of a written request from the City for City projects which the City has itself or by contract designed and engineered, which directly conflicts with the facilities, unless telecommunications carrier can certify the exact location and depth of the telecommunications facilities at the location where potholing is requested.

7. Construction Status Reports. During construction, telecommunications carrier shall submit to the City periodic progress reports describing in detail the status of construction in relation to the construction plan submitted under this Agreement. The first report shall be submitted within 30 days of commencement of construction and shall be updated each 30 days thereafter.

H. Compliance with Permit. All construction practices and activities shall be in accordance with the permit and approved final plans and specification for the facilities. The City Engineer or his representatives shall be provided access to the work and such further information as he or she may require to ensure compliance with such requirements.

I. Display of Permit. The permittee shall maintain a copy of the encroachment permit and approved plans at the construction site, which shall be displayed and made available for inspection by the City Engineer or his representatives at all times when construction is work is occurring.

J. Construction of Good Quality. During any phase of construction, installation, maintenance and repair of the telecommunications system, the telecommunications carrier shall use materials of good and durable quality and all such work shall be performed in a safe, thorough, and reliable manner.

K. Conditions of Use of Streets and Public Rights-of-Way.

1. All wires, conduits, cable (coaxial, fiber or functional equivalent), and other property and facilities of a telecommunications carrier shall be so located, constructed, installed and maintained so as not to endanger or unnecessarily interfere with usual and customary use, traffic and travel upon the streets, public right-of-way, easements and public property of the City pursuant to a routing plan to be approved by the City Manager or his/her designee.

2. In the event a telecommunications carrier’s system creates a hazardous or unsafe condition or an unreasonable interference with property, such telecommunications carrier shall voluntarily, or upon the request of the City, remove or modify that part of the telecommunications system to eliminate such condition from the subject property.

3. A telecommunications carrier shall not place equipment where it will interfere with existing and future City uses of the streets, public right-of-way, or public property, with the rights of private property owners, with gas, electric, or telephone fixtures, with water hydrants or mains, with wastewater stations, with any traffic control system, or any other service or facility that benefits the City’s or its residents’ health, safety or welfare.

4. A telecommunications carrier, at its own expense, shall protect streets and public rights-of-way, easements, and support or temporarily disconnect or relocate at its sole cost in the same street or other street or public right-of-way, any property of such telecommunications carrier when necessitated by reason of:

a. Traffic conditions;

b. Public safety;

c. Temporary or permanent street closing;

d. Street construction or resurfacing;

e. A change or establishment of street grade;

f. Installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, storm drains, lift stations, force mains, power or signal lines, and any traffic control system; or

g. Any improvement, construction or repair or any improvement related to the City’s or its residents’ health, safety or welfare.

5. It shall be the responsibility of a telecommunications carrier to locate and mark or otherwise visibly indicate and alert others to the location of its underground cable before employees, agents, or independent contractors of any entity perform work in the marked-off area. The telecommunications carrier shall participate in and adhere to the practices of Underground Services Alert (USA) and provide at least 48 hours’ prior notice to USA prior to any excavation.

6. A telecommunications carrier shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit, temporarily remove, raise or lower the cable wires to allow the moving of the building. The expense of temporary removal shall be paid by the person requesting it, and such telecommunications carrier may require payment in advance.

L. Noncomplying Work. Upon order of the City Engineer, all work which does not comply with the encroachment permit, the approved plans and specifications for the work, or the requirements of this title as determined by the City Engineer shall be removed and the area restored to the pre-existing conditions at no cost to the City.

M. Survey of Underground Facilities. If the encroachment permit specifies the location of facilities by depth, line grade, proximity to other facilities or other standard, the permittee shall cause the location of such facilities to be verified by a registered California land surveyor. The permittee shall relocate any facilities which are not located in compliance with permit requirements.

N. Undergrounding and Mitigation of Visual Impacts – Design/Dimension of Above- and Belowground-Mounted Equipment.

1. Belowground-mounted equipment:

a. The equipment cover of a pull box shall be flush with the adjacent surface grade of the land.

2. Aboveground-mounted equipment:

a. Equipment shall be mounted on concrete footings, or other mounting system approved by the City Engineer or Building Official. The footings must be adequate to assure that the equipment will remain in its original vertical alignment over time.

3. Miscellaneous:

a. All above and belowground-mounted equipment shall have the provider’s name and emergency telephone number permanently affixed or molded into the cover/door.

b. All underground conduit/cable shall be installed to provide for continuous and sealed runs between pull boxes so as to preclude the ingress into the conduit/cable system of liquids and/or other foreign materials.

c. The minimum depth of conduit/cable shall be 18 inches below grade.

d. All installations shall comply with relevant provisions of the Uniform Electrical Code and the rules, regulations, standards and orders of the PUC.

O. Construction Default.

1. Upon the failure, refusal or neglect of the telecommunications carrier to cause any construction, repair, or the terms of any building permit, or other necessary work to comply with the terms of the franchise agreement or license, thereby creating an adverse impact upon public safety, City may (but shall not be required to) cause such work to be completed in whole or in part, and upon so doing shall submit to the telecommunications carrier an itemized statement of costs. The telecommunications carrier shall be given reasonable advance notice of City’s intent to exercise this power, and 15 days to cure the default. The telecommunications carrier shall, within 30 days of billing, pay to City the actual costs incurred.

2. Stop Work Notice. Whenever construction is being performed in a manner contrary to the provisions of this agreement, the City Engineer, or an inspection official representing the City, may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any person engaged in, or causing, the construction. Any work stopped shall not resume until authorized in writing by the City Engineer.

P. Completion of Construction. The permittee shall promptly complete all construction activities to minimize disruption of the City ways and other public and private property. All construction work authorized by a permit shall be completed within 120 calendar days of the date of issuance unless specifically approved in writing by the City Engineer.

Q. As-Built Drawings. Within 60 days after completion of construction, the permittee shall furnish the City with one complete set of “as-built” plans, drawn to scale and certified to the City as accurately depicting the locations of all telecommunications facilities constructed pursuant to the encroachment permit.

R. System Technical Data. The telecommunications carrier shall provide City with a computer disk or other data storage device requested by City, in a format approved by City, which details and documents all of the telecommunications carrier’s equipment and facilities and their geographic location in the City. Such computer disk or other device shall be updated annually and whenever there have been significant changes in the location of the telecommunications carrier’s equipment and telecommunications facilities. In addition, the telecommunications carrier shall maintain in its local office a complete and up-to-date set of as-built system maps and drawings upon completion of construction or reconstruction, equipment specification and maintenance publications, and signal level diagrams for each active piece of electronic equipment in the system. As-built drawings shall show all lines and installed equipment, and tap values and spigots. The scale of maps and drawings shall be sufficient to show the required details in easily readable form and size. Technical data at the local office shall also include approved pole applications, details and documentation of satellite and microwave equipment, mobile radio units, heavy construction vehicles and equipment, and video and audio equipment normally used in the operation of the system. If City requires use of technical data in its own offices, it may make copies of any items at City’s expense.

S. Restoration of Improvements. Upon completion of any construction work, the permittee shall promptly repair any and all public and private property improvements, fixtures, structures and facilities damaged during the course of construction. Restoration shall be to the preconstruction condition as determined by the City Engineer.

T. Construction Surety. Prior to issuance of an encroachment permit, the permittee shall provide a performance bond, as described in CMC 52.40.070(EE).

Chapter 52.44
Video Franchises
Sections:

52.44.010    Regulation of State video franchises and City video franchises.

52.44.020    State video franchise and PEG fees.

52.44.030    Audit authority.

52.44.040    Customer service penalties.

52.44.050    City response to State video franchise applications.

52.44.060    Extension of existing City video franchises.

52.44.010 Regulation of State video franchises and City video franchises.
Under State law effective January 1, 2007, the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) has the authority to grant State video franchises. The City will acquire certain rights and responsibilities with respect to State video franchise holders. These include the receipt of a franchise fee and a fee for public, educational and government (PEG) purposes, both based on a percentage of the gross revenues of State franchise holders, as well as the establishment and enforcement of penalties for violations of customer service rules. The City will retain authority, without change, over all City video franchisees until such time as they no longer hold a valid City franchise, or are no longer operating under a current or expired City franchise. The City may continue to grant, modify, renew, extend or terminate City franchises for video service until January 1, 2008. After January 1, 2008, the City may not grant new franchises, but may modify, renew, extend or terminate existing City franchises. For purposes of this chapter, the terms “City video franchise” and “City video franchisee” shall have the same meaning as the terms “City cable franchise” and “City cable franchisee.” (Ord. 1990 § 1, 2008)

52.44.020 State video franchise and PEG fees.
A. For any State video franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the City, there shall be a fee paid to the City equal to five percent of the gross revenue of that State video franchise holder.

B. For any State video franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the City, there shall be an additional fee paid to the City equal to one percent of the gross revenue of that State video franchise holder, which shall be imposed under the terms and conditions set forth in the Act. This fee shall be used by the City for PEG purposes consistent with State and Federal law.

C. “Gross revenue,” for the purposes of subsections A and B of this section, shall have the definition set forth in California Public Utilities Code Section 5860, as amended from time to time.

D. The City’s PEG fee as set forth in this section shall automatically be reauthorized in compliance with California Public Utilities Code Section 5870(n) upon the expiration of any existing or future State video franchise(s) held by any State franchised video services provider operating within the City, until such time as the City Council takes affirmative action to cease the renewals. (Ord. 2079 § 3, 2018; Ord. 1990 § 1, 2008)

52.44.030 Audit authority.
Not more than once annually, the City Manager or his or her designee may examine and perform an audit of the business records of a holder of a State video franchise to ensure compliance with CMC 52.44.020. (Ord. 1990 § 1, 2008)

52.44.040 Customer service penalties.
A. The holder of a State video franchise shall comply with all applicable State and Federal customer service and protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service.

B. The City Manager or his or her designee shall monitor the compliance of State video franchise holders with respect to State and Federal customer service and protection standards. The City Manager or his or her designee will provide the State video franchise holder written notice of any material breaches of applicable customer service and protection standards, and will allow the State video franchise holder 30 days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. Material breaches not remedied within the 30-day time period will be subject to the following penalties to be imposed by the City:

1. For the first occurrence of a violation, a fine of $500.00 shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $1,500 for each occurrence of the violation.

2. For a second occurrence of a violation of the same nature within 12 months, a fine of $1,000 shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $3,000 for each occurrence of the violation.

3. For a third or further occurrence of a violation of the same nature within 12 months, a fine of $2,500 shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $7,500 for each occurrence of the violation.

C. A State video franchise holder may appeal a penalty assessed by the City Manager or his or her designee to the City Council within 60 days of the initial assessment. After relevant speakers are heard, and any necessary staff reports are submitted, City Council will vote to uphold, modify, or vacate the penalty. The City Council’s decision on the imposition of a penalty shall be final. (Ord. 1990 § 1, 2008)

52.44.050 City response to State video franchise applications.
A. Applicants for State video franchises within the boundaries of the City must concurrently provide complete copies to the City of any application or amendments to applications filed with the CPUC. One complete copy must be provided to the City Clerk, and one complete copy to the City Manager.

B. Within 30 days of receipt, the City Manager will provide any appropriate comments to the CPUC regarding an application or an amendment to an application for a State video franchise. (Ord. 1990 § 1, 2008)

52.44.060 Extension of existing City video franchises.
Any entity providing video service under an expired City video franchise on January 1, 2007, shall hereby have the terms of its City video franchise extended on the same terms and conditions until January 2, 2008. The extension of a City video franchise does not preclude the City from further modifications, renewals, extensions or termination of that City video franchise. (Ord. 1990 § 1, 2008)

Title 56
TRAFFIC CODE
Chapters:

56.01    Purpose and Authority

56.02    Definitions

56.03    Traffic Administration

56.04    Enforcement and Obedience to Traffic Regulations

56.08    Bicycles

56.10    Traffic Control Devices

56.12    Turning Movements

56.14    One-Way Streets and Alleys

56.16    Special Stops

56.18    Driving Rules

56.20    Pedestrian Regulations

56.24    Abandoned Vehicles

56.28    Rollerskates and Skateboards

56.30    Stopping, Standing and Parking

56.32    Parking Meters

56.40    Restricted Use of Streets

56.50    Special Speed Zones

56.60    Repealed

56.70    Permit Parking Zones

56.80    Spectators Prohibited at Illegal Speed Contests or Exhibitions of Speed

56.90    Use of Electric Personal Assistive Mobility Devices

Chapter 56.01
PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY
Sections:

56.01.010    Citation.

56.01.020    Vehicle Code governs.

56.01.030    Voluntary payment of penalty.

56.01.010 Citation.
This title may be cited as the City of Coronado Traffic Code. (Ord. 1795)

56.01.020 Vehicle Code governs.
The California Vehicle Code contains basic statutory provisions relating to the control of vehicles and traffic in the State of California. The Code delegates specific authority for local jurisdictions to further regulate vehicles and traffic by ordinance or resolution. This title of the Municipal Code covers vehicle and traffic ordinances pertaining to the City of Coronado enacted under the general authority.

56.01.030 Voluntary payment of penalty.
A. Any operator or owner of a vehicle or bicycle to whom a citation has been issued in violation of any section of this title or any resolution relating to parking (except for any violation of CMC 56.30.200 or 56.30.210) may, within 10 days of the time of issuance of the citation, pay to the Parking Citation Processing Officer, at the address indicated on the violator’s copy of the citation, as a penalty for, and in full satisfaction of, such violation, the sum of $24.50. The failure of owner or operator to make such payment within said 10 days shall render such owner or operator subject to the penalties provided for in Chapter 1.08 CMC.

B. Any operator or owner of a vehicle to whom a citation has been issued in violation of CMC 56.30.200 or 56.30.210 may, within 10 days of the time of issuance of the citation, pay to the Parking Citation Processing Officer, at the address indicated on the violator’s copy of the citation, as a penalty for, and in full satisfaction of, such violation, the sum of $81.50. The failure of owner or operator to make such payment within said 10 days shall render such owner or operator subject to the penalties provided for in Chapter 1.08 CMC. (Ord. 2019 §§ 3, 4, 2011)

Chapter 56.02
DEFINITIONS
Sections:

56.02.010    Vehicle Code definitions.

56.02.020    Local definitions.

56.02.010 Vehicle Code definitions.
Whenever any words or phrases used herein are not defined, but are defined in the Vehicle Code, such definitions shall apply.

56.02.020 Local definitions.
The following words and phrases when used herein shall have the meanings respectively described to them. These definitions are supplementary to those contained in this code.

A. “Curb” means the lateral boundary of the roadway whether such curb be marked by curbing construction, or not so marked. The word “curb” as used herein shall not include the line dividing the roadway of a street from parking stripes in the center of a street, nor the rights-of-way of public utility companies.

B. “Island” means a raised curbed area, or an area delineated by painted pavement markings, located in the roadway and separating opposing or conflicting streams of traffic.

C. “Loading zone” means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.

D. Official Time. Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in this City.

E. “Parking meter” means a mechanical device installed immediately adjacent to a parking space for the purpose of controlling the period of time occupancy of such parking meter space by any vehicle.

F. “Passenger loading zone” means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.

G. “Police officer” means every officer of the Police Department of this City or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.

H. “Skateboard” means a board with a skate, or skates, attached thereto; foot propelled without steering apparatus.

I. “Vehicle Code” means the Vehicle Code of the State of California.

Chapter 56.03
TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION
Sections:

56.03.010    Police administration.

56.03.011    Duty of Traffic Division.

56.03.012    Traffic accident studies.

56.03.013    Traffic accident reports.

56.03.014    Annual traffic safety report.

56.03.020    City Traffic Engineer.

56.03.021    Powers and duties of City Engineer relating to traffic.

56.03.030    Repealed.

56.03.031    Repealed.

56.03.040    Traffic regulations by resolutions.

56.03.050    State approval required.

56.03.051    Withdrawal of State approval.

56.03.010 Police administration.
There is hereby established in the Police Department of this City a Traffic Division to be under the control of an Officer of Police appointed by and directly responsible to the Director of Police Services.

56.03.011 Duty of Traffic Division.
It shall be the duty of the Traffic Division with such aid as may be rendered by other members of the Police Department to enforce the traffic regulations of this City and all of the State vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this City, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate traffic accidents and to cooperate with the City Engineer and other officers of the City in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon said division by this code and the traffic ordinances and resolutions of this City.

56.03.012 Traffic accident studies.
Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the Traffic Division shall cooperate with the City Engineer in conducting studies of such accidents and determine remedial measures.

56.03.013 Traffic accident reports.
The City Engineer shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Such reports shall be available for the use and information of the Traffic Division.

56.03.014 Annual traffic safety report.
The City Engineer, in cooperation with the Police Department, shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the City Council. Such a report shall contain information on traffic matters in this City as follows:

A. Traffic accident data, including the number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed and the number of persons injured;

B. The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data on the safety activities of the City; and

C. The plans and recommendations of the City staff for future traffic safety activities.

56.03.020 City Traffic Engineer.
The City Engineer shall serve as City Traffic Engineer in addition to his other functions; provided, however, that the City Engineer may designate a suitably qualified individual under his supervision as the Traffic Engineer for the purpose of exercising the powers and duties with respect to traffic prescribed herein.

56.03.021 Powers and duties of City Engineer relating to traffic.
It shall be the general duty of the City Engineer to determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic control devices and signals, to conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineer and traffic investigations of traffic conditions and to cooperate with other City officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances and resolutions of this City. Whenever, by the provisions of this code an authority is granted to the City Engineer or a duty imposed upon him, the authority may be exercised or the duty performed by his deputy or by a person authorized in writing by him.

56.03.030 Traffic Committee.
Repealed by Ord. 1604. (Ord. 1440)

56.03.031 Duties of Traffic Committee.
Repealed by Ord. 1604. (Ord. 1440)

56.03.040 Traffic regulations by resolutions.
Any traffic regulation not inconsistent with an adopted ordinance of the City or statute of the State of California may be adopted and established by resolution of the Council.

56.03.050 State approval required.
Whenever any provision of this code or any ordinance or resolution delegates authority to a City Officer, or authorized action by the Council, to regulate traffic upon a State highway in any way which by State law requires the prior approval of the State Department of Transportation, no such officer shall exercise such authority nor shall such action by the Council be effective with respect to any State highway without the prior approval in writing of the Department of Transportation when and to the extent required by the Vehicle Code.

56.03.051 Withdrawal of State approval.
Any provision of this code or any ordinance or resolution which regulates traffic or delegates the regulation of traffic upon State highways in any way for which the approval of the State Department of Transportation is required by State law shall cease to be operative six months after receipt by City of written notice of withdrawal of approval of the Department of Transportation.

Chapter 56.04
ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Sections:

56.04.010    Authority of Police and Fire Department officials.

56.04.011    Persons other than officials shall not direct traffic.

56.04.012    Obedience to police or authorized officers.

56.04.013    Obstruction or interference with police or authorized officers.

56.04.020    Report of damage to property.

56.04.040    Removal of vehicle from highway.

56.04.010 Authority of Police and Fire Department officials.
Officers of the Police Department and such other Peace Officers as are assigned by the Director of Police Services are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, audible or other signal in conformance with traffic laws, except that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Police Department or members of the Fire Department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions to the contrary contained in this code or the Vehicle Code. The Director of Police Services is also authorized to issue permits which temporarily exempt compliance with the provisions of this title, when in his judgment, there is adequate justification for such temporary exemption.

56.04.011 Persons other than officials shall not direct traffic.
No person other than an officer of the Police Department or members of the Fire Department or a person authorized by the Director of Police Services or a person authorized by law shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal, except that persons may operate, when and as herein provided, any mechanical push button signal erected by order of the Council or the State Department of Transportation. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit individuals from warning oncoming traffic of an accident or hazardous situation pending the arrival of officers empowered to direct traffic nor to prohibit the use of regularly employed flagmen at authorized construction sites.

56.04.012 Obedience to police or authorized officers.
No person shall fail or refuse to comply with or to perform any act forbidden by any lawful order, signal, or direction of a traffic or police officer, or a member of the Fire Department, or a person authorized by the Director of Police Services or by law.

56.04.013 Obstruction or interference with police or authorized officers.
No person shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any police officer or other officer or employee of this City in their enforcement of the provisions of this code. The removal, obliteration or concealment of any chalk mark or other distinguishing mark used by any police officer or other employee or officer of this City in connection with the enforcement of the parking regulations of this title shall, if done for the purpose of evading the provisions of this code, constitute such interference or obstruction.

56.04.020 Report of damage to property.
The operator of a vehicle or the person in charge of any animal involved in any accident resulting in damage to any property publicly owned or owned by a public utility, including but not limited to any fire hydrant, parking meter, lighting post, telephone pole, electric light or power pole, or resulting in damage to any tree, traffic control device or other property of a like nature located in or along any street, shall within 24 hours after such accident make a report of such accident to the Police Department of this City.

A. Every such report shall state the time when and the place where the accident took place, the name and address of the person owning and of the person operating or in charge of such vehicle or animal, the license number of every such vehicle, and shall briefly describe the property damage in such accident.

B. The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident shall not be subject to the requirements of penalties of this section if and during the time he is physically incapable of making a report, but in such event he shall make a report as required within 24 hours after regaining ability to make such report.

56.04.040 Removal of vehicle from highway.
A. Any regularly employed and salaried officer of the Police Department of the City of Coronado is hereby authorized to remove a vehicle from a street or highway to the nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or maintained by the City of Coronado, under the circumstances enumerated in California Vehicle Code Section 22651 and any amendments thereto.

B. Upon removal of any vehicle under the provisions of subsection A of this section, the Police Department shall comply with the procedures set forth in California Vehicle Code Section 22852 and any amendments thereto.

C. The post storage hearing shall be conducted by the City Manager or any other regularly salaried full-time employee of the City of Coronado whom the City Manager may designate, from time to time.

D. The Post Storage Hearing Officer shall render a written decision containing the conclusions and findings which shall be sent to the persons receiving notice in accordance with subsection B of this section. (Ord. 1448)

Chapter 56.08
BICYCLES
Sections:

56.08.010    Bicycle definition expanded.

56.08.020    Report of dealers.

56.08.030    Bicycle license.

56.08.031    Issuance and attachment of license.

56.08.032    Application for license and fee.

56.08.033    Transfer of bicycle and fee.

56.08.034    Inspection of bicycle.

56.08.040    Removal of license plate.

56.08.050    Obedience to signs and directions.

56.08.051    Right-of-way.

56.08.052    Riding abreast.

56.08.053    Speed.

56.08.054    Bicycles prohibited on sidewalk.

56.08.055    Parking on street rights-of-way.

56.08.060    Violation.

56.08.061    Permitting violation by child.

56.08.070    Impounding of minor’s bicycle.

56.08.080    Abandoned bicycle.

56.08.090    Schedule of fines.

56.08.010 Bicycle definition expanded.
In this title, the Vehicle Code definition of “bicycle” is expanded to include devices having four wheels in addition to those described in the Vehicle Code as having two or three wheels.

56.08.020 Report of dealers.
Every person engaged in the business of buying and selling new or secondhand bicycles in this City shall file with the Director of Police Services a monthly report, giving the name and address of the person from whom or to whom a bicycle is purchased or sold, the description thereof, the frame number thereof, and the number of the license plate, if any, attached to the bicycle.

56.08.030 Bicycle license.
The Director of Police Services is hereby authorized and directed to issue, upon written application, a bicycle license which shall be effective for a period of three years or less from the date of issuance during the period of time such licensee retains title to such bicycle.

56.08.031 Issuance and attachment of license.
All licenses shall be issued by the Director of Police Services, who shall cause a license plate or sticker to be firmly attached to the frame of the bicycle, in the manner or position required by the Vehicle Code.

56.08.032 Application for license and fee.
Applications for bicycle licenses shall be made upon a form provided by the Director of Police Services. Each application shall be issued upon the payment of a fee of $3.00 except that a proportionally smaller payment may be accepted by the Director of Police Services when the effective period of the license to be issued is less than three years.

56.08.033 Transfer of bicycle and fee.
For registration and licensing when there is a transfer of ownership, the new owner shall pay $3.00 for which payment a new license number shall be issued.

56.08.034 Inspection of bicycle.
The Director of Police Services is hereby required to inspect, or cause to be inspected, all bicycles for which applications to license are filed, and, before any license shall be issued pursuant to the authority of this chapter, the Director of Police Services shall satisfy himself that such bicycle is in a safe mechanical condition for operation and use in the City, and, if he should decide that such bicycle is not safe mechanically for use or operation in the City, he shall require such applicant to have the same placed in a safe mechanical condition before a license to operate the same is issued.

56.08.040 Removal of license plate.
It is unlawful for any person to remove a license plate after same has been affixed to a bicycle, unless such removal has been authorized by the licensing authorities of the City.

56.08.050 Obedience to signs and directions.
Any person using and operating a bicycle in this City shall obey any direction or traffic-related order issued by a police officer.

56.08.051 Right-of-way.
The operator of a bicycle travelling on or crossing a sidewalk or sidewalk area shall yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians on or approaching the sidewalk or sidewalk area.

56.08.052 Riding abreast.
Persons riding bicycles upon highways in this City or on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles shall not ride more than two abreast.

56.08.053 Speed.
No person shall operate or use a bicycle in this City at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing.

56.08.054 Bicycles prohibited on sidewalk.
It is unlawful for any person to ride or operate a bicycle upon a sidewalk within any business district of the City, and the Council may by resolution designate other areas of the City where bicycle riding upon a sidewalk is prohibited. This section does not prohibit a person from walking beside and guiding a bicycle on a sidewalk.

56.08.055 Parking on street rights-of-way.
No person shall lay a bicycle down on any street, alley or park a bicycle upon any public street, alley or sidewalk in this City in such a position as to interfere with the safety or movement of traffic, including vehicles and pedestrians, or to interfere with the use of the public rights-of-way by vehicles or pedestrians.

56.08.060 Violation.
It is unlawful for any person to use a bicycle in and upon any street, alley, park or other public place in the City or upon any path or lane set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles within the City, without complying in all respects with the terms and provisions of this chapter and the following provisions of the Vehicle Code:

A. Vehicle Code § 21201(a);

B. Vehicle Code § 21201(b);

C. Vehicle Code § 21201(c);

D. Vehicle Code § 21201(d)(1)-(4);

E. Vehicle Code § 21201.3(b);

F. Vehicle Code § 21202(a);

G. Vehicle Code § 21203;

H. Vehicle Code § 21204(a);

I. Vehicle Code § 21204(b);

J. Vehicle Code § 21205;

K. Vehicle Code § 21208(a);

L. Vehicle Code § 21208(b);

M. Vehicle Code § 21210;

N. Vehicle Code § 21211(a);

O. Vehicle Code § 21211(b);

P. Vehicle Code § 21212(a)

Q. Vehicle Code § 21453(a);

R. Vehicle Code § 21453(b);

S. Vehicle Code § 21453(c);

T. Vehicle Code § 21650;

U. Vehicle Code § 21800(a);

V. Vehicle Code § 21801(a);

W. Vehicle Code § 21801(b);

X. Vehicle Code § 21802(a);

Y. Vehicle Code § 21802(b);

Z. Vehicle Code § 21803(a);

AA. Vehicle Code § 21803(b);

BB. Vehicle Code § 21804(a);

CC. Vehicle Code § 21804(b);

DD. Vehicle Code § 21806(a)(1);

EE. Vehicle Code § 21950(a);

FF. Vehicle Code § 21950(c);

GG. Vehicle Code § 21951;

HH. Vehicle Code § 22107;

II. Vehicle Code § 22108;

JJ. Vehicle Code § 22109;

KK. Vehicle Code § 22450(a); and

LL. Vehicle Code § 27400. (Ord. 2065 § 1, 2017)

56.08.061 Permitting violation by child.
It is unlawful for any parent or guardian of any child or for anyone who has the custody and control of any child in this City to knowingly permit such child to use a bicycle in the City in violation of the terms and provisions of this chapter.

56.08.070 Impounding of minor’s bicycle.
The Director of Police Services shall have authority, in the event that any juvenile or person under the age of 18 years is found violating any provision of this chapter, to take and impound the bicycle of such juvenile or minor so found violating this chapter, and to hold the same for a period not to exceed 30 days, during which time the Director of Police Services shall notify the parents or guardian or other person having the custody and control of the juvenile or minor of such offense, and secure, if possible, the cooperation and assistance of such parent or guardian or other person having the custody and control of the juvenile or minor, in preventing the recurrence of such offense by such juvenile or minor.

56.08.080 Abandoned bicycle.
Any bicycle that is left on City property for a period of 72 consecutive hours or longer shall be deemed abandoned property and may be impounded by the City. This does not apply to bicycles parked legally in City-owned bicycle lockers, to bicycles parked legally at the Glorietta Bay Marina, or to bicycles parked legally in any other areas designated by the City for long-term bicycle parking. Bicycles impounded under this section will be managed as per Chapter 3.60 CMC. (Ord. 2057 § 2, 2016)

56.08.090 Schedule of fines.
A. A person convicted of an infraction for a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished as follows:

1. By a fine not exceeding $50.00.

2. For a second infraction occurring within one year of a prior infraction that resulted in a conviction, a fine not exceeding $100.00.

3. For a third or subsequent infraction occurring within one year of two or more prior infractions that resulted in convictions, a fine not exceeding $250.00.

B. No additional assessments will be added to this schedule of fines. (Ord. 2065 § 2, 2017)

Chapter 56.10
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
Sections:

56.10.010    Signs required for enforcement.

56.10.020    Authority to install traffic control devices.

56.10.021    Installation of traffic signals.

56.10.022    Lane marking.

56.10.023    Distinctive roadway markings.

56.10.024    Removing, relocating and discontinuing traffic control devices.

56.10.025    Hours of operation of traffic control devices.

56.10.030    Unauthorized painting of curbs.

56.10.010 Signs required for enforcement.
No provision of the Vehicle Code or of this title for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate legible signs are in place giving notice of such provisions of the traffic laws.

56.10.020 Authority to install traffic control devices.
The City Engineer shall have the authority and duty to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official traffic control devices when required to make effective the provisions of this title. Such traffic control devices shall conform to the uniform standards and specifications of the Vehicle Code.

A. Whenever the Vehicle Code or this title requires for the effectiveness of any provision thereof that signs or other traffic control devices be installed in order to give notice to the public of the application of such law, the City Engineer is hereby authorized to install or cause to be installed the necessary signs or devices subject to any limitations or restrictions set forth in the applicable law.

B. The City Engineer may also place and maintain, or cause to place and maintain, such additional traffic control devices as he may deem necessary or proper to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic, but he shall make such determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations in accordance with such standards, limitations, and rules as may be set forth in this title or as may be determined by ordinance or resolution of the Council.

56.10.021 Installation of traffic signals.
The City Engineer is hereby directed to install and maintain official traffic signals at those intersections and other places where traffic conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or property from exceptional hazard.

A. The City Engineer shall ascertain and determine the locations where such signals are required by field investigations, traffic counts and other traffic information as may be pertinent and his determinations therefrom shall be made in accordance with those traffic engineering and safety standards and instructions set forth in current standards of the California Department of Transportation.

B. Whenever the City Engineer installs and maintains an official traffic signal at any intersection, he shall likewise erect and maintain at such intersection street name signs clearly visible to traffic approaching from all directions unless such street name signs have previously been placed and are maintained at any said intersection.

56.10.022 Lane marking.
The City Engineer is hereby authorized to mark center lines and lane lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be travelled by vehicles, and may place signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the center line of the highway.

56.10.023 Distinctive roadway markings.
The City Engineer is authorized to place and maintain distinctive roadway markings as described in the Vehicle Code on those streets or parts of streets where the volume of traffic or the vertical or other curvature of the roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side of such marking or signs and markings. Such marking or signs and markings shall have the same effect as similar markings placed by the State Department of Transportation pursuant to provisions of the Vehicle Code.

56.10.024 Removing, relocating and discontinuing traffic control devices.
The City Engineer is hereby authorized to remove, relocate or discontinue the operation of any traffic control device not specifically required by the Vehicle Code, this title or Council resolution whenever he shall determine in any particular case that the conditions which warranted or required the installation no longer exist.

56.10.025 Hours of operation of traffic control devices.
The City Engineer shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic control device shall be in effect, except in those cases where such hours or days are specified in this code or by Council resolution.

56.10.030 Unauthorized painting of curbs.
No person shall paint any street or curb surface unless authorized by the City Engineer. This section shall not apply, however, to the painting of numbers on a curb surface by any person who has complied with the provisions of any resolution or ordinance of this City pertaining thereto.

Chapter 56.12
TURNING MOVEMENTS
Sections:

56.12.010    Turning markers.

56.12.011    Restricted turn signs.

56.12.012    Right turns at signal controlled intersections.

56.12.010 Turning markers.
The City Engineer is authorized to place official traffic control devices within or adjacent to intersections and indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and the City Engineer is authorized to locate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right or left-hand turns, and the course to be traveled as so indicated shall supersede other regulations prescribed by law.

56.12.011 Restricted turn signs.
The City Engineer is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left, or U turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted.

56.12.012 Right turns at signal controlled intersections.
The City Engineer shall post appropriate signs prohibiting vehicles making a right turn against a red or stop signal at any intersection where he determines that the making of right turns against traffic signal “stop” indication would seriously interfere with the safe and orderly flow of traffic.

Chapter 56.14
ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
Sections:

56.14.010    Signs for one-way streets and alleys.

56.14.020    State Highway Routes 75 and 282.

56.14.030    Local streets.

56.14.010 Signs for one-way streets and alleys.
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this City designates any one-way street or alley, the City Engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.

56.14.020 State Highway Routes 75 and 282.
Portions of the following streets are hereby designated and declared to be one-way streets:

A. Fourth Street eastbound from Alameda Boulevard to Pomona Avenue;

B. Pomona Avenue westbound from Fourth Street to Third Street;

C. Third Street westbound from Pomona Avenue to Alameda Boulevard; and

D. Alameda Boulevard southbound from Third Street to Fourth Street.

56.14.030 Local streets.
Council may, by resolution, designate streets and alleys not on the State highway system for one-way use.

Chapter 56.16
SPECIAL STOPS
Sections:

56.16.010    Erecting stop signs.

56.16.020    Emerging from alley, driveway or building.

56.16.030    School pedestrian lane stops.

56.16.010 Erecting stop signs.
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this City designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a through street, or any intersection at which vehicles are required to stop at one or more entrances thereto, the City Engineer shall erect and maintain stop signs on each and every street intersecting such through street or portion thereof so designated, and at those entrances to either intersections where a stop is required; provided, however, stop signs shall not be erected or maintained at any entrance to an intersection when such entrance is controlled by an official traffic control signal.

56.16.020 Emerging from alley, driveway or building.
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the sidewalk area extending across any alley or driveway.

56.16.030 School pedestrian lane stops.
A person driving or operating any vehicle shall stop within 50 feet of the nearest side of a school pedestrian lane where any signal, device, flagman, or other person is stationed, giving warning that children are about to cross or are crossing the street, and no such person shall proceed until such signal has stopped, raised or been removed, or the flagman or person stationed at such pedestrian lane has given a signal to go, or has left the locality.

Chapter 56.18
DRIVING RULES
Sections:

56.18.010    Driving through funeral or other procession.

56.18.011    Commercial vehicles using private driveways.

56.18.012    Riding or driving on sidewalk.

56.18.013    New pavement and markings.

56.18.014    No entrance into intersection that would obstruct traffic.

56.18.015    Limited access.

56.18.020    Barriers and signs.

56.18.030    Strand Bikeway.

56.18.040    Vehicles prohibited.

56.18.010 Driving through funeral or other procession.
No operator of a vehicle shall drive in the same direction between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession or a parade when such vehicles are conspicuously so designated. The directing of all vehicles and traffic on any street over which such funeral procession or parade wishes to pass shall be subject to the orders of the Police Department.

56.18.011 Commercial vehicles using private driveways.
No person shall operate or drive a commercial vehicle in, on or across any private driveway itself without the consent of the owner or occupant of the property, if a sign or markings are in place indicating that the use of such driveway is prohibited. For the purpose of this section, a “commercial vehicle” shall mean a vehicle having a rated capacity in excess of one-half ton.

56.18.012 Riding or driving on sidewalk.
No person shall ride, drive, propel, or cause to be propelled any vehicle of more than one-half ton gross weight across or upon any sidewalk or curb excepting over permanently constructed driveways and excepting when it is necessary for any temporary purpose to drive a loaded vehicle across a sidewalk. Before such a loaded vehicle is driven across a sidewalk or curb, written permission will be obtained from the City Engineer and said sidewalk and curb area shall be substantially protected by wooden planks two-inches thick. Such wooden planks shall not be permitted to remain upon such sidewalk area during the hours from 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.

56.18.013 New pavement and markings.
No person shall ride or drive any animal or vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted markings in any street when a barrier sign, cone marker or other warning device is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or marking, or when any such device is in place indicating that the street or any portion thereof is closed.

56.18.014 No entrance into intersection that would obstruct traffic.
No operator of any vehicle shall enter any intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle being operated without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control indication to proceed.

56.18.015 Limited access.
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are lawfully established.

56.18.020 Barriers and signs.
No person, public utility or department in the City shall erect or place any barrier or sign on any street unless of a type approved by the City Engineer. It is unlawful for any person to disobey the instructions, remove, tamper with or destroy any barrier or sign lawfully placed on any street by any person, public utility or by any department of this City.

56.18.030 Strand Bikeway.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle on the Strand Bikeway along State Highway Route 75 between the south City limits and Glorietta Boulevard at Tenth Street, when signs are posted giving notice of the prohibition; except that motorized bicycles licensed for street use which produce less than two brake horsepower and are capable of speeds on level ground of not more than 30 miles per hour may be ridden on the Bikeway by drivers licensed to operate such vehicles. (Ord. 1536)

56.18.040 Vehicles prohibited.
Unless expressly authorized in advance by an official of the City of Coronado, it is unlawful to operate, park, or allow to stand a vehicle, motorized or nonmotorized, upon any public beach, park, golf course, median strip, traffic island, or parkway, except in parking areas and access roads thereto designated in accordance with CMC 56.30.100 or 56.30.110. (Ord. 1594)

Chapter 56.20
PEDESTRIAN REGULATIONS
Sections:

56.20.010    Establishing marked crosswalks.

56.20.020    Pedestrians must use crosswalks.

56.20.010 Establishing marked crosswalks.
The City Engineer shall establish, designate and maintain crosswalks at intersections and other places by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway as follows:

A. Crosswalks shall be established and maintained at all intersections within business districts and at intersections outside such districts, and at other places within or outside said districts where the City Engineer determines that there is particular hazard to pedestrians crossing the roadway.

B. The City Engineer may place signs at or adjacent to an intersection directing that pedestrians shall not use any crosswalk so indicated. When appropriate, barricades may also be erected to prevent pedestrians from entering such a crosswalk.

56.20.020 Pedestrians must use crosswalks.
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than by a crosswalk in any business district.

Chapter 56.24
ABANDONED VEHICLES
Sections:

56.24.010    Citation.

56.24.012    Authority.

56.24.020    Unlawful to abandon vehicles.

56.24.022    Abandoned vehicles to be removed or abated.

56.24.030    City Council findings and declarations.

56.24.032    Director of Public Services to administer.

56.24.034    Work by private parties.

56.24.036    City Council determines administrative charges.

56.24.040    Notice of intention.

56.24.042    Highway Patrol notification.

56.24.044    Owner may request hearing.

56.24.046    Hearing by Director of Public Services.

56.24.048    City Council hearing.

56.24.050    Assessing cost when owner did not consent.

56.24.060    Disposal of vehicles.

56.24.062    Notifying Department of Motor Vehicles.

56.24.070    Payment of costs.

56.24.010 Citation.
This chapter may be cited as the City of Coronado Abandoned Vehicle Abatement Ordinance. (Ord. 1794; Ord. 1429)

56.24.012 Authority.
This chapter is enacted in accordance with the authority granted by the State of California under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances. This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the City. It is supplemental and in addition to other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the City, the State or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. Nothing in this chapter shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than this chapter.

56.24.020 Unlawful to abandon vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon, park, store or leave, or permit the abandonment, parking, storing or leaving of, any licensed or unlicensed vehicle or part thereof which is in an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative condition upon any private or public property, not including highways, within the City unless such vehicle or part thereof is:

A. Completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other private or public property; or

B. Stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer or a licensed junkyard.

56.24.022 Abandoned vehicles to be removed or abated.
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or part thereof or to refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with the abatement provisions of this chapter or State law where such State law is applicable.

56.24.030 City Council findings and declarations.
The City Council hereby makes the following findings and declarations:

A. The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property, not including highways, it hereby finds to create a condition tending to reduce the value of property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a harborage for rodents and insects, and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare.

B. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or part thereof on private or public property, not including highways, except as expressly hereinafter permitted, is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

56.24.032 Director of Public Services to administer.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Director of Public Services. In this enforcement, the Director and the Director’s assistants and employees may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter.

56.24.034 Work by private parties.
When the City Council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person for such work, that person, and his employees, shall be authorized to enter upon private or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter.

56.24.036 City Council determines administrative charges.
The City Council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs, exclusive of the actual moving costs for the removal of any vehicle or part thereof under this chapter.

56.24.040 Notice of intention.
Notice of intention to abate and remove a vehicle or part thereof shall be given at least 10 days before such abatement and removal. Such notices shall contain a statement of the hearing rights of the owner of the property on which the vehicle is located and the owner of the vehicle. The statement shall include notice to the property owner that he may appear in person at a hearing or may present a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his reasons for such denial, in lieu of appearing. The notice of intention to abate shall be mailed by registered or certified mail to the owner of the land as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the last registered and legal owner of record when the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are available to determine ownership. Said notice may also be served in person and the notice forms shall also contain an acknowledgement space for signature where notices are issued in person by delegated officers.

56.24.042 Highway Patrol notification.
A copy of the notice of intention to abate shall, at the same time such notice is issued, be given to the California Highway Patrol, identifying the vehicle or part thereof proposed for removal.

56.24.044 Owner may request hearing.
Within 10 days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate the owner of the vehicle or the owner of the land on which such vehicle is located may request a hearing. Said request shall be made in writing to the Director of Public Services. If the owner of the land on which the vehicle is located submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land within such time period, this statement shall be construed as a request for hearing which does not require the presence of the owner submitting such request. If a request is not received within such period, the Director of Public Services shall have the authority to remove the vehicle. The cost of removal and disposal of any such vehicle and the administrative cost thereof may then be charged against the person who is determined to be responsible for the maintenance of the vehicle as a public nuisance.

56.24.046 Hearing by Director of Public Services.
Whenever a request is made for a hearing pursuant to CMC 56.24.044, the Director of Public Services shall schedule such hearing within 15 calendar days of the date said request is received. The hearing shall be conducted by the Director or the Director’s authorized assistant, hereinafter referred to as hearing officers, who shall receive such facts and testimony as the hearing officer deems pertinent, prior to rendering a decision, which facts and testimony may relate to the condition or status of the vehicle or part thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on said private or public property, and may be in the form of oral testimony or written statements. The hearing officer shall make findings whether the vehicle constitutes a public nuisance and whether the property owner, on whose land said vehicle is located, consented to the placement of the vehicle or acquiesced in its presence. The hearing officer shall notify each party of his findings and of the right to a full public hearing before the City Council. If the party who requested the hearing objects to the findings of the hearing officer, the party may appeal the decision to the City Council in writing within 10 days of notification of said findings. In the event the hearing officer determines the vehicle constitutes a nuisance and no appeal is taken within the prescribed time, the Director of Public Services may immediately remove said vehicle. Except as provided in CMC 56.24.050, the Director of Public Services shall thereafter charge the costs of administration and removal of said vehicle against the person or persons who are determined to be responsible for maintenance of said nuisance.

56.24.048 City Council hearing.
In the event of an appeal pursuant to CMC 56.24.046, a public hearing shall thereafter be held by the City Council on the question of abatement, said hearing to be scheduled by the Director of Public Services within 20 days of the date the notice of appeal is received. The City Council shall hear all facts and testimony it deems pertinent. The facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or part thereof and the circumstances, concerning its location on the said private or public property, and may be in the form of oral testimony or written statements. The City Council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land on which the vehicle is located may appear in person at the hearing, or present a written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land with his reasons for such denial. The City Council may impose such conditions and take such other action as it deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter. It may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or part thereof if, in its opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the City Council may find that a vehicle or part thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or is inoperative on private or public property and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance. The City Council may then direct disposal as hereinafter provided and determine the administrative costs and the costs of removal to be charged against the owner of the parcel of land on which the vehicle or part thereof is located. The order requiring removal thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle is available at the site. Unless otherwise stated in the order of removal, the vehicle or part thereof may be removed by the Director of Public Services immediately following said order.

56.24.050 Assessing cost when owner did not consent.
In any case wherein a final determination is made by the hearing officer or the City Council that the vehicle was placed on land without the consent of the landowner and that the landowner has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, then the City shall not assess costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the real property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such cost from the landowner.

56.24.060 Disposal of vehicles.
Any vehicles removed pursuant to this chapter may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard or licensed automobile dismantler’s yard. After a vehicle has been removed pursuant to this chapter, it shall not be reconstructed or made operable.

56.24.062 Notifying Department of Motor Vehicles.
Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or part thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle or part thereof removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates.

56.24.070 Payment of costs.
If the administrative costs and the actual cost of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to CMC 56.24.046 or 56.24.048 are not paid within 30 days of the date of the order, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 25845 of the California Government Code and shall be transmitted to the County Tax Collector for collection. Said assessment shall have the same priority as City taxes.

Chapter 56.28
ROLLERSKATES AND SKATEBOARDS
Sections:

56.28.010    Prohibition – Locations.

56.28.020    Prohibition – Specified areas.

56.28.030    Prohibition – Violation.

56.28.040    Ramps prohibited.

56.28.045    Use of public skateboard facility.

56.28.050    Seizure of evidence.

56.28.010 Prohibition – Locations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to be upon, ride or use any skateboard, rollerskates, or other similarly wheeled devices:

A. Upon any public sidewalk or bikepath which is within any designated business district;

B. Upon any public sidewalk or bikepath which is adjacent to any commercial building or business, public library, fire station, police station, senior citizens center, hospital, school auditorium, school office, school passenger loading zone or school bus loading zone;

C. Upon any public or private parking lot, parking facility, sidewalk, walkway, path, ramp, bridge, plaza, mall, quadrangle, or patio when signs prohibiting such activity are displayed;

D. Upon any public property when signs prohibiting such activity are displayed;

E. Upon any public property, to include without limitations sidewalks and bikepaths, during the hours of darkness. (Ord. 2064 § 2, 2016; Ord. 1760; Ord. 1461; Ord. 1441)

56.28.020 Prohibition – Specified areas.
In addition to the general regulations imposed by this chapter, the City Council may adopt a resolution regulating the use of rollerskates and skateboards in specified areas upon the placement of appropriate signs.

56.28.030 Prohibition – Violation.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person who is upon, riding or using any skateboard, rollerskates or other similarly wheeled device while on a sidewalk or within a crosswalk to fail to yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians within or approaching the area.

B. It shall be unlawful for any person who is upon, riding or using any skateboard, rollerskates or other similarly wheeled device while upon a public street or alley to interfere with the movement of vehicles thereon.

C. A person upon, riding, or using a skateboard, roller skates or similarly wheeled device on a roadway or street must obey all Vehicle Code laws applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application. (Ord. 2064 § 3, 2016)

56.28.040 Ramps prohibited.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to use, construct or place upon any public property a ramp, jump, platform or similar device intended for use by a person upon a skateboard, rollerskates or other similarly wheeled devices.

B. The costs incurred by the City in removing a device placed contrary to this section shall be a charge imposed upon and payable by the individual violating this section. If the individual violating this section is a minor, then the charge shall be imposed against the individual’s custodial parent, parents or guardians.

56.28.045 Use of public skateboard facility.
A. No person shall use, remain in or enter any City operated skateboard facility during all closed hours specified in park regulations. A notice indicating time or period when the skateboard facility is closed shall be posted at the skateboard facility.

B. No person shall ride a skateboard, use in-line skates, or ride a nonmotorized scooter in the skateboard facilities except while wearing a commercially manufactured helmet, elbow pads, and knee pads.

C. No person shall use any City-operated skateboard facility for any purpose other than skateboarding, in-line skating, or scootering; use of motorized vehicles, bicycles, or other similar devices is specifically prohibited in any City-operated skateboard facility.

D. No person shall skate in the parking lot, sidewalks, curbs, or entrance areas near the skateboard facility.

E. For purposes of this section, the term “skateboard facility” shall mean the fence and the entire fenced area surrounding and including the skateboard bowls and street plaza area and the land adjacent to the skateboard bowls and street plaza area.

F. This section does not apply to any duly authorized City employee while performing duties of their job.

G. Any person who violates this section is guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in CMC 1.08.050. Each violation constitutes a separate offense and may be separately punished. (Ord. 2078 § 1, 2018; Ord. 1926)

56.28.050 Seizure of evidence.
In accordance with applicable rules and regulations, police officers are authorized to seize as evidence any item used in the commission of a violation of any provision of this chapter. Seized items shall be removed and stored in accordance with law. (Ord. 1741; Ord. 1703; Ord. 1461; Ord. 1441)

Chapter 56.30
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Sections:

56.30.010    Purpose.

56.30.020    Procedure.

56.30.030    Notice by sign/paint.

56.30.040    Designating parking spaces.

56.30.050    Designating temporary regulation areas.

56.30.060    Designating restricted time parking.

56.30.070    Designating no-stopping zone (red curb).

56.30.080    Designating parking on one-way streets.

56.30.090    Designating general loading zones (yellow curb).

56.30.100    Designating passenger loading zones (white curb).

56.30.105    Designated short-term parking (green curb).

56.30.110    Limitation on designating loading and passenger zones.

56.30.120    Designating disabled parking spaces (blue curb).

56.30.130    Designating diagonal parking.

56.30.140    Designating public parking lots.

56.30.150    Designating restricted parking lots.

56.30.160    Prohibition – Parking outside marked spaces.

56.30.170    Prohibition – Areas where parking is prohibited.

56.30.180    Prohibition – Storage.

56.30.190    Prohibition – Large commercial vehicles in residential districts.

56.30.200    Prohibition – Oversized vehicles on any public street, alley, highway, including State highways, within the City.

56.30.210    Prohibition – Nonmotorized vehicles on any public street, alley, highway, including State highways, within the City.

56.30.220    Prohibition – Repairing or servicing vehicles.

56.30.230    Prohibition – Commercial washing/polishing vehicles.

56.30.240    Repealed.

56.30.250    Authority to remove vehicles for sale.

56.30.010 Purpose.
A. It is the purpose of this chapter to provide regulations for the stopping, standing and parking of vehicles.

B. The prohibitions of this chapter shall apply except when it is necessary to stop, stand or park a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in order to comply with the directions of the police officer or official traffic control device.

C. The provisions of this chapter imposing time limits on the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other, more restrictive provisions of State law or this title applicable to the specified places or at specified times.

D. “Residential district” shall mean any block in which over 50 percent of the buildings on the block are used for residential purposes. (Ord. 1740)

56.30.020 Procedure.
A. The City Council may establish by resolution regulations which prohibit or restrict the parking or standing of vehicles. (Vehicle Code § 22507 et seq.)

B. The City Council may establish by ordinance parking meter zones and fix the rate of fees for such zones. (Vehicle Code § 22508)

C. The City Council may establish by resolution parking spaces for the exclusive use of vehicles which display a distinguishing license plate or placard of a disabled person in accordance with the provisions of the Vehicle Code. (Vehicle Code § 22556.7)

D. The City Council may, by ordinance, cause streets and highways to be marked with white lines designating parking spaces and require vehicles to park within the parking spaces. (Vehicle Code § 22508)

56.30.030 Notice by sign/paint.
A. The City Engineer is hereby authorized to erect and maintain signs and colored curb markings to give notice of the regulations imposed in accordance with this chapter.

B. When curb markings are used to give notice, curbs shall be painted in accordance with State law. (Vehicle Code § 21458)

C. When signs are used, the location of the signs will be determined by the City Engineer and placed as may be necessary to provide for adequate visibility, notice and safety. The signs also may contain the additional notice that a vehicle in violation shall be removed and impounded at the owner’s expense. (Ord. 1769)

56.30.040 Designating parking spaces.
The City Engineer is authorized to install and maintain parking space markings to indicate parking spaces adjacent to curbings where parking is allowed.

56.30.050 Designating temporary regulation areas.
A. Whenever the City Engineer determines that traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of an assemblage, gathering or function, or for other reasons causing a hazardous situation or temporary traffic congestion, the City Engineer is authorized to order temporary signs to be erected or posted, indicating that the operation, stopping, standing or parking of vehicles is prohibited during the time when such temporary signs are in place.

B. The temporary signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency and the City Engineer shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter.

C. When signs authorized by this section are in place for a period of more than 24 hours, vehicles parked in violation of the temporary prohibition may be removed and impounded at the owner’s expense.

D. When signs are in place indicating the temporary regulation, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle in violation of the regulation.

56.30.060 Designating restricted time parking.
A. By resolution, the City Council may designate locations where parking is limited to a specified period of time.

B. Restrictions created in accordance with this section shall be in effect between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day except Sundays and holidays unless the resolution designating such locations specifies different hours or days.

C. Types of restricted time parking zones are as follows:

1. Twelve-minute zone.

2. One-hour zone.

3. Two-hour zone.

4. Four-hour zone.

D. When signs or curb markings are in place giving notice of the restricted time regulation, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park such vehicle contrary to the regulation. A vehicle in violation of this regulation may be removed and impounded at the owner’s expense.

56.30.070 Designating no-stopping zone (red curb).
A. By resolution, the City Council may designate no-stopping zones where the stopping of vehicles is prohibited.

B. When signs or curb markings are in place giving notice of the no-stopping regulation, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop such vehicle contrary to the regulation. A vehicle in violation of this regulation may be removed and impounded at the owner’s expense.

56.30.080 Designating parking on one-way streets.
A. By resolution, the City Council may designate when stopping, standing or parking a vehicle shall be prohibited upon the left-hand side of any one-way street or when stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle may be prohibited upon the left-hand side of any one-way roadway or highway, having two or more separate roadways.

B. When signs or curb markings are in place giving notice of the no-stopping, standing or parking regulation, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle contrary to the regulation. A vehicle in violation of this regulation may be removed and impounded at the owner’s expense.

56.30.090 Designating general loading zones (yellow curb).
A. By resolution, the City Council may designate loading zones where vehicles shall stop only for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers, material or freight for a period of time not to exceed 20 minutes.

B. Loading zones shall be operative between 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays, unless the resolution designating such locations specifies different hours or days.

C. Taxicabs may park or stand in a general loading zone only when the zone is marked as a taxicab stand in accordance with this code.

D. When signs or curb markings are in place giving notice of general loading regulation, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle contrary to the regulation. A vehicle in violation of this regulation may be removed and impounded at the owner’s expense.

56.30.100 Designating passenger loading zones (white curb).
A. By resolution, the City Council may designate passenger loading zones in which vehicles may stop only for loading or unloading of passengers for a period of time not to exceed three minutes.

B. Passenger loading zones shall be operative 24 hours a day except as follows:

1. Passenger zones in front of theaters shall be operative between 1:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight each Saturday, Sunday or holiday and between 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on other days of the week.

2. Passenger zones in front of nursery and elementary schools shall be operative between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.

C. When signs or curb markings are in place giving notice of passenger loading regulation, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle contrary to the regulation. A vehicle in violation of this regulation may be removed and impounded at the owner’s expense.

56.30.105 Designated short-term parking (green curb).
A. By resolution, the City Council may designate locations where parking is limited to 12 minutes.

B. Restrictions created in accordance with this section shall be in effect between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day except Sundays and holidays unless the resolution designating such locations specifies different hours or days.

C. Short-term parking zones shall be of 12-minute duration unless it is determined that a different time period is more appropriate.

D. When signs or curb markings are in place giving notice of the restricted time regulation, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park such vehicle contrary to the regulation. A vehicle in violation of this regulation may be removed and impounded at the owner’s expense. (Ord. 2023 § 1, 2011)

56.30.110 Limitation on designating loading and passenger zones.
Within an area designated for business uses, not more than one fourth of the total length of any one block may be designated as a general loading or a passenger loading zone.

56.30.120 Designating disabled parking spaces (blue curb).
A. The City Council may by resolution designate parking spaces for the exclusive use by vehicles of the physically disabled or handicapped.

B. When so designated and marked, such parking spaces shall be occupied only by vehicles displaying the distinguishing license plate or placard issued in accordance with the Vehicle Code.

C. Any person who qualifies for issuance of a distinguishing license plate or placard may apply to the Department of Police Services for issuance of a distinguishing placard or decal. When authorized, a $4.00 fee shall be charged for processing and issuing such placards or decals.

D. When signs or curb markings are in place giving notice of disabled parking regulation, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle contrary to the regulation. A vehicle in violation of this regulation may be removed and impounded at the owner’s expense.

56.30.130 Designating diagonal parking.
A. By resolution, the City Council may designate any of the streets or portions of streets as diagonal parking zones.

B. When signs or curb markings are in place indicating the requirement to park diagonally, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park said vehicle except:

1. At the angle to the curb indicated by signs or curb markings allotting space to parked vehicles and entirely within the limits of said allotted space; and

2. With the front wheel nearest the curb within six inches of said curb.

C. The provision of this section shall not apply when a vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading passengers, freight or materials and diagonal parking is not practicable.

D. A vehicle in violation of this regulation may be removed and impounded at the owner’s expense.

56.30.140 Designating public parking lots.
A. By resolution, the City Council may designate City owned or controlled property or portions thereof as a public parking area for vehicles and may then prescribe regulations for the use of such area. Such regulations may include, but are not limited to, such items as the type of vehicles permitted to use the lot, hours during which parking is authorized and duration of parking time permitted.

B. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon land designated as a public parking lot for the purpose of conducting business, unless the person has first obtained a permit from the City in accordance with the provisions of this code.

C. When signs or curb markings are in place giving notice of designated public parking lot regulations, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle contrary to the regulation. A vehicle in violation of this regulation may be removed and impounded at the owner’s expense.

56.30.150 Designating restricted parking lots.
A. By resolution, the City Council may designate public areas, the beach and other City property on which the operating, stopping, standing or parking of vehicles by the public is either prohibited or restricted.

B. When signs or curb markings are in place, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle contrary to the regulation. A vehicle in violation of this regulation may be removed and impounded at the owner’s expense.

56.30.160 Prohibition – Parking outside marked spaces.
No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle on a street where parking spaces are marked unless the vehicle is within a single, marked space. A vehicle in violation of this regulation may be removed and impounded at the owner’s expense; except, the operator may use more than one marked space if the size or shape of the vehicle makes compliance with this section impossible.

56.30.170 Prohibition – Areas where parking is prohibited.
No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, or park such vehicle in any of the following places:

A. Within or adjacent to any traffic island or median, curbed or uncurbed, unless authorized and clearly so indicated with appropriate signs or markings;

B. In any area where the stopping, standing or parking of any vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property;

C. On any street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or the installation of underground utilities or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided, that signs giving notice of such parking are erected or placed at least 24 hours prior to the effective time of such no parking;

D. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle within 100 feet of any intersection when any portion of the vehicle, including its load, is greater than six feet in height when signs giving notice of such prohibition are posted. The City Engineer is authorized to make a determination as to which intersections require such prohibition. (Vehicle Code § 22507) (Ord. 1770)

56.30.180 Prohibition – Storage.
A. No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall allow such vehicle to remain stopped, standing or parked in one location upon any street, alley, highway or public parking lot for a period of time exceeding 72 consecutive hours.

B. Moving a vehicle for a distance of less than 200 feet from its original parking position shall not constitute a change of parking location for purposes of enforcing this title.

C. A vehicle in violation of this regulation may be removed and impounded at the owner’s expense. (Ord. 2051 § 2, 2015)

56.30.190 Prohibition – Large commercial vehicles in residential districts.
A. It is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand or park a commercial vehicle having a manufacturer’s gross weight rating of 10,000 pounds or more on a street, alley or highway in any residential district within the City. (Vehicle Code § 22507-5)

B. “Commercial vehicle” means any vehicle whose primary use is for commercial purposes.

C. The prohibition in this section shall not apply to an operator who stops, stands or parks a commercial vehicle when then engaged in:

1. Making a pick up or delivery of goods, wares or merchandise from or to property located on the restricted street, alley or highway on which the commercial vehicle is stopped, standing or parked; or

2. Providing services to property located on the restricted street, alley or highway on which the commercial vehicle is stopped, standing or parked so long as the commercial vehicle’s presence is required to provide the service; or

3. Delivering materials to be used for a project for which a building permit has previously been obtained involving the repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure located upon the restricted street, alley or highway on which a vehicle is stopped, standing or parked.

56.30.200 Prohibition – Oversized vehicles on any public street, alley, highway, including State highways, within the City.
A. In addition to the general prohibition against parking commercial vehicles in residential districts, it is the purpose of this section to preserve both aesthetic quality and available parking space within the City from the intrusion of oversized vehicles.

B. “Oversized vehicle” means a vehicle or combination of connected vehicles that exceeds 24 feet in length, is more than 95 inches in width, or has a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating in excess of 10,000 pounds.

C. Prohibition. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any oversized vehicle shall allow such vehicle to remain stopped, standing or parked in one location upon any public street, alley, highway, including State highways, within the City for a period of time exceeding three consecutive hours. Relocating a vehicle a distance of less than 500 feet from its original parking position shall not constitute a change of parking location for purposes of complying with this section.

D. Exception. Any resident who owns or has possession, custody or control of any oversized vehicle may remain stopped, standing or parked in one location upon any public street or alley within the City for a period of time not exceeding 48 hours so long as the vehicle is being loaded or otherwise prepared for noncommercial purposes or is being unloaded or otherwise dealt with following its use for noncommercial purposes.

A permit must be obtained at the Police Department prior to the commencement of such activity. Permits will be available at the Police Department, Monday through Friday, except holidays, from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.

E. The prohibition set forth in this section shall not apply to a vehicle parked to make emergency repairs so long as permission is obtained from the Police Department which shall be given by any police officer, without the payment of a fee, upon a showing by the requesting party that the vehicle is immovable or that there is no place to which the vehicle can be moved where emergency repairs can be accomplished.

F. The Police Department will operate/maintain a permit program which will authorize the temporary parking of oversized vehicles by a bona fide resident’s guest.

1. The permit will be issued to the resident for a visiting, non-Coronado guest. The duration of the permit shall not exceed 48 hours.

2. No more than three permits shall be authorized to any one resident/residence in any one-year period. Permits may not be issued for consecutive periods and only one permit will be issued to a resident for a guest at a time.

3. The temporary parking authorization only exempts the parking restrictions while parked at the residence where the permit has been granted.

4. The vehicle shall not be used for overnight camping, lodging, residing in or using for accommodation purposes.

5. The parked vehicle shall not create a safety or traffic hazard.

G. A vehicle in violation of this regulation may be removed and impounded at the owner’s expense. (Ord. 1984 § 3, 2007)

56.30.210 Prohibition – Nonmotorized vehicles on any public street, alley, highway, including State highways, within the City.
A. It is the purpose of this section to preserve the aesthetic quality of residential communities by prohibiting the placing of detached, nonmotorized vehicles on streets, alleys and highways within the City.

B. “Detached, nonmotorized vehicle” means any vehicle which is not self-propelled, including, without limitation, boat trailers, travel trailers and mobile home trailers, and which is not attached to a vehicle which is motorized.

C. Prohibition. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any nonmotorized vehicle shall allow such vehicle to remain stopped, standing or parked in one location, detached from a motorized vehicle, upon any public street, alley, highway, including State highways, within the City for a period of time exceeding three consecutive hours. Relocating a vehicle a distance of less than 500 feet from its original parking position shall not constitute a change of parking location for the purposes of complying with this section.

D. Exception. Any resident who owns or has possession, custody or control of any nonmotorized vehicle detached from a motorized vehicle may remain stopped, standing or parked in one location upon any public street, alley or highway within the City for a period of time not exceeding 48 hours so long as the motorized vehicle is being loaded or otherwise prepared for noncommercial purposes or is being unloaded or otherwise dealt with following its use for noncommercial purposes.

A permit must be obtained at the Police Department prior to the commencement of such activity. Permits will be available at the Police Department, Monday through Friday, except holidays, from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.

E. The prohibition set forth in this section shall not apply when a nonmotorized vehicle is parked to make emergency repairs so long as permission is obtained from the Police Department which shall be given, without the payment of a fee, by any police officer upon a showing by the requesting party that the vehicle is immovable or that there is no place to which the nonmotorized vehicle can be moved where emergency repairs can be accomplished.

F. A vehicle in violation of this regulation may be removed and impounded at the owner’s expense. (Ord. 1984 § 4, 2007)

56.30.220 Prohibition – Repairing or servicing vehicles.
No person shall construct or cause to be constructed, repair or cause to be repaired, grease or cause to be greased, dismantle or cause to be dismantled any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street, alley or highway in this City. Exception: Temporary emergency repairs may be made upon a public street.

56.30.230 Prohibition – Commercial washing/polishing vehicles.
No person shall wash or cause to be washed, polish or cause to be polished any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street, alley or highway in this City when a charge is made for such service.

56.30.240 Prohibition – Peddlers and vendors.
Repealed by Ord. 2090.

56.30.250 Authority to remove vehicles for sale.
A. Purpose. The City Council of the City of Coronado finds that the display of vehicles for sale on its streets creates a distraction for drivers and pedestrians, thereby creating a hazard; creates a nuisance for the community; and decreases the parking available for businesses and residents. The Council further finds that numerous methods are available and necessary to alleviate this problem in the method most appropriate. The purpose of this section is to authorize and empower an authorized peace officer or other regularly employed and salaried employee of the City of Coronado who is engaged in directing traffic or enforcing parking laws and regulations of the City, to take various actions when public streets and highways identified in this section are used for the private sale of vehicles.

B. Parking For Sale Vehicles Restricted. It is unlawful to park a vehicle on a street designated in subsection (C)(2) of this section when, because of a sign or placard on the vehicle, it appears that the primary purpose of parking the vehicle at that location is to display and advertise to the public that the vehicle is for sale, and where the notice required in subsection C of this section has been given to the owner or operator of the vehicle in the manner set forth therein.

C. Pre-Removal Notice. Prior to the removal of a vehicle pursuant to this section, the officer or employee must first determine that within the past 30 days, the vehicle is known to have been previously issued a notice of parking violation, which notice must contain the following:

1. A warning that an additional violation of this section may result in the impoundment of the vehicle, even if the vehicle is moved to another street designated under this section, so long as the sign or placard offering the vehicle for sale remains on the vehicle.

2. A list of the following streets subject to this section, which are hereby identified by the City Council as streets where the parking of vehicles for sale is prohibited, is incorporated in the aforementioned warning.

 

STREET

BEGINNING LIMIT

ENDING LIMIT

Orange Avenue

1000 Second Street

1200 Avenida Del Sol

Silver Strand Boulevard (SR 75)

1200 Avenida Del Sol

Tulagi Road

Strand Way

1200 Avenida Del Sol

Rendova Road

First Street

100 Alameda Boulevard

1499 First Street

Second Street

200 Glorietta Boulevard

200 Orange Avenue

Third Street

300 Glorietta Boulevard

300 Alameda Boulevard

Fourth Street

400 Alameda Boulevard

400 Glorietta Boulevard

Sixth Street

600 Orange Avenue

600 C Avenue

Seventh Street

700 Orange Avenue

700 C Avenue

C Avenue

1100 Sixth Street

1100 Seventh Street

Glorietta Boulevard

2000 Second Street

500 Tenth Street

Pomona Avenue

1500 Orange Avenue

1500 Fourth Street

Ocean Boulevard

200 Ocean Drive

1100 R H Dana Place

Palm Avenue

700 Fourth Street

400 F Avenue

(Ord. 2005 § 1, 2009)

Chapter 56.32
PARKING METERS
Sections:

56.32.010    Establishing parking meter zones.

56.32.020    Zone designations and meter rates.

56.32.030    Time of operation.

56.32.040    Operational procedure to be followed.

56.32.041    Unlawful to park after meter time has expired.

56.32.042    Unlawful to extend time beyond limit.

56.32.043    Improper use of meter.

56.32.044    Deposit of coins in meter by unauthorized person.

56.32.045    Improper use of parking meters.

56.32.050    Rule of evidence.

56.32.052    Application of other chapters.

56.32.060    Installation of parking meters.

56.32.062    Citation for illegal parking.

56.32.070    Use of fees.

56.32.010 Establishing parking meter zones.
The City Council may by resolution designate certain streets, or portions thereof, and public parking lots, as parking meter zones; and when parking meters are thereafter installed as herein provided adjacent to the parking space in such zones, the provisions of this chapter shall govern parking in such parking spaces; provided, however, that in the event no parking meters are installed in any parking spaces within the parking meter zone, then the maximum time for parking in any such space shall be that prescribed by the zone designation.

56.32.020 Zone designations and meter rates.
The resolution establishing a parking meter zone shall specify whether it shall be an eight-hour, four-hour, two-hour, or 30-minute zone. Meter rates for said zones shall be set forth in an adopted fee schedule, which may be amended from time to time, and as needed, by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 2049 § 4, 2015; Ord. 1669; Ord. 1664)

56.32.030 Time of operation.
The provisions of this code relating to the operation of parking meters and the maximum time parking is allowed in parking meter zones shall be in effect between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day except Sundays and holidays unless the resolution designating a zone location specifies different hours or days.

56.32.040 Operational procedure to be followed.
Immediately after occupancy of a parking meter space, the operator of a vehicle shall deposit a coin of the United States in said parking meter and if necessary turn a crank, knob, or handle in accordance with the instructions posted on the face of the parking meter.

56.32.041 Unlawful to park after meter time has expired.
No operator of any vehicle shall permit said vehicle to remain parked in any parking space during any time that the meter is showing a signal indicating that such space is illegally in use other than such time immediately after the original occupancy as is necessary to operate the meter to show legal parking.

Exception(s): The provisions of this section shall not apply to holders of special license plates issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles for Congressional Medal of Honor recipients; Legion of Valor recipients; Former Prisoners of War; Purple Heart recipients; and Pearl Harbor Survivors under Vehicle Code Sections 5101.3 to 5101.6 and 5101.8 or other similar California statutory authority. (Ord. 1976 § 2, 2006)

56.32.042 Unlawful to extend time beyond limit.
No person shall follow the operational procedure or any part of the operational procedure for the purpose of increasing or extending the parking time of any vehicle beyond the legal parking time which has been established for the parking space adjacent to which said parking meter is placed.

56.32.043 Improper use of meter.
No person shall deposit of cause to be deposited in any parking meter any defaced or bent coin, or any slug, device or metallic substitute for a coin of the United States, or deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter.

56.32.044 Deposit of coins in meter by unauthorized person.
No person, other than the owner or operator of a vehicle, shall deposit any coin in any parking meter without the knowledge or consent of said owner or operator of the vehicle using the parking space immediately adjacent to said meter.

56.32.045 Improper use of parking meters.
A. Except where a City-owned bicycle locking rack affixed to the parking meter standard is used, no person shall attach or secure anything to or lean anything against a parking meter standard.

B. Anything attached to, secured to or leaned against a parking meter or a parking meter standard in violation of this section may be removed as follows:

1. A written notice shall be placed adjacent to such thing advising of its intended removal in 60 minutes, the location where such thing can be retrieved, and the right to request an informal hearing.

2. Upon proper notice, such thing may be removed using no more force than is necessary to clear and make safe the public way.

3. Upon receipt of such thing at the impounding facility, the impounding facility shall compute the actual costs to the City of Coronado for removing and storing such thing. This cost shall be the amount of the fee to be paid for retrieving such thing.

4. If such thing is not retrieved, then the City shall treat such thing as any other thing found to be abandoned on public property.

C. Within 48 hours of the posting of notice of intention to remove, an owner of the thing may request, either in person or in writing, an informal meeting conducted before the City Manager or the City Manager’s designated representative. The meeting will be conducted within 48 hours of the request, excluding weekends and holidays. The sole purpose of the meeting is to determine whether the thing was lawfully impounded. If probable cause cannot be established for the impounding, then the City of Coronado shall be responsible for the cost incurred for impounding. (Ord. 1548; Ord. 1450)

56.32.050 Rule of evidence.
The parking or standing of any vehicle in a parking space, at which space the parking meter displays the sign or signal indicating illegal parking, shall constitute a prima facie presumption that the vehicle has been parked or allowed to stand in such space for a period longer than permitted by this code.

56.32.052 Application of other chapters.
No section of this chapter shall be construed as permitting any parking in violation of any other provision of this code.

56.32.060 Installation of parking meters.
Subject to the availability of operable meters, the Director of Police Services shall cause parking meters to be installed and maintained in all parking meter zones.

A. Parking meters shall be installed upon the curb or sidewalk area immediately adjacent to each parking space. Each meter shall be placed in such manner as to show or display by a sign or signal that the parking space adjacent thereto is or is not legally in use.

B. Each parking meter shall be set to display, after the operational procedure has been completed, a sign or signal indicating legal parking for that period of time conforming to the limit of parking time as indicated on the meter. Each parking meter shall indicate the limit of parking time in the parking space adjacent to the parking meter, and shall continue to operate from the time of the completion of the operational procedure until the expiration of thereof for the part of the street upon which said meter is placed. Each said meter shall also be so arranged that upon the expiration of said legal parking and by proper signal that the lawful parking period has expired.

56.32.062 Citation for illegal parking.
It is the duty of each police officer, parking meter officer or public services officer assigned to parking enforcement by the Director of Police Services to record the number of any meter at which any vehicle is overparked, as provided for in this chapter, take the State vehicle license of such vehicle, and issue in writing a citation for illegal parking in the same form and subject to the same procedure provided for by the laws of the State of California applicable to traffic violations within this City; except when the vehicle is an official City vehicle parked while the operator is performing official duties in the vicinity. (Ord. 1651)

56.32.070 Use of fees.
The coins deposited in parking meters as provided herein are hereby levied and assessed as fees to provide for the proper regulation, control and inspection of traffic upon the public streets and in public parking lots, and the cost of supervising, regulating and inspecting the parking of vehicles in the parking meter zones created hereby, and to cover the cost of the purchase, supervision, protection, inspection, installation, operation, maintenance, control, and use of the parking meters and associated facilities installed therein, and the fund created thereby shall be devoted exclusively to those purposes.

Chapter 56.40
RESTRICTED USE OF STREETS
Sections:

56.40.010    Advertising vehicles.

56.40.020    Truck routes.

56.40.030    Commercial vehicles prohibited.

56.40.040    Movement of heavy vehicles and equipment.

56.40.010 Advertising vehicles.
No person shall park, operate or drive any vehicle used for advertising purposes or any advertising vehicle equipped with a sound amplifying or loud speaking device upon any street or alley at any time without a special permit issued by the Director of Police Services.

56.40.020 Truck routes.
A. Whenever any resolution of this City designates and describes any street or portion thereof a street the use of which is permitted by any vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons, the City Engineer is hereby authorized to designate such street or streets by appropriate signs as “truck routes” for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight of three tons.

B. When any such truck route or routes are established and designated by appropriate signs the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons shall drive on such route or routes and none other except that nothing in this section shall prohibit the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of three tons coming from a “truck route” having ingress and egress by direct route to and from restricted streets and when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on such restricted streets or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon such restricted streets for which a building permit has previously been obtained therefor.

C. The provisions of this section shall not apply to (1) passenger busses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission, or (2) any vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility.

56.40.030 Commercial vehicles prohibited.
A. A resolution of the Council may designate and describe any street or portion thereof as a street the use of which is prohibited by any commercial vehicle, or by a particular class of commercial vehicle; and thereafter, the City Engineer shall erect and maintain appropriate signs on those streets affected by such resolution.

B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to passenger busses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission.

56.40.040 Movement of heavy vehicles and equipment.
No person shall move or operate upon any of the streets under the jurisdiction of the City of Coronado any vehicle with a load or loads in excess of those permitted by the Vehicle Code without a written permit. The City Engineer may authorize by written permit, on other than State highways, a load or loads in excess of those allowed for in the Vehicle Code, if, in his judgment, the streets upon which such vehicle is to be operated can safely withstand the additional size or weight. The applicant may be required to guarantee to the City that all costs of repair to the streets or the public property of the City damaged by the movement of such load or loads will be paid in full. Such permit shall be granted upon such conditions and upon depositing such bond as the City Engineer in his discretion may require. (Ord. 1956 § 17, 2004)

Chapter 56.50
SPECIAL SPEED ZONES
Sections:

56.50.010    Decrease of State law maximum speed.

56.50.020    Increase of State law maximum speed.

56.50.010 Decrease of State law maximum speed.
When it has been determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that the speed permitted by State law outside of business and residence areas is greater than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist upon any street, the Council may by resolution declare that the prima facie speed limit is set at a lower limit, and such speed limit shall become effective when signs are erected giving notice thereof.

56.50.020 Increase of State law maximum speed.
Whenever it has been determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey that the speed permitted by State law is less than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist upon any street, the Council may by resolution declare that the prima facie speed limit is set at a greater when signs are erected giving notice thereof. (Ord. 1499)

Chapter 56.60
REPEALED
(Repealed by Ord. 1833)

Chapter 56.70
PERMIT PARKING ZONES
Sections:

56.70.010    Purpose.

56.70.020    Definition.

56.70.030    Designation of zones.

56.70.040    Parking regulation in designated zones.

56.70.050    General prohibitions.

56.70.060    Permit issuance.

56.70.070    Displaying permits.

56.70.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to set forth procedures and regulations for establishing permit parking zones to protect residential areas of the City. (Ord. 1765)

56.70.020 Definition.
“Residential parking” includes parking for:

A. Residents at their residence;

B. Guests of residents; and

C. Public and commercial services and deliveries being made to a residence.

56.70.030 Designation of zones.
A. By a resolution adopted following a noticed public hearing, the City Council may designate permit parking zones when the City Council finds facts that support each of the following conclusions:

1. The proposed zone is designated for residential uses only;

2. The proposed zone is being used as an on-street parking site for commercial or commuter purposes;

3. The commercial or commuter parking within the proposed zone adversely impacts the residential character and quality of life in the proposed zone;

4. The institution of a permit parking zone will not adversely impact any shoreline access or recreation sites, including, but not limited to, existing shoreline access points along First Street, Coronado City Beach and Glorietta Bay;

5. The establishment or enlargement of any permit parking zone shall not be final until being reviewed and approved by the Coastal Commission as a local coastal program amendment;

B. The resolution shall designate the geographic boundaries of the zone; and

C. The zone regulation shall be effective following the adoption of the resolution, the placement of signs and a 30-day period for persons to obtain required permits. (Ord. 1779)

56.70.040 Parking regulation in designated zones.
Within a designated permit parking zone, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on a public street or alley between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and Saturday 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m., holidays excepted, unless a valid parking permit is properly displayed on such vehicle. (Ord. 1799)

56.70.050 General prohibitions.
A. It shall be unlawful for any permittee to loan, assign, sell or otherwise transfer a permit for use by a vehicle whose parking is within the zone and is unrelated to the permittee’s residence.

B. It shall be unlawful for any person to make false representations in obtaining a permit.

C. It shall be unlawful for any person to use a permit without the express authority of the permittee.

D. It shall be unlawful for any person to counterfeit or otherwise alter any permit.

56.70.060 Permit issuance.
The Department of Police Services shall issue parking permits as follows:

A. Annual Permit – Formula for Maximum Allowance. The number of vehicles customarily parked at the residence by persons who reside at the residence within the zone.

B. Temporary Permits. A maximum of three permits (temporary) for each residence in the zone for use only by public, commercial or private guests temporarily at the residence.

C. As a condition to the issuance of a permit, the Department of Police Services shall collect a fee from the permittee in an amount established in accordance with this code.

56.70.070 Displaying permits.
A. An annual permit shall be issued in the form of a decal which shall be affixed to the left rear bumper of the registered vehicle. If the vehicle is not equipped with a bumper, the decal shall be visibly attached to the left rear portion of the vehicle.

B. A temporary permit shall be issued in the form of a card which shall be placed on the dashboard of the authorized vehicle, on the driver’s side, clearly visible from the outside. (Ord. 1799)

Chapter 56.80
SPECTATORS PROHIBITED AT ILLEGAL SPEED CONTESTS OR EXHIBITIONS OF SPEED
Sections:

56.80.010    Purpose.

56.80.020    Definitions.

56.80.030    Spectator at illegal speed contests or exhibitions of speed – Violation.

56.80.040    Relevant circumstance to prove a violation.

56.80.050    Admissibility of prior acts.

56.80.060    Enforcement.

56.80.010 Purpose.
A. The City Council for the City of Coronado finds and declares that pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 23109, motor vehicle speed contests and exhibitions of speed conducted on public streets and highways are illegal. Motor vehicle speed contests and exhibitions of speed are more commonly known as street races or drag races.

B. Such street racing threatens the health and safety of the public, interferes with pedestrian and vehicular traffic, creates a public nuisance, and interferes with the right of private business owners to enjoy the use of their property within the City of Coronado. When illegal street races occur on various streets within the City, racers and spectators gather on these streets late at night and in the early morning hours, blocking the streets and sidewalks to traffic, forming a racetrack area, placing bets, and otherwise encouraging, aiding, and abetting the racing process.

C. Illegal street racers can accelerate to high speeds without regard to oncoming traffic, pedestrians, or vehicles parked or moving nearby. The racers can drive quickly from street to street, race for several hours, and then move to other locations upon the arrival of the police. Participants in this illegal activity use cell phones, police scanners, and other electronic devices to communicate with each other to avoid arrest. Participants also use the Internet to provide information on where to race, and give advice on how to avoid detection and prosecution.

D. In many cases, illegal street races can attract hundreds of spectators. The mere presence of spectators at these events fuels the illegal street racing and creates an environment in which these illegal activities can flourish.

E. This chapter is adopted to prohibit spectators at illegal street races with the aim of significantly curbing this criminal activity. This chapter targets a very clear, limited population and gives proper notice to citizens as to what activities are lawful and what activities are unlawful. In discouraging spectators, the act of organizing and participating in illegal street races will be discouraged.

F. This chapter makes evidence of specified prior act admissible to show the propensity of the defendant to be present at or attend illegal street races, if the prior act or acts occurred within three years of the presently charged offense. (Ord. 1950 § 2, 2003)

56.80.020 Definitions.
A. “Illegal motor vehicle speed contest” or “illegal exhibition of speed” means any speed contest or exhibition of speed referred to in California Vehicle Code Sections 23109(a) and 23109(c).

B. “Preparations for the illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed” include, but are not limited to, situations in which: (1) a group of motor vehicles or individuals has arrived at a location for the purpose of participating in or being spectators at the event; (2) a group of individuals has lined one or both sides of a public street or highway for the purpose of participating in or being a spectator at the event; (3) a group of individuals has gathered on private property open to the general public without the consent of the owner, operator, or agent thereof for the purpose of participating in or being a spectator at the event; (4) one or more individuals has impeded the free public use of a public street or highway by actions, words, or physical barriers for the purpose of conducting the event; (5) two or more vehicles have lined up with motors running for an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed; (6) one or more drivers is revving the vehicle’s engine or spinning its tires in preparation for the event; or (7) an individual is stationed at or near one or more motor vehicles serving as a race starter.

C. “Spectator” means any individual who is present at an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed, or at a location where preparations are being made for such activities, for the purpose of viewing, observing, watching, or witnessing the event as it progresses. Spectator includes any individual at the location of the event without regard to whether the individual arrived at the event by driving a vehicle, riding as a passenger in a vehicle, walking, or arriving by some other means. (Ord. 1950 § 3, 2003)

56.80.030 Spectator at illegal speed contests or exhibitions of speed – Violation.
A. Any individual who is knowingly present as a spectator, either on a public street or highway, or on private property open to the general public without the consent of the owner, operator, or agent thereof, at an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed is guilty of a misdemeanor subject to a maximum of 90 days in jail and a fine of $1,000, except that notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection, any such violation constituting a misdemeanor under this section may, in the discretion of the attorney having prosecutorial functions, be charged and prosecuted as an infraction in accordance with CMC 1.08.050.

B. Any individual who is knowingly present as a spectator, either on a public street or highway, or on private property open to the general public without the consent of the owner, operator, or agent thereof, where preparations are being made for an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a maximum of 90 days in jail and a fine of $1,000, except that notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection, any such violation constituting a misdemeanor under this section may, in the discretion of the attorney having prosecutorial functions, be charged and prosecuted as an infraction in accordance with CMC 1.08.050.

C. An individual is present at the illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed if that individual is within 200 feet of the location of the event, or within 200 feet of the location where preparations are being made for the event.

D. Exemption. Nothing in this section shall prohibit or make illegal law enforcement officers or their agents from being spectators at illegal motor vehicle speed contests or exhibitions of speed in the course of their official duties. (Ord. 1950 § 4, 2003)

56.80.040 Relevant circumstance to prove a violation.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, to prove a violation of CMC 56.80.030, admissible evidence may include, but is not limited to, any of the following:

A. The time of day;

B. The nature and description of the scene;

C. The number of people at the scene;

D. The location of the individual charged in relation to any individual or group present at the scene;

E. The number and description of motor vehicles at the scene;

F. That the individual charged drove or was transported to the scene;

G. That the individual charged has previously participated in an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed;

H. That the individual charged has previously aided and abetted an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed;

I. That the individual charged has previously attended an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed;

J. That the individual charged previously was present at a location where preparations were being made for an illegal speed contest or exhibition of speed or where an exhibition of speed or illegal motor vehicle speed contest was in progress. (Ord. 1950 § 5, 2003)

56.80.050 Admissibility of prior acts.
The list of circumstances set forth in CMC 56.80.040 is not exclusive. Evidence of prior acts may be admissible to show the propensity of the defendant to be present at or attend an illegal motor vehicle speed contest of exhibition speed, if the prior act or acts occurred within three years of the presently charged offense. These prior acts may always be admissible to show knowledge on the part of the defendant that a speed contest or exhibition of speed was taking place at the time of the presently charged offense. Evidence of prior acts shall not be limited to those that occurred within the City of Coronado, and may include evidence of such acts from other jurisdictions within the County of San Diego. (Ord. 1950 § 6, 2003)

56.80.060 Enforcement.
Enforcement of this chapter shall be under the jurisdiction of the Director of Police Services. (Ord. 1950 § 7, 2003)

Chapter 56.90
USE OF ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES
Sections:

56.90.010    Purpose and intent.

56.90.020    Definitions.

56.90.030    General prohibition.

56.90.040    EPAMD safety regulations.

56.90.050    Penalties for violation.

56.90.010 Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect public health, safety and welfare by prohibiting the use and operation of electric personal assistive mobility devices (“EPAMD”), as defined in California Vehicle Code Section 313 (as the same may be amended from time to time), along Orange Avenue extending from Eighth Street to Avenida de las Arenas in the City of Coronado. The unregulated use and operation of EPAMDs within City limits jeopardizes public health and safety because such operation puts pedestrians at risk of being injured or being forced off public sidewalks, walkways and pathways to avoid injury. (Ord. 1998 § 2, 2008)

56.90.020 Definitions.
A. “City” means the City of Coronado.

B. “Electric personal assistive mobility device” or “EPAMD” means a self-balancing, non-tandem, two-wheeled device, that is not greater than 20 inches deep and 25 inches wide and can turn in place, designed to transport only one person, with an electric propulsion system averaging less than 750 watts (one horsepower), the maximum speed of which, when powered solely by a propulsion system on a paved level surface, is no more than 12.5 miles per hour, as defined in Section 313 of the California Vehicle Code.

C. “EPAMD operator” or “person operating an EPAMD” shall mean any person who owns, leases, rents or uses an electric personal assistive mobility device for their personal, recreational or business use. (Ord. 1998 § 2, 2008)

56.90.030 General prohibition.
A. An EPAMD may only be operated in the City of Coronado in accordance with this chapter.

B. It shall be unlawful to operate an EPAMD on any sidewalk, walkway, or pathway located along Orange Avenue extending from Eighth Street to Avenida de las Arenas, and along Ocean Boulevard adjacent to Coronado Beach.

C. No person shall operate an EPAMD for their personal, recreational or business use within the City limits in violation of California Vehicle Code Sections 21281.5 and 21282, respectively.

D. No person shall operate an EPAMD upon any public beach within the Coronado City limits.

E. No person shall operate an EPAMD upon any public street within the Coronado City limits unless crossing an intersection.

F. These prohibitions shall not apply:

1. Where EPAMD is being operated as part of any activity or event for which a permit allowing such devices has been issued by the City of Coronado; or

2. Use of EPAMD by any governmental agency, public utility or the U.S. Postal Service; or

3. City employees conducting City business on City equipment including, but not limited to, public safety officers; or

4. To any disabled person (as defined by California Vehicle Code Section 295.5(a)(c)) who displays a state-issued disabled card. (Ord. 1998 § 2, 2008)

56.90.040 EPAMD safety regulations.
The following safety criteria are established for operators of EPAMD in the City and are minimum criteria set and adopted by the City Council:

A. Any person operating an EPAMD must weigh no less than 100 pounds (as recommended by the manufacturer);

B. Any person operating an EPAMD, who is under the age of 18 years, must wear a safety helmet which meets the specifications of Vehicle Code Section 21212;

C. Any person operating an EPAMD must yield the right-of-way to walking pedestrians on any sidewalk or crosswalk upon which it is lawful to operate EPAMD, and shall operate EPAMDs in a single-file line when encountering pedestrians or others occupying sidewalks and crosswalks;

D. Any person operating an EPAMD must obey all traffic and pedestrian control signals and signs;

E. EPAMDs may only be operated on sidewalks, bike paths, pathways, trails, and parks within the City’s limits except as prohibited in CMC 56.90.030; and

F. Any person operating an EPAMD is permitted to cross Orange Avenue only at controlled intersections. (Ord. 1998 § 2, 2008)

56.90.050 Penalties for violation.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. Notwithstanding CMC 1.08.050(A), any person convicted of an infraction shall be punished by a fine as follows: for the first offense by a warning or a fine of not more than $50.00; and for a second offense and each additional offense thereafter, occurring within one year of the first offense, by fines of not more than $100.00. (Ord. 1998 § 2, 2008)

Title 60
SEWERS
Chapters:

60.04    Wastewater System

60.08    Sewer Service Fees

60.12    Wastewater Capacity Fee

60.16    Storm Drainage System Charge

Chapter 60.04
WASTEWATER SYSTEM
Sections:

60.04.010    Purpose.

60.04.014    Scope.

60.04.016    Policy.

60.04.020    Definitions.

60.04.030    Administration.

60.04.040    Notice.

60.04.050    Approval of wastewater facility.

60.04.060    Availability of the City’s wastewater facilities.

60.04.070    Reserved.

60.04.080    Reserved.

60.04.090    Reserved.

60.04.100    Permit required for discharge.

60.04.110    Application for discharge permit.

60.04.120    Contents of discharge permit.

60.04.130    Permit conditions, general.

60.04.140    Permit conditions, special (pretreatment).

60.04.144    Permit conditions, special (food establishments).

60.04.150    Permit conditions, standard.

60.04.160    Annual discharge permit fee.

60.04.170    Amended discharge permit.

60.04.180    Inspection and sampling.

60.04.900    Prohibitions.

60.04.910    Enforcement.

60.04.920    Discrepancies between actual and reported discharge quantities.

60.04.010 Purpose.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the maximum beneficial public use of the City’s wastewater system through adequate regulation of sewer construction, sewer use and industrial wastewater discharge, to provide for equitable distribution of the City’s costs, and to provide procedures for complying with wastewater discharge requirements placed upon the City through interagency agreement or by other regulatory bodies.

B. To comply with stated policies of the Federal government and to permit the City to meet increasingly higher standards, provisions are made in this chapter for the regulation of industrial wastewater discharges. This chapter establishes quantity and quality limitations on industrial wastewater discharges. Methods of cost recovery from industrial wastewater discharges are also established where the discharges impose inequitable collection, treatment or disposal costs on the City. (Ord. 1795; Ord. 1782)

60.04.014 Scope.
A. This chapter shall be interpreted in accordance with the definitions set forth herein and the provisions of this chapter shall apply to the direct or indirect discharge of all waste into the City’s wastewater system.

B. This chapter, among other things, provides for the regulation of sewer construction in areas within the City’s boundaries, the quantity and quality of discharged wastes, the degree of waste pretreatment required, the setting of waste discharge fees to provide for equitable distribution of costs, the approval of plans for sewer construction, the issuance of permits for industrial wastewater discharge and of other miscellaneous permits, and the establishment of penalties for violation of this chapter.

60.04.016 Policy.
A. The City builds and operates and/or contracts for public sewers and wastewater facilities collectively known as the City’s wastewater system, which serves homes, industries and commercial establishments. The following policies apply to wastewater discharges within the City’s boundaries and to other discharges that are tributary to the City’s wastewater facilities.

B. Generally, wastewater originating within the City’s boundaries will be removed by the City’s wastewater system provided the wastewater will not:

1. Damage structures;

2. Create nuisances such as odors;

3. Menace public health;

4. Impose unreasonable collection, treatment or disposal costs on the City;

5. Interfere with wastewater treatment processes;

6. Exceed quality requirements set by regulatory government agencies or interagency agreements; or

7. Detrimentally affect the local environment.

C. The City is committed to a policy of wastewater renovation and reuse in order to provide an alternate source of water supply and to reduce the overall costs of wastewater treatment and disposal. The renovation of wastewater through secondary and/or tertiary wastewater treatment processes will necessitate stringent quality requirements on industrial wastewater discharges so as to facilitate such wastewater renovation.

D. Recovery and reuse procedures established by industrial wastewater dischargers themselves to meet the limitation set on their discharges are preferred by the City over those procedures designed solely to meet wastewater discharge limitations. Methods providing for beneficial reuse of otherwise wasted resources is the preferred method of industrial wastewater treatment wherever feasible.

E. Optimum use of the City’s wastewater facilities may require that certain industrial wastewater be discharged during periods of low flow in the City’s wastewater system.

60.04.020 Definitions.
A. Unless otherwise defined herein, terms relating to water and wastewater shall be defined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation.

B. The following terms used in this chapter shall be defined as follows:

1. “Applicant” shall mean a person, firm or corporation who applies for connection to a public sewer, approval of plans to construct, to modify wastewater facilities or a Permit for Industrial Wastewater Discharge.

2. “Director” is the Director of Public Services.

3. “Discharger” shall mean any person that discharges or causes a discharge of wastewater directly or indirectly to a public sewer.

4. “Domestic wastewater” shall mean the liquid and waterborne wastes derived from the ordinary living processes in a dwelling unit, said wastes being of such character as to permit satisfactory disposal, without special treatment, into a public sewer.

5. “Food establishment” shall mean any facility that prepares, serves or processes food for consumption by the public.

6. “Industrial wastewater” shall mean all wastewater, excluding domestic wastewater, and shall include all wastewater from any producing, manufacturing, processing, institutional, commercial, service, agricultural, food preparation, or other operation. These may also include wastes of human origin similar to domestic wastewater.

7. “Mass emission rate” shall mean the weight of a specific material discharged to the public sewer during a given time interval.

8. “Person” shall mean any individual, partnership, entity, firm, association, corporation or public agency including the State of California and the United States of America.

9. “Public sewer” shall mean a sewer owned and operated by the City which is tributary to treatment facilities operated or utilized by the City of Coronado.

10. “Standard methods” shall mean procedures described in the current edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, as published by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation.

11. “Suspended solids” shall mean any insoluble material contained as a component of wastewater and capable of separation from the liquid portion of said wastewater by laboratory filtration as determined by the appropriate testing procedure and standard methods.

12. “Treatment facilities” shall mean treatment works actually used in the treatment of wastewater or for the reclamation of wastewater.

13. “Waste” shall mean any and all waste substances, liquid or solid, gaseous, or radioactive, associated with human habitation, or of human or animal origin, or from any producing, manufacturing or processing operation of whatever nature, including such wastes placed within containers of whatever nature, prior to and for the purpose of disposal via a public sewer.

14. “Wastewater” shall mean waste and water, whether treated or untreated, discharged into or permitted to enter a public sewer.

15. “Wastewater constituents and characteristics” shall mean the individual chemical, physical, bacteriological or radiological parameters, including volume, flow rate and such other parameters that define, classify or measure the quality and quantity of wastewater.

16. “Wastewater system or facilities” shall mean any and all facilities used for collecting, conveying, pumping, treating and disposing of wastewater.

17. “Lateral” shall mean a pipe or other conduit that transports sewage from a source to a collector main, said main being located in a public right-of-way. The installation, maintenance and operation of a lateral shall be the responsibility of the property owner including the lateral connection to the public collector main.

60.04.030 Administration.
A. The Director shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Director may be delegated by the Director to persons in the employ of the City.

B. The Director is authorized to make and enforce supplemental regulations necessary for the administration of this chapter. The Director may amend such administrative regulations from time to time as conditions require. These administrative regulations shall be consistent with the general policy established in this chapter.

C. The Director shall keep a permanent and accurate account of all fees and charges received under this chapter, giving the names and addresses of the persons on whose account the fees and charges were paid, the date and amount thereof and the purpose for which charges were paid.

D. Unless otherwise provided herein, whenever the fees and charges required by this chapter are based on estimated values or estimated quantities, the Director shall make such determinations in accordance with established estimating practices.

E. The Director will approve plans for wastewater facilities construction, issue a permit for industrial wastewater discharge or any other permit under this chapter only if the Director determines that the wastewater facilities construction, sewer connection, industrial wastewater discharge or other procedure conforms to the requirements of this chapter.

F. Any time limit provided in any written notice or in any provision of this chapter may be extended only by a written directive of the Director.

60.04.040 Notice.
A. Unless otherwise provided herein, any notice required to be given by the Director under this chapter shall be in writing and served in person or by registered or certified mail. If served by mail, the notice shall be sent to the last address known to the Director. Where the address is unknown, service may be made upon the owner of record of the property involved.

B. Notice shall be deemed to have been given at the time of deposit, postage prepaid, in a facility regularly serviced by the United States Postal Service.

60.04.050 Approval of wastewater facility.
A. Any person proposing to construct a wastewater facility shall submit to the Director for approval such construction plans and specifications and other details as required to fully describe the proposed wastewater facility. The plans shall have been prepared under the supervision of and shall be signed by an engineer of suitable training registered in the State of California.

B. All required fees and charges shall be paid before approval of plans and specifications.

60.04.060 Availability of the City’s wastewater facilities.
If wastewater facilities capacity is not available, the Director may require the industrial waste discharger to restrict his discharge until sufficient capacity can be made available. When requested, Director will advise persons desiring to locate new facilities as to the areas where industrial wastewater of their proposed quantity and quality can be received by available wastewater facilities. The Director may refuse service to persons locating facilities in areas where their proposed quantity or quality of industrial wastewater is unacceptable in the available collection and/or treatment facility.

60.04.070 Reserved.
60.04.080 Reserved.
60.04.090 Reserved.
60.04.100 Permit required for discharge.
A discharge permit must first be obtained from the Director before discharging any of the following into a public sewer:

A. All wastewater discharges which are required to be controlled by Federal, State of California or local regulations or which interfere with the operation and maintenance of the sewer system and wastewater treatment facilities;

B. All industrial wastewater; and

C. Wastewater discharged into public sewers from facilities engaged in preparing food for consumption by the public.

60.04.110 Application for discharge permit.
A. Persons seeking a discharge permit shall complete and file with the Director an application in the form prescribed by the Director and accompanied by the applicable fees as set forth in the Master Fee Schedule as modified from time to time by resolution of the City Council. The technical data submitted shall be projected or actual, dependent upon applicable circumstance. The applicant may be required to submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information:

1. Name, address and Standard Industrial Classification number of applicant;

2. Volume of wastewater to be discharged;

3. Proposed wastewater constituents and characteristics as determined by a laboratory approved by the City;

4. Time and duration of discharge;

5. Average and 30-minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variation if any;

6. Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises including all materials which are or could be discharged;

7. Plans or diagrams depicting location of on-site sewer lines pumping stations and any reclamation or pretreatment facilities;

8. Time of food preparation operations (regarding food establishments);

9. Description of food preparation, type, number of meals served, cleanup procedures, dining room capacity, number of employees and size of kitchen (regarding food establishments); or

10. Any other information as may be deemed by the Director to be necessary to evaluate the permit application.

B. The Director will evaluate the data furnished by the applicant and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, an on-site inspection of the waste discharge system, treatment systems or other systems relating to the waste discharge may be required. The Director may then issue a discharge permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein.

60.04.120 Contents of discharge permit.
A. Specificity. Each discharge permit shall be issued to a specific permittee, for a specific location, specific use and specific manner of operation.

B. Term of Discharge Permit.

1. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years and shall be stated to expire on a specific date. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year.

2. Multi-year permits for all years other than the last year shall be subject to submission of a renewal request and payment of an annual permit fee 30 days prior to the annual anniversary date of permit issuance. Single year and the last year of multi-year permits shall be subject to submission of an application for a discharge permit and payment of the appropriate permit fee 30 days prior to the permit expiration date.

60.04.130 Permit conditions, general.
A. Discharge permits shall be subject to all provisions of this chapter and all other regulations, user charges and fees established from time to time by ordinance or resolution of the City Council, to include without limitation reimbursement of pertinent costs incurred by the City. The conditions imposed in discharge permits shall be uniformly enforced by the Director in accordance with this chapter, and applicable local, State and Federal regulations.

B. The discharge permit may require quantity or quality restrictions, submission of periodic reports, pretreatment of industrial wastewater before discharge, restriction of peak flow discharges, discharge of certain wastewater only to specified sewers of the City, relocation of point of discharge, prohibition of discharge of certain wastewater components, installation of monitoring and/or metering facilities, restriction of discharge to certain hours of the day, payment of additional charges to defray increased costs of the City created by the wastewater discharge, repayment of costs incurred by the City (relative to compliance tests, violations of the terms of the permit, nonroutine inspections and administrative activities) and such other conditions as may be required to effectuate the purpose of this title.

60.04.140 Permit conditions, special (pretreatment).
A. Permittees shall make wastewater acceptable under the limitations established herein before discharging to any public sewer. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the Director shall be provided and maintained at the permittee’s sole expense. Detailed plans, compliance schedules and operating procedures shall be submitted to the Director for review and shall be approved by the Director before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the permittee from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable under the provisions of this chapter. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be approved by the Director. No permittee shall increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge (except as allowed by Federal pretreatment standards) as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with any local, State or Federal discharge standard.

B. The Director shall have the authority to impose on the permittee compliance schedules relating to installation of specific pretreatment equipment, filing of reports and achievement of specific discharge conditions including target parameter concentrations.

C. Pretreated wastewater shall conform to categorical pretreatment standards promulgated by the U. S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) per authority of the Clean Water Act, Sections 307(b) and (c).

60.04.144 Permit conditions, special (food establishments).
A. Grease Pretreatment.

1. All food establishment permittees shall be required to install an approved type grease pretreatment device in the waste line leading from the food preparation area, or from sinks, drains, appliances and other fixtures or equipment used in food preparation or cleanup where grease may be introduced into the sewerage system. Such grease pretreatment devices shall be installed to remove grease from wastewater and shall be maintained in efficient operating conditions by periodic removal of the accumulated grease. No such collected grease shall be introduced into any drainage piping or public sewer.

2. Each permittee shall also be required to provide a collection drum or container for the purpose of physically segregating oils, greases and greasy solids. Permittees shall establish procedures for personnel to practice maximum segregation of oils, greases and greasy solids to the collection drum or container prior to washing and other cleaning which goes into the sewer. The permittee shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the material captured from either grease pretreatment devices on wastewater lines or the collection drum for segregating oils, greases and greasy solids. Confirmation of proper disposal shall be the responsibility of the permittee.

B. Records and Reports.

1. The permittee shall keep records of grease pretreatment device cleaning, maintenance and grease removal and to report on such maintenance and disposal to the Director.

2. The permittee shall, upon the request of the Director, provide results of periodic measurements of its discharge which is to include chemical analysis of oil and grease content.

60.04.150 Permit conditions, standard.
The following standard conditions shall be incorporated by reference into every discharge permit:

A. Conditions Modifiable by City. The terms and conditions of the discharge permit are subject to modification by the Director at any time during the term of the discharge permit. The permittee shall be informed of any proposed modification at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. Any such modifications shall be in writing and shall be incorporated into an amended discharge permit. Modifications to the discharge permit may be made for any of the following reasons:

1. Flows, concentrations or facilities are found not to be in conformance with the discharge permit.

2. State or Federal regulations are modified.

3. Imposition of mass discharge limits.

4. The provisions of Chapter 60.04 CMC are modified.

5. The Director shall have the right to impose mass discharge limits in lieu of, or in conjunction with concentration discharge limits.

B. Supplemental Reports. The Director may at any time, with 30 days’ notice, require the permittee to submit data and/or information in addition to that required in the discharge permit application or elsewhere in the discharge permit. Such supplemental report may include but not be limited to changes in nature of process, volume, hourly rates of flow, mass emission rate, production quantities, hours of operation or other information which relates to the generation of waste, including specified constituents and characteristics of the wastewater discharge. Such report may also include the chemical constituents and quantity of liquid or gaseous materials stored on-site even though they may not normally be discharged.

C. Sampling and Monitoring Facilities.

1. The Director may at any time, with 30 days’ notice, require the permittee to provide results of periodic measurements of its discharge which include chemical analyses and flow. The Director may require a monitoring facility to be furnished and operated at the permittee’s expenses.

2. The permittee making periodic measurements shall furnish and install at an appropriate location, a calibrated flume, weir, flow meter or similar device suitable to measure flow rate and total volume approved by the Director. In lieu of wastewater flow measurement, the Director may accept records of water usage and adjust the flow volume by suitable factors to determine peak and average flow rates for the specific industrial wastewater discharge. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the permittee’s premises, but the Director may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, by encroachment permit separately applied for, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.

3. Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the Director’s requirements and shall be completed within 90 days following written notification by the Director unless a time extension is granted by the Director.

4. When required by the Director, the permittee shall make periodic measurements of industrial wastewater flows and constituents shall annually make the number of such periodic measurements as required in the permit. When required by the Director, the permittee shall install and maintain in proper order automatic flow proportional sampling equipment and/or automatic analysis and recording equipment.

5. The Director shall have the right to set up on the permittee’s property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations.

6. All sampling, analysis and flow measurement procedures, equipment, results and records shall be subject at any time to inspection by the Director.

D. Nontransferable Without Approval. Any sale, lease, transfer or assignment of the premises or operation for which the discharge permit was issued shall require notice to the City. The discharge permit is not transferable without City approval, which shall not be unreasonably withheld.

E. Change of Operation. If the permittee changes any condition of operation, an amended discharge permit must first be applied for and obtained.

F. Revocation of Discharge Permit. Upon notice to the permittee with an opportunity to respond, the Director may revoke the discharge permit of any permittee who is found to be in violation of this chapter or applicable local, State or Federal regulations or who:

1. Fails to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge;

2. Fails to report significant changes in operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics;

3. Refuses reasonable access to the permittee’s premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring;

4. Fails to pay for other than the last year of a multi-year permit, appropriate charges, fees and reimbursements within 30 days prior to the annual anniversary date of permit issuance;

5. Fails to pay compliance costs within 30 days following billing;

6. Causes or threatens to cause a condition of contamination, pollution, or nuisance;

7. Fails to install grease pretreatment devices as required by the permit (regarding food establishments);

8. Fails to fulfill reporting requirements or pretreatment maintenance as required by the permit (regarding food establishments);

9. Violates a condition of the permit;

10. Transmits false information relative to its operations or discharge; or

11. Fails to file the appropriate renewal forms and pay the annual discharge permit fees by the anniversary or expiration date, as appropriate.

G. Records Retention.

1. The permittee shall retain and preserve for not less than three years any records, books, documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence and any and all summaries thereof relating to monitoring, sampling and chemical analyses made by or on behalf of a permittee in connection with its discharge.

2. All records which pertain to matters which are the subject of administrative action or any other enforcement or litigation activities brought by the City shall be retained and preserved by the permittee until all enforcement activities have concluded and all periods of limitation with respect to any and all appeals have expired.

3. The City, through its representatives or inspectors, shall have the right to inspect and copy pertinent records relating to a permittee’s wastewater discharge or pretreatment operations including inventories, chemical usage, materials, sources, hazardous materials manifests and disposal records, treatment and operations log books and materials invoices.

H. Access to Permittee’s Premises. The permittee shall give to authorized personnel of the City, at all reasonable times including those occasioned by emergency conditions, access to all parts of the premises of the permittee’s facilities for purposes of sampling or in the performance of any of their duties. Where a permittee has security measures in force, the permittee shall make the necessary arrangements with their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel of the City shall be permitted to enter without delay.

I. Protection from Accidental Discharge.

1. The permittee shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or from other substances regulated by this chapter. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the permittee’s own cost and expense.

2. In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the permittee to immediately notify both the Director and the City of San Diego Water Utilities Industrial Waste Program (San Diego) of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume and corrective actions. Within five days following an accidental discharge, the permittee shall submit to the Director and to San Diego a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the permittee to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the permittee of any expense, loss, damages or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to any wastewater systems, fish kills or any other damage to persons or property; nor shall such notification relieve the permittee of any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be imposed by this title or other applicable law. A notice shall be permanently posted on the permittee’s bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of an accidental discharge. Permittees shall ensure that all employees who may cause, allow or observe such an accidental discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedures.

60.04.160 Annual discharge permit fee.
A. A discharge permit fee will be collected annually from all permittees.

B. The amount of the annual permit fee will be established from time to time by a resolution of the City Council. Prior to considering any change in said permit fee, a public hearing will be conducted by the City Council upon 10 days, published notice.

C. The annual permit fee shall include expenses incurred by the City for permit processing, data evaluation, routine on-site inspections, monitoring, sampling or chemical analysis whether performed by the City or other entity acting in the City’s behalf. Costs relative to permit violations are not included in the annual permit fee and will be billed separately in accordance with the provisions stated on the discharge permit.

60.04.170 Amended discharge permit.
A. Any person desiring to discharge wastewaters or use facilities which are not in conformance with a valid discharge permit shall apply to the Director for an amended permit.

B. The Director shall issue an amended discharge permit with such conditions as appropriate. Costs related to issuance of an amended permit shall be charged to the permittee.

60.04.180 Inspection and sampling.
A. Adequate identification shall be provided by the Director for all inspectors and other authorized personnel and those persons shall identify themselves when entering any property for inspection purposes or when inspecting the work of any contractor.

B. Inspection and sampling of every facility that is involved directly or indirectly with the discharge of wastewater to the City’s wastewater system may be made by the Director as he deems necessary. These facilities shall include, but not be limited to, sewers, wastewater pumping stations, pollution control plants, all industrial processes, food establishment facilities or other facilities which discharge grease and oil at levels which cause blockages to the sewer, industrial wastewater generation, conveyance and pretreatment facilities, and all similar wastewater facilities. Inspections may be made to determine that such facilities are maintained and operated properly and are adequate to meet the provisions of this chapter.

C. The data obtained in these samplings along with any other relevant information obtained by the Director or presented by the permittee, shall be used by the Director in determining the sewer service charge.

60.04.900 Prohibitions.
A. Public Nuisance. Discharge of wastewater in any manner in violation of this chapter or of any order issued by the Director as authorized by this chapter, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the Director. Any person creating such a public nuisance is guilty of a misdemeanor.

B. Falsifying of Information. Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation, record, report, plan or other document filed with the Director or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

C. Malicious Damage to City Facilities. Any unauthorized entering, breaking, damaging, destroying, uncovering, defacing or tampering with any structure, equipment or appurtenance which is a part of the City’s wastewater system shall be a violation of this chapter.

D. Interference with Inspector. No person shall interfere with, delay, resist or refuse entrance to an authorized City inspector attempting to inspect any wastewater generation, conveyance or treatment facility connected directly or indirectly to the City’s wastewater system.

E. Limitations on Point of Discharge. No person shall discharge any substance(s) directly into a manhole or other opening in a public sewer other than through an approved sewer connection.

F. Septic Tank and Other Liquid Waste. Trucked septic tank, seepage pit, interceptor, or cesspool contents, industrial wastewater or other liquid waste shall not be discharged to the City’s public sewers or to facilities that discharge directly or indirectly to such public sewers.

G. Compliance with Permit. No permittee shall discharge industrial wastewater not in conformity with the quantity or quality limitations set by the discharge permit.

H. Prohibited Items. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to a public sewer, which directly or indirectly connects to the City’s wastewater system, the following:

1. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, solvent, fuel oil or any liquid, solid or gas that would cause or tend to cause flammable or explosive conditions to result in the wastewater system.

2. Any matter containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in such quantities that, alone or in combination with other substances, may create a health hazard for humans, animals or the local environment, interfere detrimentally with wastewater treatment processes, cause a public nuisance, or cause any hazardous condition to occur in the wastewater system.

3. Any matter having a pH lower than 5.0 or greater than 11.0 or having any corrosive or detrimental characteristic that may cause injury to wastewater treatment or maintenance personnel or may cause damage to structures, equipment or other physical facilities of the wastewater system.

4. Any solids or viscous substances or other matter of such quality, size or quantity that they may cause obstruction to flow in the sewer or be detrimental to proper wastewater treatment plant operations. These objectionable substances include, but are not limited to, asphalt, dead animals, offal, ashes, sand, mud, straw, industrial process shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, wood, whole blood, paunch manure, bones, hair and fleshings, entrails, fatty acids, grease and oil, paper dishes, paper cups, milk containers, or other similar paper products, either whole or ground.

5. Any rainwater, stormwater, groundwater, street drainage, subsurface drainage, roof drainage, yard drainage, water from yard fountains, swimming pools, ponds or lawn sprays or any other uncontaminated water.

6. Any matter having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius), or at a temperature which causes the influent to the waste treatment plant to exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius).

7. Any matter containing more than 500 mg/l of oil or grease.

8. Any strongly odorous matter or matter tending to create odors.

9. Any matter containing over 1.0 mg/l of dissolved sulfides.

10. Any matter with a pH high enough to cause alkaline incrustations on sewer walls.

11. Any matter promoting or causing the promotion of toxic gases.

12. Any matter requiring an excessive quantity of chlorine or other chemical compound used for disinfection purposes.

13. Any excessive amounts of deionized water, steam condensate, distilled water or single pass cooling water.

14. Any radioactive matter, except:

a. When the person is authorized to use radioactive materials by the State Department of Health or other governmental agency empowered to regulate the use of radioactive materials, and

b. When the matter is discharged in strict conformity with current California Radiation Control Regulations (California Administrative Code, Title 17), and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission regulations and recommendations for safe disposal, and

c. When the person is in compliance with all rules and regulations of all other applicable regulatory agencies.

15. Any matter producing excessive discoloration of the wastewater treatment plant effluent.

16. Any toxic materials including, but not limited to, all heavy metals, cyanide, phenols, chlorinated hydrocarbons and other organic compounds unless limited to that concentration which complies with all local, State and Federal discharge limitations, and which does not interfere with the operation of the wastewater facilities.

17. Any substance, liquid, gas or solid waste which would cause a public nuisance or hazard to life, or would be deleterious to the operation of wastewater facilities or to the waters receiving the discharge of the wastewater facilities.

I. Access to Premises. The user, owner and person in possession of any facility directly or indirectly connected to the City’s wastewater system shall allow the City to inspect such facility at any reasonable time, upon reasonable notice. Any permanent or temporary obstruction to easy access to the facility shall promptly be removed by the user, owner or person in possession at the written or verbal request of the Director.

J. Garbage Grinders.

1. No person shall discharge matter from a garbage grinder into a public sewer except matter generated in preparation of food normally consumed on the premises.

2. No person shall use a garbage grinder to grind plastic, paper products, inert materials or garden refuse.

3. Except: Where a permittee has obtained a permit for the use of a garbage grinder from the Director and agrees to undertake whatever self monitoring is required to enable the Director to equitably determine the sewer service charges based on the waste constituents and characteristics. Such grinders must shred the waste to a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow condition normally prevailing in the public sewer.

60.04.910 Enforcement.
A. Administration. Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter shall be served by the Director with written notice stating the location and nature of the violation. Within 30 days after the date of the notice, unless a shorter time is necessary due to the nature of the violation, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the Director by the person found to be in violation. If the violation is not corrected by timely compliance, or a satisfactory correction plan submitted within the specified time, the Director may order any person to show cause why enforcement action should not be taken. A written notice shall be served on the person specifying the time and place of a hearing, the reason why the action is to be taken and the proposed enforcement action. The Director may propose any enforcement action reasonably necessary to abate the violation. Based upon the evidence presented at the hearing the Director shall determine the appropriate enforcement action which should be taken, if any.

B. Injunction. Whenever a discharge of wastewater is in violation of the provisions of this chapter or otherwise causes or threatens to cause a condition of contamination, pollution or nuisance, the Director may cause the City to seek a petition to the superior court for the issuance of an injunction to restrain the continuances of such discharge.

C. Damage to System. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or who is responsible for a discharge which causes a deposit, obstruction, damage or any other impairment to the City’s facilities shall be liable to the City for all expense, loss and damage occasioned the City by reason of such violation or discharge.

D. Compliance Costs.

1. Persons discharging waste into a City sewer in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be required to pay for all actual costs incurred by the City in order to bring such person into compliance with this chapter and/or conditions of such person’s discharge permit. Compliance costs include, but are not limited to, the following:

a. Site inspection/investigation;

b. Monitoring and sampling;

c. Laboratory analyses;

d. Hearings and other compliance meetings;

e. Equipment and transportation;

f. Management and overhead;

g. Issuance of notices of violations and other pertinent correspondence.

2. Compliance costs shall be paid within 30 days following billing. Nonpayment of total charges within the specified period will constitute grounds for revocation of a permit and termination of sewer service.

3. The requirement to pay compliance costs, if imposed, is in addition to the annual discharge permit fee.

E. Termination of Sewer Service.

1. The Director may terminate or cause to be terminated any sewer service to any premises if an uncorrected violation of any provision of this chapter is found to exist or if a discharge of wastewater causes or threatens to cause a condition of contamination, pollution or nuisance.

2. When deemed necessary by the Director for the preservation of public health or safety or for the protection of public or private property, the Director shall notify the sewer service customer, in writing, advising of the intention to suspend sewer service to any person or persons using the wastewater system in a manner or way to endanger the public health or safety, or public or private property. The Director shall conduct a hearing allowing the noticed person to respond.

3. If the endangerment is substantial and imminent, then the Director may act immediately to suspend sewer service without notice or warning to said person or persons. The Director shall notify the affected persons as soon as possible with information regarding the resumption of sewer service.

4. In suspending sewer service, the Director may sever all pertinent connections to the public sewer.

F. Civil Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or a condition of a permit, or who discharges wastewater which causes pollution, or who violates any cease and desist order, prohibition, effluent limitation or national pretreatment standard shall be liable civilly for a penalty not to exceed $1,000 for each day in which such violation occurs.

G. Criminal Penalties. Any person who intentionally violates any provision of this chapter or permit condition or who discharges wastewater which causes pollution or who violates any cease and desist order, prohibition, effluent limitation or national pretreatment standard shall be liable, upon conviction, for a sum not to exceed $10,000 for each day in which such violation occurs, or for imprisonment for not more than one year or both.

60.04.920 Discrepancies between actual and reported discharge quantities.
A. No permittee shall discharge a flow rate, or a quantity of flow, chemical oxygen demand, suspended solids or other constituent significantly in excess of that stated on the discharge permit or in excess of the quantities reported to the Director by the permittee and upon which the sewer service charge is based.

B. Should measurements or other investigations reveal that the permittee is in violation of this section, the Director may institute proceedings to revoke the discharge permit or upon application may issue an amended permit.

C. For the purpose of establishing the correct sewer service charge, the data obtained from samplings along with any other relevant information obtained by the Director or presented by the permittee, shall be used by the Director. A permittee who violates this section shall, in the absence of other evidence, be presumed to have been discharging at the determined parameter values during the preceding three years or since the Director’s previous verification of quantity parameters, whichever period is shorter.

D. The permittee shall be assessed for all delinquent charges together with penalty and interest. Before these charges shall be assessed, at least two additional 24-hour samples and flow measurements shall be obtained by the Director with all costs of sampling and analyses to be paid by the permittee.

Chapter 60.08
SEWER SERVICE FEES
Sections:

60.08.010    Purpose.

60.08.020    Charge for sanitary sewer service.

60.08.030    Collection.

60.08.040    Delinquent payments – Penalties.

60.08.050    Sanitary sewer service rate.

60.08.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to impose a charge on users of the sanitary sewer system to reimburse the City for the reasonable costs of providing this service. The cost of providing sanitary sewer service includes the costs of acquisition, construction, reconstruction, maintenance, and operation of the sanitary sewer system and the payment of principal and interest on bonds or other debt instruments issued for the construction or reconstruction of the sanitation sewer system. These costs are not related to expenses incurred to accommodate new development. The amount of the charge to the user shall be reasonably related to the quantity and quality of the user’s discharge into the sanitary sewer system. (Ord. 1825; Ord. 1390)

60.08.020 Charge for sanitary sewer service.
The owner of real property which is connected to the sanitary sewer system of the City shall pay a sanitary sewer service charge pursuant to this chapter.

60.08.030 Collection.
A. The sanitary sewer service charge together with any delinquent payments and penalties thereon shall be collected in the same manner, by the same persons, at the same time as, and together with the general taxes of the City.

B. Where property does not appear on the tax rolls or when it is deemed appropriate by the Director of Administrative Services, the City may send individual bills to users of the City sanitary sewer system.

60.08.040 Delinquent payments – Penalties.
A sanitary sewer service charge shall be delinquent at the same time as the general taxes of the City for those sanitary service charges listed on the general taxes For those sanitary sewer service charges that are not listed on the tax rolls, payments shall be delinquent 30 days from the date of the bill. A basic penalty of 10 percent of the amount charged shall be imposed on any delinquent payment together with an additional penalty of one-half of one percent of the delinquent payment and basic penalty imposed monthly until such amount is paid in full. (Ord. 1733; Ord. 1718; Ord. 1679; Ord. 1655; Ord. 1629; Ord. 1600; Ord. 1530; Ord. 1416)

60.08.050 Sanitary sewer service rate.
The monthly charges for sanitary sewer service user categories are based upon the 2014 Sewer User Rate Study performed by Atkins North America, Inc., on behalf of the City, and have been adopted and set forth in Ordinance No. 2045, and are as indicated below:

A. Residential User Categories.

Monthly Sewer Service Charge Rate By Fiscal Year (FY) (July 1 to June 30)(1)

Land Use

Current Rate

FY 2014/2015

FY 2015/2016

FY 2016/2017

FY 2017/2018

FY 2018/2019

Single-Family

$31.64

$35.06

$38.48

$41.92

$45.33

$48.75

Multifamily

$25.31

$28.05

$30.79

$33.52

$36.26

$39.00

B. Nonresidential User Categories.

Monthly Sewer Service Charge Rate By Fiscal Year (FY) (July 1 to June 30) 

Land Use

 

 

 

 

 

 

Flat Rates (Monthly)

Current Rate

FY 2014/2015

FY 2015/2016

FY 2016/2017

FY 2017/2018

FY 2018/2019

Commercial

$34.75

$39.59

$44.43

$49.26

$54.10

$58.94

Small Restaurant (up to 50 seats)

$29.58

$32.61

$35.64

$38.67

$41.70

$44.73

Medium Restaurant (51 to 150 seats)

$146.08

$157.51

$168.93

$180.36

$191.78

$203.21

Large Restaurant (over 150 seats)

$415.81

$455.97

$496.14

$536.30

$576.46

$616.62

Hotel/Motel (per room)

$11.00

$12.74

$14.49

$16.23

$17.98

$19.72

Boat Slips (per slip berth)

$4.87

$5.43

$5.99

$6.54

$7.10

$7.66

Flow Based Rates (per HCF)(2):

Current Rate

FY 2014/2015

FY 2015/2016

FY 2016/2017

FY 2017/2018

FY 2018/2019

Schools

$2.37

$2.79

$3.20

$3.62

$4.04

$4.46

Laundromat

$2.37

$2.80

$3.23

$3.66

$4.09

$4.52

Hotel del Coronado Laundromat

$2.37

$2.97

$3.57

$4.17

$4.78

$5.38

Hospitals

$2.37

$2.83

$3.30

$3.76

$4.23

$4.69

Tidelands Port Authority

$2.37

$2.78

$3.19

$3.60

$4.01

$4.41

1. This is non-inclusive of potential proposed City of San Diego Metropolitan Wastewater District and San Diego Gas and Electric pass-through rate increases or decreases.

2. Hundred cubic feet (“HCF”) of potable water used, which is equivalent to 748 gallons as measured by a water meter.

C. The City Manager is hereby authorized and directed to pass through all future fees and charges imposed by other entities on the City related to wholesale charges for sewage treatment or wastewater treatment, to those charged sewer service charges, for a five-year period beginning September 1, 2014. (Ord. 2045 § 3, 2014; Ord. 1846)

Chapter 60.12
WASTEWATER CAPACITY FEE
Sections:

60.12.010    Purpose.

60.12.020    Definition.

60.12.030    Fee for sewer connection.

60.12.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to impose a fee on newly connecting users to the sanitary sewer system to reimburse the City for the reasonable costs associated with building the existing system and building and purchasing capacity in the San Diego METRO System. These funds will be used for capital improvements and/or replacements to the system. The amount of the fee to the newly connecting user shall be reasonably related to the total value of the system divided by number of users. (Ord. 2026 § 6, 2011)

60.12.020 Definition.
“Equivalent dwelling units (EDU)” as used in this chapter are defined as units of measure that standardize all land use types (housing, retail, office, etc.) to the level of demand created by one single-family housing unit. (Ord. 2026 § 6, 2011)

60.12.030 Fee for sewer connection.
A. Unless specifically otherwise indicated or prohibited by ordinance of the City Council or by applicable law, any person, firm or corporation adding new equivalent dwelling units or expanding existing equivalent dwelling units to the sanitary sewer system of the City of Coronado shall pay a wastewater capacity fee, which shall be set by resolution of the City Council and shall be amended from time to time by resolution of the City Council. Said resolution shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk.

B. The fees set forth pursuant to Ordinance No. 1825 (1994) shall remain in effect until such time as new fees become effective pursuant to a resolution adopted by the City Council.

C. If the wastewater capacity fees on a particular project exceed $10,000, then the City may agree, at its sole discretion, to receive the payment of such fee on terms acceptable to the City to include interest on the balance. In all other cases, the connection charge must be paid prior to the issuance of the building permit.

D. Where further development is being made to a lot already connected to the sewer system, a capacity fee will not be charged if such development utilizes the existing connection except that a capacity fee will be charged for each equivalent dwelling unit or portion thereof added to the connection. (Ord. 2026 § 6, 2011; Ord. 1825)

Chapter 60.16
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM CHARGE
Sections:

60.16.010    Purpose.

60.16.020    Charge for storm drainage system.

60.16.030    Collection.

60.16.040    Delinquent payments – Payments.

60.16.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to impose a charge on those property owners who benefit from the City’s storm drainage system. The charge is to reimburse the City for the reasonable costs of providing this service. The cost of providing storm drainage system service includes the costs of acquisition, construction, reconstruction, maintenance and operation of the storm drainage system and the payment of principal and interest on bonds issued for the construction or reconstruction of the storm drainage system. These costs are not related to expenses incurred to accommodate new development. The amount of the charge to the property owner shall be reasonably related to the proportional amount that the property benefits from the storm drainage system. (Ord. 1826)

60.16.020 Charge for storm drainage system.
The owner of real property located within the City shall pay a storm drain service charge per month as follows:

 

Monthly Charge

A. Each dwelling unit and habitable unit

$3.80

B. Each commercial establishment and use

$3.80

(Ord. 1847)

60.16.030 Collection.
A. The storm drainage service charge together with any delinquent payments and penalties thereon shall be collected in the same manner, by the same persons, at the same time as, and together with the property taxes of the City.

B. Where property does not appear on the tax rolls or when it is deemed appropriate by the Director of Administrative Services, the City may send individual bills to persons that benefit from the City’s storm drainage system.

60.16.040 Delinquent payments – Payments.
A storm drainage service charge shall be delinquent at the same time as the property taxes of the City for those storm drain service charges listed on the property taxes. For those storm drainage service charges that are not listed on the tax rolls, payments shall be delinquent 30 days from the date of the bill. A basic penalty of 10 percent of the amount charged shall be imposed on any delinquent payment together with an additional penalty of one-half of one percent of the delinquent payment and basic penalty imposed monthly until such amount is paid in full.

Title 61
STORMWATER AND URBAN RUNOFF MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROL
Chapters:

61.04    Stormwater and Runoff Management Program

61.08    Discharge Regulations and Requirements

61.10    Repealed

61.12    Inspection and Enforcement

Chapter 61.04
STORMWATER AND RUNOFF MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
Sections:

61.04.010    Purpose and intent.

61.04.020    Definitions.

61.04.030    General provisions.

61.04.010 Purpose and intent.
A. The purposes of this title are to ensure the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the City of Coronado and those who work and/or visit the City of Coronado by:

1. Effectively prohibiting nonstormwater discharges to the stormwater conveyance system.

2. Eliminating discharges to the stormwater conveyance system from spills, dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater.

3. Reducing pollutants in stormwater discharges, including those pollutants taken up by stormwater as it flows over urban areas, to the maximum extent practicable.

4. Establishing best management practices requirements for the management of stormwater flows from development projects, both to prevent erosion and sediment discharges and to protect and enhance existing quality of waters of the State.

5. Controlling through interagency agreements among the other permittees the contribution of pollutants from one portion of the stormwater conveyance system to another portion of the stormwater conveyance system in accordance with the San Diego Regional Water Quality Control Board Order Number R9-2013-0001, which constitutes National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NDPES) Permit No. CAS0108758 as amended.

6. Controlling, by coordinating and cooperating with other owners of the stormwater conveyance system such as Caltrans, the U.S. Federal government, or sovereign Native American tribes through interagency agreements, where possible, the contribution of pollutants from their portion of the stormwater conveyance system to the portion of the stormwater conveyance system within the City’s jurisdiction.

7. Assessing the effectiveness of BMPs, through requiring documentation and any other measures available to the City, to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants from the stormwater conveyance systems to the MEP.

8. Requiring enforcement of this title to hold those who discharge to the stormwater conveyance system accountable for their contribution of pollutants and flows.

B. The intent of this title is to protect and enhance the water quality of our watercourses, water bodies, and wetlands in a manner pursuant to and consistent with, and to require compliance with the Clean Water Act 33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq., and the San Diego Regional Water Quality Control Board Order Number R9-2013-0001, which constitutes National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit No. CAS0109266 as amended, and any other applicable Federal, State, or local law or regulation. (Ord. 2055 § 1 (Exh. 1), 2016; Ord. 1989 § 1 (Exh. 1), 2007)

61.04.020 Definitions.
When used in this title, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:

A. “Attached residential development” means any development that provides 10 or more residential units that share an interior/exterior wall. This category includes, but is not limited to: dormitories, condominiums and apartments.

B. Authorized Enforcement Official. The City Manager may designate one or more authorized enforcement officials to enforce provisions of this chapter and Chapters 61.08 and 61.12 CMC.

C. “Authorized enforcement staff” means any City employee assigned by the authorized enforcement official to duties involving permits and other City approvals, inspections, and enforcement related to this chapter and Chapters 61.08 and 61.12 CMC.

D. “Automotive repair shop” means a facility that is categorized in any one of the following Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) codes: 5013, 5014, 5541, 7532-7534, or 7536-7539.

E. “Basin plan” means the Water Quality Control Plan for the San Diego Basin adopted by the Regional Water Quality Control Board, San Diego Region on September 8, 1994, and approved by the State Water Resources Control Board on December 13, 1994, and all subsequent adopted and approved amendments thereto.

F. “Best available technology (BAT)” means best available technology economically achievable. BAT is the technology-based standard established by Congress in Clean Water Act Section 304(b)(2) for industrial discharges of stormwater. Technology-based standards establish the level of pollutant reductions that dischargers must achieve, typically by treatment or by a combination of treatment and best management practices.

G. “Best management practices (BMPs)” means schedules of activities, pollution treatment practices or devices, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce to the maximum extent practicable (MEP) the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or the stormwater conveyance system. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. BMPs may include any type of pollution prevention and pollution control measures to achieve compliance with this title.

H. “Best management practice (BMP) design manual” means a plan to eliminate, reduce, or mitigate the impacts of runoff from development projects, including priority development projects. The BMP design manual outlines the details of how to prepare the plan to meet requirements for development.

I. Biofiltration BMP or Biofiltration Facility. Biofiltration BMPs are shallow basins filled with treatment media and drainage rock that treat stormwater runoff by capturing and detaining inflows prior to controlled release through minimal incidental infiltration, evapotranspiration, or discharge via underdrain or surface outlet structure. Treatment is achieved through filtration, sedimentation, sorption, biochemical processes and/or vegetative uptake.

J. Bioinfiltration BMP or Bioinfiltration Facility. Bioinfiltration BMPs are shallow basins filled with treatment media and drainage rock that manage stormwater runoff through infiltration, evapotranspiration, and biofiltration. Bioinfiltration is characterized by a subsurface stone infiltration storage zone in the bottom of the BMP below the elevation of the discharge from the underdrains. The discharge of biofiltered water from the underdrain occurs when the water level in the infiltration storage zone exceeds the elevation of the underdrain outlet.

K. “Bioretention BMP” means a BMP with a vegetated surface water system that filters water through vegetation and soil or engineered media prior to infiltrating into native soils. Bioretention BMPs retain the entire design capture volume prior to overflow to the downstream stormwater conveyance system.

L. “City” means the City of Coronado.

M. “Commercial discharger” means a discharger who operates a regulated commercial facility.

N. “Construction activity” means any activity that moves soils or substantially alters the preexisting vegetated or manmade cover of any land. This includes, but is not limited to, demolition, grading, digging, cutting, scraping, stockpiling or excavating of soil; placement of fill materials; paving, pavement removal, construction; substantial removal of vegetation where soils are disturbed including but not limited to removal by clearing or grubbing; or any activity which bares soil or rock or involves streambed alterations or the diversion or piping of any watercourse.

O. “Construction BMP plan” means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during construction activities through the selection and implementation of BMPs.

P. “Design capture volume” means a volume of stormwater runoff produced from the eighty-fifth percentile, 24-hour storm event.

Q. “Detention” means the temporary storage of storm runoff in a manner that controls peak discharge rates and provides some gravity settling of pollutants.

R. “Detention facility” means a detention basin or alternative structure designed for the purpose of temporary storage of stream flow or surface runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates.

S. “Developer” means a person who seeks or receives permits for or who undertakes land development activities.

T. “Discharge,” when used as a verb, means to allow pollutants to directly or indirectly enter stormwater, or to allow stormwater or nonstormwater to directly or indirectly enter the stormwater conveyance system or receiving waters, from an activity or operations which one owns or operates. When used as a noun, “discharge” means the pollutants, stormwater and/or nonstormwater that are discharged.

U. “Discharger” means any person or entity engaged in activities or operations or owning facilities, which will or may result in pollutants entering stormwater, the stormwater conveyance system, or receiving waters; and the owners of real property on which such activities, operations or facilities are located; provided, however, that a local government or public authority is not a discharger as to activities conducted by others in public rights-of-way.

V. “Discharges directly to” includes flow that is conveyed overland a distance of 200 feet or less from the project to the ESA, or conveyed in a pipe or open channel any distance as an isolated flow from the project to the ESA (i.e., not commingled with flows from adjacent lands).

W. “Disconnected impervious areas” means the area covered by a building, impermeable pavement, and/or other impervious surface area that are designed and constructed to direct stormwater runoff to adjacent vegetated areas, or other nonerodible permeable areas.

X. “Dry season” means May 1st through September 30th.

Y. “Employee training program” means a documented employee training program which meets the requirements of the municipal stormwater permit.

Z. “Enforcement agency” means the City of Coronado or its authorized agent.

AA. “Environmentally sensitive area (ESA)” means areas that include but are not limited to all Clean Water Act Section 303(d) impaired water bodies; areas designated as areas of special biological significance by the State Water Board and San Diego Water Board; State water quality protected areas; water bodies designated with the RARE beneficial use by the State Water Board and San Diego Water Board; areas designated as preserves or their equivalent under the natural communities conservation program within the City; and any other equivalent environmentally sensitive areas which have been identified by the City.

BB. “Flow-through treatment BMP” means a BMP that is a structural, engineered facility designed to remove pollutants from stormwater runoff using treatment processes that do not incorporate significant biological methods. Flow-through treatment BMPs include vegetated swales, media filters, sand filters, and dry extended detention basins.

CC. “Household hazardous waste” means a household hazardous material that no longer has a use and is discarded or intended to be discarded. The term includes but is not limited to paint and paint-related materials; yard and garden products; household cleaners; used oil, motor vehicle fluids, batteries and oil filters; and household batteries.

DD. “Hydromodification” means the change in the natural watershed hydrologic processes and runoff characteristics (i.e., interception, infiltration, overland flow, interflow and groundwater flow) caused by urbanization or other land use changes that result in increased stream flows and sediment transport. In addition, alteration of stream and river channels, installation of dams and water impoundments, and excessive stream-bank and shoreline erosion are also considered hydromodification, due to their disruption of natural watershed hydrologic processes.

EE. “Illicit connection” means any physical connection to the stormwater conveyance system which has not been permitted by the City of Coronado or the San Diego Regional Water Quality Control Board.

FF. “Illicit discharge” means any discharge into stormwater, the stormwater conveyance system, or receiving waters that is prohibited by this title. This includes but is not limited to discharges of nonstormwater listed as discharge prohibitions in CMC 61.08.020, any discharge from an illicit connection, and any discharge that contains additional pollutants due to the absence of a required BMP or the failure of a BMP. Discharges that require a City permit or a San Diego Water Board permit that has not been issued are illicit discharges. Discharges regulated under an applicable San Diego Water Board or City permit are illicit discharges for purposes of this title.

GG. “Impaired water body” means a water body that is listed by the SWRCB as impaired by a particular pollutant or pollutants, pursuant to Section 303(d) of the Federal Clean Water Act. “303(d) listed water body” has the same meaning.

HH. “Impervious cover or impervious surface” means constructed or modified surfaces that cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall. The term includes but is not limited to building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, and driveways.

II. “Impervious surface area” means the ground area covered or sheltered by an impervious surface, measured in plain view (i.e., as if from directly above). For example, the “impervious surface area” for a pitched roof is equal to the ground area it shelters, rather than the surface area of the roof itself.

JJ. “Industrial activity” means manufacturing, processing, or raw materials storage at a commercial, industrial or municipal facility. The term includes, but is not limited to, industrial plant yards; immediate access roads and rail lines used or traveled by carriers of raw materials; manufactured products, waste material, or by-product creation or storage; material handling; refuse storage or disposal; the application or disposal of processed wastewaters; storage and maintenance of material handling equipment; storage or disposal of residuals; outdoor shipping and receiving; activities in manufacturing buildings; storage of raw materials and intermediate and finished products; and areas where significant industrial activity has taken place in the past and significant materials remain and are exposed to stormwater. Material handling activities include the storage, loading and unloading, transportation, or conveyance of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, by-product, or waste product.

KK. “Industrial discharger” means a discharger who operates a regulated industrial facility.

LL. “Industrial stormwater general permit” means the State industrial stormwater general permit as defined below.

MM. “Infiltration” means the process of percolating stormwater or nonstormwater into the subsoil.

NN. Infiltration BMPs or Infiltration Facility. Infiltration BMPs or facilities are structural measures that capture, store and infiltrate stormwater runoff. These BMPs are engineered to store a specified volume of water and have no design surface discharge (underdrain or outlet structure) until this volume is exceeded. These types of BMPs may also support evapotranspiration processes, but are characterized by having their most dominant volume losses due to infiltration. An infiltration BMP or facility includes sedimentation or filtration as pretreatment prior to infiltration. Bioinfiltration BMPs that infiltrate some water but which are designed primarily to retain water or to treat water, such as retention basins, constructed wetlands, or filtering swales are not infiltration facilities.

OO. “Jurisdictional runoff management plan (JRMP)” means the City of Coronado’s document describing the specific measures and programs implemented to comply with the municipal stormwater permit (NPDES No. CAS0109266), and as amended.

PP. Land Development Activity. Any construction, rehabilitation, redevelopment, or reconstruction activity or proposed activity of any public or private project is considered land development or redevelopment activities that have the potential to contact stormwater and contribute an anthropogenic source of pollutants, or reduce the natural absorption and infiltration abilities of the land. The land development activity has the potential for adding or replacing or resulting in the addition or replacement of roofs, pavement, or other impervious surfaces and thereby resulting in increased flows and stormwater pollutants. The project may not be segmented or phased into small parts if the effect is to reduce the quantity of impervious area and fall below thresholds for applicability of stormwater requirements. Also known as “land development project.”

QQ. “Land owner” means the holder of legal title to the land, and other persons or entities who exercise control over a land development project pursuant to rights granted in a purchase agreement, joint venture agreement, development agreement, or long-term lease.

RR. “Low impact development (LID)” means a stormwater management and land use development strategy that emphasizes conservation and the use of on-site natural features integrated with engineered, small-scale hydrologic controls to more closely reflect predevelopment hydrologic functions. Also known as “site design.”

SS. “Maintenance (of a BMP)” means periodic action taken to maintain the as-designated performance of a BMP, and includes but is not limited to repairs to the BMP as necessary, and replacement of the BMP by an equally effective or more effective BMP at the end of its useful life.

TT. “Maximum extent practicable” means the technology-based standard established by Congress in CWA Section 402(p)(3)(B)(iii) for stormwater that operators of MS4s must meet. Technology-based standards establish the level of pollutant reductions that dischargers must achieve, typically by treatment or by a combination of source control and treatment control BMPs. MEP generally emphasizes pollution prevention and source control BMPs primarily (as the first line of defense) in combination with treatment methods serving as a backup (additional line of defense). MEP considers economics and is generally, but not necessarily, less stringent than BAT. A definition for MEP is not provided either in the statute or in the regulations. Instead, the definition of MEP is dynamic and will be defined by the following process over time: municipalities propose their definition of MEP by way of their runoff management programs. Their total collective and individual activities conducted pursuant to the runoff management programs becomes their proposal for MEP as it applies both to their overall effort, as well as to specific activities (e.g., MEP for street sweeping, or MEP for MS4 maintenance). In the absence of a proposal acceptable to the San Diego Water Board, the San Diego Water Board defines MEP. MEP is an acceptability standard for best management practices (BMPs). When BMPs are required to meet this standard, the BMPs must be the most effective set of BMPs that is still practicable. A BMP is effective if it prevents, reduces or removes the pollutants that would otherwise be present in runoff due to human activity. A BMP is practicable if it complies with other regulations as well as stormwater regulations; is compatible with the area’s land use, character, facilities, and activities; is technically feasible (considering area soil, geography, water resources, and other resources available); is economically feasible; and provides benefits that are reasonable in relation to costs.

UU. “Municipal facility” means a facility owned or operated by the City of Coronado, by the Port Authority of San Diego, or by Caltrans, that is used for a governmental purpose. Facilities on municipally owned land that are leased or rented to others to generate municipal revenues are not municipal facilities. (The commercial or industrial lessees of such facilities may, however, be subject to this title as commercial dischargers or industrial dischargers.)

VV. Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System or MS4. See “stormwater conveyance system.”

WW. “Municipal stormwater permit” means NPDES Permit No. CAS0109266, Order No. R9-2013-0001 and subsequent amendments, issued by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, San Diego Region for Discharges from the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems (MS4s) Draining the Watersheds within the San Diego Region. Also known as “municipal permit” and “MS4 permit.”

XX. “National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit” means a permit issued by the Regional Water Quality Control Board or the State Water Resources Control Board pursuant to requirements stipulated in the Federal Clean Water Act to control discharges from point and nonpoint sources to waters of the United States.

YY. “Nonstormwater discharge” means any discharge to the stormwater conveyance system that is not entirely composed of stormwater. Also known as runoff or urban runoff.

ZZ. “Performance standard” means a requirement under this title that specifies a result that must be achieved (e.g., “minimize impervious surface area” or “implement LID BMPs that are designed to retain the volume of stormwater runoff produced from a 24-hour eighty-fifth percentile storm event”) without specifying the means that must be used to achieve that result. (This title applies performance standards only to certain land development and redevelopment projects that require City permits; those permits will typically include enforceable project-specific requirements intended to achieve the result required by the performance standard.)

AAA. Pollutant. Pollutants in runoff discharged from the stormwater conveyance system include total suspended solids, sediment, pathogens (e.g., bacteria, viruses, protozoa), heavy metals (e.g., cadmium, copper, lead, and zinc), petroleum products and polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons, synthetic organics (e.g., pesticides, herbicides, and PCBs), nutrients (e.g., nitrogen and phosphorus), oxygen-demanding substances (e.g., decaying vegetation, animal waste), detergents, and trash. The discharge of pollutants from the stormwater conveyance system to receiving waters may cause or contribute to a condition of pollution or a violation of water quality standards.

BBB. “Premises” means any building, lot, parcel, real estate, land or portion of land whether improved or unimproved.

CCC. “Priority development project” is defined in the municipal stormwater permit as including the following:

1. New development projects that create 10,000 square feet or more of impervious surfaces (collectively over the entire project site). This includes commercial, industrial, residential, mixed-use, and public development projects on public or private land.

2. Redevelopment projects that create and/or replace 5,000 square feet or more of impervious surface (collectively over the entire project site on an existing site of 10,000 square feet or more of impervious surfaces). This includes commercial, industrial, residential, mixed-use, and public development projects on public or private land.

3. New and redevelopment projects that create and/or replace 5,000 square feet or more of impervious surface (collectively over the entire project site), and support one or more of the following uses:

a. Restaurants, including stationary lunch counters and refreshment stands (Standard Industrial Classification code 5812).

b. Hillside development projects. This category includes development on any natural slope that is 25 percent or greater.

c. Parking lots. This category is defined as a land area or facility for the temporary parking or storage of motor vehicles used personally, for business, or for commerce.

d. Streets, roads, highways, freeways, and driveways. This category is defined as any paved impervious surface used for the transportation of automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, and other vehicles.

4. New development project, or redevelopment projects that create and/or replace 5,000 square feet or more of impervious surface, that support one or more of the following uses:

a. Automotive repair shops.

b. Retail gasoline outlets meeting the following criteria: (i) 5,000 square feet or more, or (ii) a projected average daily traffic of 100 or more vehicles per day.

DDD. “Projects discharging to receiving waters within an environmentally sensitive area” means all development or redevelopment projects that create and/or replace 2,500 square feet or more of impervious surfaces (collectively over the entire project site) and discharging directly to an “environmentally sensitive area.”

EEE. “Rainy season” means October 1st through April 30th. Also known as “wet season.”

FFF. “Receiving waters” means surface bodies of water which have discharge points for the stormwater conveyance system, including creeks, rivers, reservoirs, lakes, lagoons, estuaries, harbors, the San Diego Bay and the Pacific Ocean.

GGG. “Redevelopment” means any construction, alteration or improvement at an already developed site that will create or replace the impervious surface area of that site. Redevelopment can include but is not limited to the expansion of building footprints, the addition or replacement of a structure, exterior construction and remodeling, replacement of existing impervious surfaces that is not part of a routine maintenance activity, and other activities that create additional impervious surface.

HHH. “Regulated commercial facility” means all nonresidential facilities engaged in business or commerce, whether for profit or not-for-profit, or publicly or privately owned, except for regulated industrial facilities and municipal facilities; plus residences used for commercial repair, maintenance, cleaning, manufacturing, food preparation or painting activity if that activity has the potential to result in the discharge of nonstormwater or the discharge of pollutants to stormwater.

III. “Regulated industrial facility” means any facility subject to the State industrial stormwater general permit. Municipal facilities are not regulated industrial facilities, unless they are subject to the State industrial stormwater general permit.

JJJ. “Residential development” means any development on private land that provides living accommodations for one or more persons. This category includes, but is not limited to: single-family homes, multifamily homes, condominiums, and apartments.

KKK. “Residential discharger” means, for an occupied residence, the occupants; for a vacant residence, the owner and the manager of the residence.

LLL. “Restaurant” means, for the purposes of this title, a facility that sells prepared foods and drinks for consumption, including stationary lunch counters and refreshment stands selling prepared foods and drinks for immediate consumption (SIC code 5812).

MMM. “Runoff” means all flows in a stormwater conveyance system in the City of Coronado. Runoff includes but is not limited to stormwater, exempt nonstormwater discharges, and illicit discharges.

NNN. “San Diego Bay Water Quality Improvement Plan” means a plan developed by the San Diego Bay Watershed Copermittees in the Municipal Stormwater Permit and other Responsible Parties (e.g., Caltrans) that guides each of their jurisdictional runoff management programs towards achieving the outcome of improved water quality in MS4 discharges and receiving waters. The goal of the San Diego Bay Water Quality Improvement Plan is to further the Clean Water Act’s objective to protect, preserve, enhance, and restore the water quality and designated beneficial uses of waters of the State. This goal will be accomplished through an adaptive planning and management process that identifies the highest priority water quality conditions within a watershed and implements strategies through the jurisdictional runoff management programs to achieve improvements in the quality of discharges from the MS4s and receiving waters.

OOO. “San Diego Water Board” means the California Regional Water Quality Control Board for the San Diego Region.

PPP. “Sediment” means soils or other surficial materials eroded and then transported or deposited by the action of wind, water, ice, or gravity. Sediments can increase turbidity, clog fish gills, reduce spawning habitat, lower young aquatic organisms’ survival rates, smother bottom dwelling organisms, and suppress aquatic vegetation growth.

QQQ. “Site design BMP” means a stormwater management and land development strategy that emphasizes conservation of natural features and the use of on-site natural features integrated with engineered, small-scale hydrologic controls to more closely reflect predevelopment hydrologic functions. Examples of project site design BMPs or features include reducing the amount of impervious surfaces, disconnecting impervious surfaces, and reducing creation or severity of potential pollutant sources.

RRR. “Source control BMP” means land use or site planning practices, or structures that aim to prevent runoff pollution by reducing the potential for contamination at the source of pollution. Source control BMPs minimize the contact between pollutants and runoff. Examples include roof structures over trash or material storage areas, and berms around fuel dispensing areas.

SSS. “State construction stormwater general permit” means NPDES Permit No. CAS000002, Waste Discharge Requirements for Discharges of Storm Water Associated with Construction Activities, and any amendments thereto.

TTT. “State industrial stormwater general permit” means NPDES Permit No. CAS000001, Waste Discharge Requirements for Discharges of Storm Water Associated with Industrial Activities Excluding Construction Activities, and any amendments thereto.

UUU. “Stop work order” means an order issued which requires that specifically identified activity or all activity on a site be stopped.

VVV. “Stormwater” means all surface runoff and drainage associated with precipitation events.

WWW. “Stormwater conveyance system” includes but is not limited to those municipal facilities within the City of Coronado by which stormwater may be conveyed to waters of the United States, including any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, natural and artificial channels, aqueducts, curbs, gutters, ditches, natural and artificial channels or storm drains. Also known as “municipal separate storm sewer system” or MS4.

XXX. “Stormwater management” means the use of BMPs that are designed to reduce runoff and stormwater pollutant loads, discharge volumes, and/or peak discharge flow rates or velocities. When applied to the City, stormwater management also includes planning and programmatic measures.

YYY. “Stormwater quality management plan” means a plan submitted on a City form or in a City-specific format in connection with an application for a City permit or other City approval for development or redevelopment activity at the project site or parcel(s) identifying the measures and/or best management practices that will be used for permanent post-construction stormwater and nonstormwater management during the permitted activity.

ZZZ. “Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP)” means a document which describes the best management practices, to eliminate or reduce, pollutant discharges to the stormwater conveyance system and receiving waters.

AAAA. Stormwater Standards Manual. For the purposes of this title, the City’s stormwater standards manual is comprised of the City’s jurisdictional runoff management plan (JRMP), JRMP guidance and the best management practices for activities and sources, and (BMP) design manual for development and redevelopment activities, as amended from time to time. The City may also refer to a number of reference materials such as the California Stormwater Quality Association’s Stormwater Best Management Practice Handbooks for Construction and Industrial and Commercial Facilities, the County of San Diego Hydrology Manual, and the Uniform Building Code to define compliance standards.

BBBB. Structural BMP. Structural BMPs as defined in the municipal stormwater permit are a subset of BMPs which detains, retains, filters, removes, or prevents the release of pollutants to surface waters from development projects in perpetuity, after construction of a project is completed. A structural BMP includes a pollutant treatment BMP and hydromodification BMP required for priority development projects under the permit. A structural BMP may be a pollutant control BMP, a hydromodification management BMP, or an integrated pollutant control and hydromodification management BMP. In Coronado, structural BMPs for priority development projects are limited to pollutant control BMPs since hydromodification effects are not applicable in the City. Also known as “treatment control BMP,” or “stormwater pollutant control BMP,” or “pollutant control BMP.”

CCCC. “SWRCB” means State Water Resources Control Board.

DDDD. Treatment Control BMP. See “structural BMP.”

EEEE. Tributary to an Impaired Water Body. A facility or activity is tributary to an impaired water body if runoff or stormwater from that facility or activity contains pollutants and (1) enters the stormwater conveyance system at a place and in a manner that will discharge to the impaired water; (2) is a flowing stream that will carry pollutants for which that water body is impaired in that discharge to the impaired water; or (3) an ephemeral stream that reaches the impaired water during storm events and that will carry pollutants for which that water body is impaired from the facility or activity to the impaired water body during such storm events.

FFFF. “Water quality standards” means the beneficial uses (e.g., swimming, fishing, municipal drinking water supply, etc.) of a water body and the water quality objectives in the California Water Code necessary to protect those uses.

GGGG. “Waters of the State” means any water, surface or underground, including saline waters in the boundaries of the State (CWC Section 13050(e)). The definition of “waters of the State” is broader than that for waters of the United States in that all water in the State is considered to be waters of the State regardless of the circumstances or conditions.

HHHH. Waters of the United States. As defined in 40 CFR 122.2, the “waters of the United States,” and as may be revised from time to time, are: (1) all waters, which are currently used, were used in the past, or may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce, including all waters which are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide; (2) all interstate waters, including interstate wetlands; (3) all other waters such as intrastate lakes, rivers, streams (including intermittent streams), mudflats, sandflats, wetlands, sloughs, prairie potholes, wet meadows, playa lakes, or natural ponds the use, degradation or destruction of which would affect or could affect interstate or foreign commerce including any such waters: (a) which are or could be used by interstate or foreign travelers for recreational or other purposes; (b) from which fish or shellfish are or could be taken and sold in interstate or foreign commerce; or (c) which are used or could be used for industrial purposes by industries in interstate commerce; (4) all impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the United States under this definition; (5) tributaries of waters identified in subsections (1) through (4) of this definition; (6) the territorial seas; and (7) “wetlands” adjacent to waters (other than waters that are themselves wetlands) identified in subsections (1) through (6) of this definition. Waters of the United States do not include prior converted cropland. Notwithstanding the determination of an area’s status as prior converted cropland by any other Federal agency, for the purposes of the Clean Water Act, the final authority regarding Clean Water Act jurisdiction remains with the EPA. (Ord. 2055 § 1 (Exh. 1), 2016; Ord. 1989 § 1 (Exh. 1), 2007; Ord. 1942 §§ 1, 2, 2002)

61.04.030 General provisions.
A. This title shall be interpreted to assure consistency with the requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act, and acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto, applicable implementing regulations and NPDES Permit No. CAS0109266, and any amendment, revision or reissuance thereof.

B. Stormwater Standards Manual. The City will maintain a stormwater standards manual. In most cases, the manual (e.g., BMP design manual) provides a choice of compliance methods or BMPs. The authorized enforcement official may provide additional flexibility using the guidance documents authorized in subsection C of this section.

C. Guidance Documents. The authorized enforcement official may prepare and circulate to the public guidance documents addressing the use of pollution prevention practices and BMPs for specific activities or facilities. Guidance documents may include information and BMPs.

These guidance documents may set out additional compliance alternatives that, in specified circumstances, can support achieving MEP or the performance standard.

These guidance documents may also identify practices that have been determined by the authorized enforcement official to be additional BMPs that may be implemented for existing development activities, construction activities and land development activities to prevent or control pollution to the MEP. These additional BMPs shall become mandatory for affected discharges.

The authorized enforcement official and authorized enforcement staff may also take these guidance documents into account when determining whether any practices used by a discharger, or proposed in a plan associated with a building permit (including demolition, grading and excavation activity), or in a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP), an enforcement settlement offer, or any other submittal to the City, are BMPs that will prevent or control pollution to the maximum extent practicable. These case-specific discretionary decisions may involve circumstances that were not anticipated when general guidance documents were prepared. Therefore, these guidance documents do not confer rights on dischargers in these circumstances and do not constrain the discretion of the authorized enforcement official or authorized enforcement staff. Where appropriate, and provided the same protection is provided to the environment, the authorized enforcement official and authorized enforcement staff may depart from these guidance documents when making case-specific decisions authorized by this title.

D. Significant Sources of Pollutants. The authorized enforcement official shall identify discharges and categories of facilities and activities that are a significant source of contaminants to waters of the United States, despite compliance with this title. If the significant source of contaminations identified by the authorized enforcement official is identified from specific sources, the appropriate dischargers shall be ordered by the authorized enforcement official or by authorized enforcement staff to install, implement and maintain additional BMPs to prevent or reduce contamination in runoff, stormwater and nonstormwater. Any such order shall specify a reasonable date by which those BMPs must be put in place and operational. A failure to install, implement, or maintain BMPs as required by any such order is a violation of this title. (Ord. 2055 § 1 (Exh. 1), 2016; Ord. 1989 § 1 (Exh. 1), 2007)

Chapter 61.08
DISCHARGE REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS
Sections:

61.08.010    Prohibited discharges.

61.08.020    Nonstormwater discharge prohibition.

61.08.030    Discharge in violation of permit.

61.08.040    Best management practice for all discharges.

61.08.050    Best management practice requirements for residential activities and facilities.

61.08.060    Best management practice requirements for commercial activities and facilities.

61.08.070    Best management practice requirements for industrial activities and facilities.

61.08.080    Best management practice requirements for municipal activities and facilities.

61.08.090    City’s stormwater standards manual.

61.08.100    Requirements for construction activities.

61.08.110    Planning, design and post-construction requirements for all land development and redevelopment projects.

61.08.120    Inspection, operation and maintenance of BMPs.

61.08.130    Watercourse protection.

61.08.140    Possession, sale and disposal of genus Caulerpa (killer algae).

61.08.150    Bona fide scientific research exception.

61.08.160    Acceptable methods of disposal.

61.08.010 Prohibited discharges.
A. Illegal Activity. It is unlawful for any person to cause either individually or jointly any discharge into or from the stormwater conveyance system which results in or contributes to a violation of NPDES Permit No. CAS0109266.

B. Illicit Connection. The establishment of illicit connections is prohibited. The use of illicit connections is prohibited, even if the connection was established pursuant to a valid City permit and was legal at the time it was constructed.

C. Illicit Discharges. The discharge of nonstormwater to the stormwater conveyance system is prohibited, except as specified in CMC 61.08.020.

D. Litter, Dumps and Stockpiles. Throwing, depositing, leaving, abandoning, maintaining or keeping materials or wastes on public or private lands in a manner and place where they may result in an illicit discharge is prohibited. (Ord. 2055 § 1 (Exh. 1), 2016; Ord. 1989 § 1 (Exh. 2), 2007)

61.08.020 Nonstormwater discharge prohibition.
A. The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition set forth in CMC 61.08.010:

1. Separately Permitted Discharges. The prohibition on nonstormwater discharges shall not apply to any discharge regulated under an NPDES permit issued to the discharger and administered by the SWRCB or San Diego Water Board.

a. Permitted discharges include uncontaminated pumped groundwater, discharges from foundation drains1, water from crawl space pumps; and water from footing drains1 under NPDES Permit No. CAG919003 (Order No. R9-2015-0013 as it may be amended or reissued) for discharges to surface waters within the San Diego Region.

b. Permitted discharges of nonstormwater from water line flushing and water main breaks by:

i. NPDES Permit No. CAG679001 (Order No. R9-2010-0003 as it may be amended or reissued) or NPDES General Permit No. CAG140001 (Order No. R9-2014-0194-DWQ, as it may be amended or reissued).

2. Categorically Allowed Nonstormwater Discharges. The following categories of nonstormwater discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this title, as long as dischargers install, implement and maintain BMPs to the MEP to minimize and eliminate pollutants in these nonstormwater discharges, unless the authorized enforcement official and the San Diego Water Board identify the discharge as a source of pollutants to receiving waters:

a. Discharges from potable water sources;

b. Foundation drains2;

c. Diverted stream flows;

d. Springs;

e. Rising groundwater;

f. Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration to the stormwater conveyance system;

g. Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;

h. Water from footing drains2.

3. Nonstormwater Discharges Subject to Best Management Practices. The following categories of nonstormwater discharges are controlled as established by this title. Dischargers must, however, comply with any order issued pursuant to CMC 61.04.030(D); and must install, implement and maintain the specifically applicable BMPs, if any, set out in the City’s stormwater standards manual:

a. Air conditioning condensation shall be directed to:

i. Landscaped areas; or

ii. Other pervious surfaces; or

iii. Sanitary sewer system (if permitted by the authorized enforcement official).

b. Individual residential vehicle washing shall:

i. Discharge wash water to landscaped areas; or

ii. Other pervious surfaces where feasible; and

iii. Minimize water, washing detergent and other vehicle wash products used for residential vehicle washing; and

iv. The implementation of other BMPs, including behaviors, that prevent the discharge of pollutants associated with individual residential vehicle washing from entering the stormwater conveyance system as required by the authorized enforcement official.

c. Swimming pool discharges shall comply as follows:

i. Chlorinated pools shall eliminate residual chlorine (dechlorinate), algaecide, filter backwash, or other pollutants from swimming pool water prior to discharging to:

(A) The sanitary sewer system; or

(B) Obtain permission from the authorized enforcement official to discharge to the storm drain conveyance system.

ii. Saline swimming pool water shall comply as follows:

(A) Be directed to the sanitary sewer with permission from the authorized enforcement official;

(B) Be directed to landscaped areas, or other pervious surfaces that can accommodate the volume of water;

(C) Be discharged via a pipe or concrete channel directly to a naturally saline water body (e.g., Pacific Ocean).

d. Nonemergency and emergency firefighting activities shall comply as follows:

i. Nonemergency Firefighting Discharges.

(A) Building fire suppression system maintenance discharges (e.g., sprinkler line flushing) to the stormwater conveyance system must implement BMPs to prevent pollutants associated with such discharges.

(B) Nonemergency firefighting discharges (i.e., discharges from controlled or practice blazes, firefighting training, and maintenance activities not associated with building fire suppression systems) shall be conducted as specified in the stormwater standards manual.

ii. Emergency firefighting discharges shall implement BMPs to reduce or eliminate pollutants in emergency firefighting discharges to the stormwater conveyance system and receiving waters. During emergency situations, priority of efforts should be directed toward life, property, and the environment (in descending order). BMPs should not interfere with immediate emergency response operations or impact public health and safety.

4. Exemptions to Protect Public Health and Safety. Discharges determined by the authorized enforcement official, authorized enforcement staff, or San Diego Water Board to be necessary to protect public health and safety are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this title, provided any conditions on such discharges imposed by the authorized enforcement official, authorized enforcement staff, or San Diego Water Board are satisfied.

5. Exemptions Not Absolute. Any discharge category described in subsection (A)(2) of this section that is found by the authorized enforcement official or the San Diego Water Board to be a significant source of pollutant to waters of the United States shall be prohibited from entering the stormwater conveyance system, or shall be subjected to a requirement to implement additional BMPs to reduce pollutants in that discharge. Such prohibitions shall be effective on a schedule specified by the authorized enforcement official in a written notice to the discharger. That schedule may take into account the nature and severity of any effects caused by the discharge; and the time required to design, engineer, fund, procure, construct and make appropriate BMPs operational. Alternatively, at the City’s discretion, the implementation of BMPs for a category may be proposed through the San Diego Bay Water Quality Improvement Plan, instead of prohibiting the discharge, if approval is received from the San Diego Water Board. (Ord. 2055 § 1 (Exh. 1), 2016; Ord. 1989 § 1 (Exh. 2), 2007)

61.08.030 Discharge in violation of permit.
Any discharge that would result in, or contribute to, a violation of NPDES Permit No. CAS0109266 or other State-issued NPDES permit, and any amendment, revision or reissuance thereof, either separately considered or when combined with other discharges, is prohibited. Liability for any such discharge shall be the responsibility of the person(s) causing or responsible for the discharge. Any such persons in violation of NPDES Permit No. CAS0109266 or other State-issued NPDES permit shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City of Coronado in any administrative or judicial enforcement action relating to such discharge to the extent the discharge occurred in conjunction with a permitted activity as required as condition of that permit. (Ord. 2055 § 1 (Exh. 1), 2016; Ord. 1989 § 1 (Exh. 2), 2007)

61.08.040 Best management practice for all discharges.
Any person engaged in activities which will, or may, result in pollutants entering the City of Coronado’s stormwater conveyance system shall undertake all measures to reduce such pollutants to the MEP. The following minimum requirements and best management practices are applicable to all dischargers.

A. Applicable Requirements. All dischargers within the City of Coronado must comply with the generally applicable prohibitions and requirements in Chapter 61.04 CMC and this chapter, and must also comply with any other parts of this title (including relevant parts of the City’s stormwater standards manual) that are applicable to the type of facility or activity owned or operated by that discharger.

B. Best Management Practices for All Dischargers. All dischargers within the City of Coronado must install, implement and maintain BMPs to the MEP for activities and sources in these categories, as applicable.

1. Eroded or Disturbed Soils. Dischargers must apply BMPs to remove or secure any significant accumulations of eroded soils from slopes or soils from other areas previously disturbed by demolition, clearing or grading, if those soils could otherwise enter the stormwater conveyance system or receiving waters.

2. Pollution Prevention. Dischargers shall implement pollution prevention BMPs for their business practices that have the potential to discharge pollutants to the stormwater conveyance system or receiving waters.

3. Prevention of Illicit Discharges. Illicit connections must be eliminated (even if the connection was established pursuant to a valid permit and was legal at the time it was constructed), and illicit discharge practices eliminated.

4. Slope Erosion. Completed slopes that are more than five feet in height, more than 250 square feet in total area, and steeper than 3:1 (run-to-rise) that have been disturbed at any time by clearing, grading, or landscaping, shall be protected from erosion following completion of the slope, and continuously thereafter.

5. Storage of Materials and Waste. All materials and wastes with the potential to pollute runoff shall be stored in a manner that either prevents contact with rainfall and stormwater, or contains the contaminated runoff for treatment and disposal.

6. Use of Materials. All materials with the potential to pollute stormwater and urban runoff (including but not limited to cleaning and maintenance products used outdoors, fertilizers, pesticides and herbicides) shall be used in accordance with label directions. No such product may be disposed of or rinsed into receiving waters or the stormwater conveyance system.

C. Inspection, Maintenance, Repair and Upgrading of BMPs. BMPs must be inspected by the discharger before and following rain events and at minimum once prior to the rainy season. BMPs must be maintained so that they continue to function as designed. BMPs which fail must be repaired as soon as it is safe to do so. If the failure of a BMP indicates that the BMPs in use are inappropriate or inadequate to the circumstances, the BMPs must be modified or upgraded to prevent any further failure under the same or similar circumstances to meet MEP. The City may at its discretion require improvement, modifications or upgrades to BMPs, including source control BMPs for storage and refuse areas, for problematic and/or persistent sources of pollutants or illicit discharges to the stormwater conveyance system or receiving waters.

D. Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP). The authorized enforcement official may require a commercial, industrial or construction activities discharger to prepare and submit a SWPPP for approval by that official if (1) the discharger does not come into compliance with this title after one or more warnings or other enforcement action, because BMPs are inadequate or are not being adequately maintained; or (2) the facility or activity at issue is a significant source of pollutants to the stormwater conveyance system or receiving waters despite compliance with this title. Any discharger required to submit and to obtain approval of a SWPPP shall install, implement and maintain the BMPs specified in the approved SWPPP.

The SWPPP shall identify the BMPs that will be used by the discharger to prevent or control pollution of stormwater to the MEP. If the facility is an industrial facility, the SWPPP submitted to the City shall at a minimum meet the requirements of the State’s NPDES industrial stormwater general permit. If the activity at issue is a construction activity, the SWPPP submitted to the City shall at a minimum meet the requirements of the State’s NPDES construction stormwater general permit.

Whenever submission of a SWPPP is required pursuant to this title, the authorized enforcement official or authorized enforcement staff may take existing City guidance documents into account when determining whether the practices proposed in the SWPPP are BMPs that will prevent or control pollution to the required level of MEP.

E. Notification of Spills, Releases and Illicit Discharges. Spills, releases, illicit discharges and discharges of pollutants to receiving waters or to the stormwater conveyance system shall be reported by the discharger as required by all applicable State and Federal laws. In addition, any such spills, releases and illicit discharges with the potential to endanger health, safety or the environment shall be reported to the Coronado Police Department at (619) 522-7350 and the Director of Public Services and Engineering at (619) 522-7380 immediately after discovery of the spill, release or discharge. If safe to do so, necessary actions shall be taken to contain and minimize the spill, release or illicit discharge.

F. Sampling, Testing, Inspection, Monitoring and Reporting. Residential, commercial, industrial or construction activities dischargers shall perform the sampling, testing, inspection, monitoring and reporting required by this title. In addition, the authorized enforcement official or authorized enforcement staff may order a discharger to conduct sampling, testing, inspection or monitoring and to report the result(s) to the City if (1) the authorized enforcement official determines that sampling, testing, inspection or monitoring is needed to determine whether BMPs are effectively preventing or reducing pollution in runoff to the MEP, or to determine whether the facility or discharge is a significant source of pollutants to the stormwater conveyance system or receiving waters; or (2) the authorized enforcement officer or authorized enforcement staff determines that sampling, testing, inspection or monitoring is needed to assess the impacts of an illicit discharge on health, safety or the environment; or (3) an illicit discharge has not been eliminated after written notice by the authorized enforcement official or authorized enforcement staff; or (4) repeated violations have been documented by written notices from the authorized enforcement official or authorized enforcement staff; or (5) the San Diego Water Board requires the City to provide any information related to the discharger’s activities or discharges.

Sampling, testing and monitoring ordered pursuant to this subsection may include the following:

1. Visual monitoring of dry weather flows, wet weather erosion, and/or BMPs.

2. Visual monitoring of premises for illicit discharges, spills or other discharges.

3. Sampling for laboratory analytical testing of stormwater or nonstormwater discharges for pollutants.

4. Background or baseline pollutant or flow monitoring or analysis.

5. Monitoring of receiving waters or sediments that may be affected by pollutant discharges or illicit discharges by the discharger (or by a group of dischargers including the discharger).

The authorized enforcement official or authorized enforcement staff may direct the manner in which the results of required sampling, testing, inspection and monitoring are reported, and may determine when required sampling, testing, inspection or monitoring may be discontinued.

G. Mitigation. All illicit discharges must be mitigated within a reasonable period of time to correct or compensate for all damage to the environment caused by the illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement official or authorized enforcement staff or their designees who issued notice to the discharger that a discharge was illicit shall determine whether mitigation measures proposed or completed by the discharger meet this standard. The authorized enforcement official or authorized enforcement staff shall require the discharger to submit a mitigation plan and schedule by a specified date prior to taking action, and to submit a summary of completed mitigation by a specified date. (Ord. 2055 § 1 (Exh. 1), 2016; Ord. 1989 § 1 (Exh. 2), 2007)

61.08.050 Best management practice requirements for residential activities and facilities.
A. Applicable Requirements. The requirements in this title apply to all residential dischargers within the City of Coronado. All residential dischargers must install, implement, operate, and maintain the BMPs identified in CMC 61.08.040 for all dischargers, as applicable, and any additional BMPs to meet the MEP definition including:

B. Home and Garden Care Activities and Product Use. Residential dischargers shall reduce pollutants in discharges to the MEP by implementing BMP for pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers used in home and garden care activities.

1. The discharge to the stormwater conveyance system or receiving waters of pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers from residential dischargers is prohibited.

2. Household hazardous waste may not be disposed of directly or indirectly to the trash or to the street, gutter or storm drain. Household hazardous waste can be disposed of at the City’s household hazardous waste collection site.

3. Residential dischargers shall implement additional BMPs for activities associated with residential properties (e.g., trash storage and handling, pool and fountain discharges, surface cleaning and maintenance, vehicle cleaning, maintenance and repair) as required by the authorized enforcement official or authorized enforcement staff to reduce and eliminate pollutant discharges to the MEP. (Ord. 2055 § 1 (Exh. 1), 2016; Ord. 1989 § 1 (Exh. 2), 2007)

61.08.060 Best management practice requirements for commercial activities and facilities.
A. Applicable Requirements. The requirements in this section apply to all commercial activities and facilities dischargers within the City of Coronado. All commercial activity and facilities dischargers must install, implement, operate, and maintain the BMPs identified in CMC 61.08.040 for all dischargers, and any additional BMPs to meet the MEP definition for the category of activities owned or conducted by the discharger. BMPs, if any, are specified in this section or in the City’s stormwater standards manual for the category of activity or facility owned or operated by that discharger. All regulated commercial facilities shall review their facilities, activities, operations and procedures at least annually to detect and eliminate illicit connections and illicit discharges. Corrective employee training shall be provided as needed (and documented in training records) whenever an illicit discharge is discovered.

B. Regulated Commercial Facilities Identified. Facilities in the City of Coronado having one or more of the following characteristics are regulated commercial facilities:

1. The facility is a regulated commercial facility primarily engaged in one of the following commercial activities. Regulated commercial facilities, including but not limited to the types of facilities and activities listed below, shall install, implement and maintain the BMPs to the MEP and as required by the authorized enforcement official or authorized enforcement staff for each such type of facility or activity that has the potential to discharge pollutants to the stormwater conveyance system or receiving waters:

a. Automobile repair, maintenance, fueling, or cleaning;

b. Boat repair, maintenance, fueling, or cleaning;

c. Equipment repair, maintenance, fueling, or cleaning;

d. Automobile and other vehicle body repair or painting;

e. Mobile automobile or other vehicle washing;

f. Automobile (or other vehicle) parking, parking lots and storage facilities;

g. Retail or wholesale fueling;

h. Pest control services;

i. Eating or drinking establishments including food markets;

j. Mobile carpet, drape or furniture cleaning;

k. Cement mixing or cutting;

l. Masonry;

m. Painting and coating;

n. Botanical and zoological gardens and exhibits;

o. Landscaping;

p. Nurseries and greenhouses;

q. Golf courses, parks and other recreational areas/facilities;

r. Pool and fountain cleaning;

s. Marinas;

t. Portable sanitary services;

u. Building material retailers and storage;

v. Animal facilities; and

w. Power washing services.

C. Best Management Practices for all Regulated Commercial Facilities. All regulated commercial facilities shall install, implement and maintain the BMPs specified in the City’s stormwater standards manual or as directed by the authorized enforcement official or authorized enforcement staff including but not limited to the following:

1. Employee training on BMPs.

2. Storm drain tileage, signage and stenciling.

3. Pollution prevention.

4. Materials and waste management.

5. Vehicles and equipment operations, storage, repair, maintenance and parking.

6. Outdoor areas. (Ord. 2055 § 1 (Exh. 1), 2016; Ord. 1989 § 1 (Exh. 2), 2007)

61.08.070 Best management practice requirements for industrial activities and facilities.
A. Requirements. The requirements in this section apply to all industrial activities and facilities dischargers within the City of Coronado. All industrial activity and facilities dischargers must install, implement, operate, and maintain the BMPs identified in CMC 61.08.040 for all dischargers, and any additional BMPs to meet the MEP definition for the category of activities owned or conducted by the discharger. All BMPs, if any, are specified in this section or in the City’s stormwater standards manual for the category of activity or facility owned or operated by that discharger. All regulated industrial facilities shall review their facilities, activities, operations and procedures at least annually to detect and eliminate illicit connections and illicit discharges. Corrective training shall be provided as needed (and documented in training records) whenever an illicit disposal practice is identified.

B. High Priority Industrial Facilities. Regulated industrial facilities that have one or more of the characteristics listed below are high priority industrial facilities:

1. The facility is subject to the State’s industrial stormwater general permit, taking into account all of the provisions of that permit and any subsequent amendments, and shall comply with the requirements of the industrial stormwater general permit.

2. The facility was notified in writing by the authorized enforcement official or authorized enforcement staff that it has been designated a high priority industrial facility and shall comply with the provisions of this title and implement BMPs to the MEP for industrial activities that discharge or have the potential to discharge pollutants to the stormwater conveyance system or the receiving waters. Such designations shall take effect 30 days after mailing or service of notice. These designations shall be made where the facility discharges a pollutant load in stormwater or runoff that causes or contributes to the violation of water quality standards or this title. (Ord. 2055 § 1 (Exh. 1), 2016; Ord. 1989 § 1 (Exh. 2), 2007)

61.08.080 Best management practice requirements for municipal activities and facilities.
A. Municipal Facilities Requirements. The requirements in this section apply to all municipal activities and facilities dischargers within the City of Coronado. All municipal activity and facilities dischargers must install, implement, operate, and maintain the BMPs identified in CMC 61.08.040 for all dischargers, and any additional BMPs to meet the MEP definition for the category of activities owned or conducted by the discharger. (Ord. 2055 § 1 (Exh. 1), 2016; Ord. 1989 § 1 (Exh. 2), 2007)

61.08.090 City’s stormwater standards manual.
A. Stormwater Standards Manual. The City’s stormwater standards manual is made up of recommended BMPs described in fact sheets and/or lists of BMPs for various activities. All dischargers who are required by this title to install, implement and maintain BMPs shall ensure that their selection of BMPs is consistent and conform with the applicable specifications, if any, contained in the City’s stormwater standards manual, for the category and priority of activity or facility owned or operated by that discharger.

B. Existing Facilities. The City’s stormwater standards manual sets out BMPs and other objective specifications for specific types and categories of existing facilities and activities. Where BMPs and objective specifications are specified, they are mandatory. Where no BMPs have been specified in the stormwater standards manual for a type and category of facility or activity, the requirements set out in this title are applicable and BMPs shall be implemented to meet MEP. Deviations from the BMPs set out in the manual are allowed in the following circumstances: (1) the City determines pursuant to CMC 61.04.030(D) to issue an order to require additional BMPs, and provides the required written notice; or (2) a City guidance document prepared pursuant to CMC 61.04.030 sets out additional compliance requirements that may be used in lieu of the BMPs specified in the manual.

C. Land Development Activity Projects. Requirements applicable to land development and redevelopment projects are set out in the BMP design manual. Additional requirements will apply to completed land development projects when they become subject to this title as residential, industrial, municipal or commercial facilities.

The BMP design manual sets out BMPs, other objective specifications, and performance standards for land development projects. The minimum BMPs and other objective specifications in the BMP design manual are applicable to both ministerial and discretionary land development projects. The performance standards in the BMP design manual are applicable to projects that require a discretionary or ministerial City permit or approval, and shall be implemented through specific permit conditions. Development project proponents must determine whether their project design and associated BMPs will meet these performance standards for their facility or activity, and must redesign their project and/or install, implement and maintain additional BMPs where needed to meet applicable performance standards.

D. Conflicting or More Detailed Requirements. In case of any conflict between any applicable BMPs specified in CMC 61.08.040 through 61.08.070, and any applicable requirements described in more detail for a particular type of facility or activity in the City’s stormwater standards manual, the requirement in the manual shall prevail. (Ord. 2055 § 1 (Exh. 1), 2016; Ord. 1989 § 1 (Exh. 2), 2007)

61.08.100 Requirements for construction activities.
A. Permit Issuance. No land owner or development project proponent shall receive any City demolition, grading, clearing, building or other land development permit required for construction activities without first complying with the requirements of this title.

B. Owners and Operators Both Responsible and Liable. Persons or entities performing construction activities in the City and the owners of land on which construction activities are performed are dischargers for purposes of this title; provided, however, that a local government or public authority is not a discharger as to activities conducted by others in public rights-of-way.

C. Construction BMP Plan. All applications to the City for a permit or approval associated with a construction activity must be accompanied by a construction BMP plan, on a form or in a format specified by the City. The construction BMP plan shall specify the manner in which the discharger/applicant will implement the BMPs required by this title for the activity at issue.

D. Construction Activity Pollutant Control to the Maximum Extent Practicable. All dischargers engaged in construction activities must install, implement and maintain those additional BMPs, if any, that are needed to prevent or reduce pollutant, including sediment, discharges in stormwater from land disturbance to the maximum extent practicable as specified in the stormwater standards manual. (Ord. 2055 § 1 (Exh. 1), 2016; Ord. 1989 § 1 (Exh. 2), 2007)

61.08.110 Planning, design and post-construction requirements for all land development and redevelopment projects.
A. Planning, Design and Post-Construction Requirements for all Land Development and Redevelopment Projects. No land owner or development project proponent in the City of Coronado shall receive any discretionary or ministerial City permit or approval for land development activity unless the project meets or will meet the requirements of this title. Post-construction BMP requirements imposed by this section and by the City’s BMP design manual or any subsequent amendment shall not apply if the following conditions are met:

1. The project proponent has received written approval of the design that incorporates the stormwater drainage system for the priority development project in its entirety, including all applicable structural pollutant control consistent with the previous applicable 2007 NPDES Permit CAS0109266 requirements and the Model SUSMP prior to the approval of the BMP design manual or any amendment thereto; and

2. The project proponent has been issued project permit(s) or approval(s), or equivalent, that authorizes the priority development project to commence construction activities on a design approved pursuant to subsection (A)(1) of this section; and

3. The project proponent has conducted construction activities on the priority development project within 365 days prior to, or within the 180 days after, the effective date of the BMP design manual; and

4. All subsequent project permits or approvals, or equivalent, that are needed to implement the design initially approved in conformance with subsection (A)(1) of this section are issued within five years of the effective date of the BMP design manual and the storm drainage system for the priority development project in its entirety including all applicable structural pollutant control BMPs remain in substantial conformity with the design initially approved per subsection (A)(1) of this section.

B. Owners and Developers Responsible and Liable. Developers, development project proponents, and land owners for land on which development activities are performed are dischargers for purposes of this title; provided, however, that a local government or other public authority is a discharger only for its own activities on public property and not for the activities conducted by others.

C. Post-Construction Best Management Practices Required. Land development and redevelopment projects shall be planned, designed and constructed to include and shall implement post-construction BMPs to ensure that pollutants and runoff from the development will be reduced to the maximum extent practicable, will not significantly degrade receiving water quality, and will not cause or contribute to an exceedance of receiving water quality objectives.

D. Stormwater Quality Management Plan. All applications to the City for a permit or approval associated with a land development or redevelopment activity must be accompanied by a stormwater quality management plan on a form or in a format specified by the City. The plan shall specify the manner in which the discharger/applicant will implement the post-construction BMPs required by this title. The plan must address those aspects of the project that, at the time a complete application is submitted, are subject to further environmental review pursuant to Section 15162 of the California Environmental Quality Act. Fees for stormwater quality management plan review and deposit thereof shall be adopted by resolution of the City Council.

E. Additional Minimum Post-Construction Best Management Practices for Land Development Activities. Whether a City permit or approval is required or not, and whether a stormwater quality management plan is required to be submitted or not, all dischargers engaged in land development or redevelopment activities in the City of Coronado shall implement post-construction BMPs in the following areas if applicable to the project and as outlined in the BMP design manual:

1. Source control BMPs, to minimize the release of pollutants into runoff including stormwater. Also known as pollution prevention measures or BMPs.

2. Site design BMPs, such as impervious surface minimization; and appropriate use of buffer zones to protect natural water bodies.

3. Structural or stormwater pollutant control BMPs designed to retain (intercept, store, infiltrate, evaporate, and evapotranspire) on site the pollutants contained in stormwater runoff up to the design capture volume. Structural BMPs are applicable to priority development projects as outlined in the City’s BMP design manual.

4. Other applicable BMPs required by the City’s BMP design manual.

F. Control to the Maximum Extent Practicable. All dischargers engaged in land development and redevelopment activities shall install, implement and maintain post-construction BMPs as needed to prevent or reduce pollutant discharges in stormwater from land development to the maximum extent practicable. (Ord. 2055 § 1 (Exh. 1), 2016; Ord. 1989 § 1 (Exh. 2), 2007)

61.08.120 Inspection, operation and maintenance of BMPs.
A. Existing Development. Residential, commercial, industrial and municipal dischargers shall operate and maintain the BMPs they rely upon to achieve and maintain compliance with this title and as required in the stormwater standards manual, as applicable.

B. New Development or Redevelopment. The owners and occupants of lands on which structural BMPs have been installed to meet the requirements of this title shall ensure the operation and maintenance of those BMPs, and shall themselves maintain those BMPs if other persons or entities who are also obliged to maintain those BMPs (by contract or covenant, or pursuant to this title) fail to do so. All structural or stormwater pollution control BMPs must be inspected and maintenance performed, if needed, at least annually prior to each rainy season.

C. City Inspection of BMPs. The authorized enforcement official and authorized enforcement staff authority to inspect discharger’s premises and BMPs in accordance with Chapter 61.12 CMC.

D. Maintenance Obligations Assumed by Contract or Other Agreement. Primary responsibility to maintain a BMP may be transferred through a contract or other agreement. If that contract provides that it will be submitted to the City of Coronado pursuant to this title as part of a development permit application, and if that contract is so submitted, the person or entity accepting a maintenance obligation in such a contract or agreement will also be legally obligated to maintain that BMP pursuant to this title.

E. Obligation to Maintain Best Management Practices Not Avoided by Contracts or Other Agreements. For purposes of City enforcement, no contract or other agreement imposing an obligation to maintain a BMP can relieve a person or entity of any obligation to maintain a BMP imposed by this title.

F. Disclosure of Maintenance Obligations. Any developer or owner who transfers ownership of land on which a BMP is located or will be located, or who otherwise transfers ownership of a BMP or responsibility for the maintenance of a BMP to another person or entity, shall provide clear written notice of the maintenance obligations associated with that BMP to the new or additional responsible party prior to that transfer.

G. Maintenance Plans for Priority Development Projects. The proponents of any priority development project that requires a City permit shall provide to the City for review and approval prior to issuance of such permit, a plan for maintenance of all structural BMPs associated with the project as specified in the City’s BMP design manual. The plan shall provide for servicing of all structural BMPs at least annually, and for the retention of inspection and maintenance records for at least three years.

H. Access/Easement Agreement. The proponents of any land development project or redevelopment project that requires a City permit shall provide to the City for review and approval prior to issuance of such permit an executed, permanent, easement onto the land on which permanent structural BMPs will be located (and across other lands as necessary for access), to allow inspection and/or maintenance of those BMPs.

I. Assurance of Maintenance for Land Development Projects. The proponents of any land development or redevelopment project that requires a City permit shall provide to the City, prior to issuance of such permit, proof of a mechanism acceptable to the City which will ensure ongoing long-term maintenance of all structural BMPs associated with the proposed project. The proponents shall be responsible for maintenance of BMPs unless and until an alternative mechanism for ensuring maintenance is accepted by the City and becomes effective. (Ord. 2055 § 1 (Exh. 1), 2016; Ord. 1989 § 1 (Exh. 2), 2007)

61.08.130 Watercourse protection.
A. Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person’s lessee or tenant, shall:

1. Keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property reasonably free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles which would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse.

2. Maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse.

3. Shall not remove healthy bank vegetation beyond that actually necessary for said maintenance, nor remove said vegetation in such a manner as to increase the vulnerability of the watercourse to erosion.

B. No person shall commit or cause to be committed any of the following acts, unless a written permit has first been obtained from the Director of Public Services and Engineering or the appropriate State or Federal agencies, if applicable:

1. Discharge pollutants into, or connect any pipe or channel to a watercourse.

2. Modify the natural flow of water in a watercourse.

3. Carry out developments within 30 feet of the center line of any creek or 20 feet of the top of a bank, whichever is the greater distance from the top of the bank.

4. Deposit in, plant in, or remove any material from a watercourse including its banks, except as required for necessary maintenance.

5. Construct, alter, enlarge, connect to, change, or remove any structure in a watercourse.

6. Place any loose or unconsolidated material along the side of, or within, a watercourse or so close to the side as to cause a diversion of the flow, or to cause a probability of such material being carried away by stormwaters passing through such a watercourse.

C. The above requirements do not supersede any requirements set forth by the California Department of Fish and Game stream alteration permit process.

D. Compliance with Best Management Practices. Where best management practices guidelines or requirements have been adopted by any Federal, State of California, regional agency, and/or the City of Coronado, for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to stormwater pollution or contamination, illicit discharges, and/or discharge of nonstormwater to the stormwater conveyance system, every person undertaking such activity or operation, or owning or operating such facility, shall comply with such guidelines or requirements as may be identified by the Director of Public Services and Engineering. (Ord. 2055 § 1 (Exh. 1), 2016; Ord. 1989 § 1 (Exh. 2), 2007)

61.08.140 Possession, sale and disposal of genus Caulerpa (killer algae).
A. Possession, Sale or Improper Disposal of Caulerpa. It is unlawful for any person to sell, possess, transport within this City, transfer or make a gift of any salt water algae of the genus Caulerpa; or to release alive into the City’s waterways, storm drains or ocean any salt water algae of the genus Caulerpa. (Ord. 2055 § 1 (Exh. 1), 2016; Ord. 1989 § 1 (Exh. 2), 2007)

61.08.150 Bona fide scientific research exception.
A person may possess or transport specimens of the algae genus Caulerpa for bona fide scientific research or for identification purposes. Whether the research is bona fide shall be determined by the authorized enforcement official. (Ord. 2055 § 1 (Exh. 1), 2016; Ord. 1989 § 1 (Exh. 2), 2007)

61.08.160 Acceptable methods of disposal.
Acceptable methods of disposal shall be determined by the authorized enforcement official after consultation with the Regional Water Quality Control Board, the California Department of Fish and Game, or the National Marine Fisheries Service. (Ord. 2055 § 1 (Exh. 1), 2016; Ord. 1989 § 1 (Exh. 2), 2007)

1
Only applies to this category of nonstormwater if the system is designed to be located at or below the groundwater table to actively or passively extract groundwater during any part of the year.


2
Only applies to this category of nonstormwater discharge if the system is designed to be located above the groundwater table at all times of the year, and the system is only expected to discharge nonstormwater under unusual circumstances.


Chapter 61.10
STANDARD URBAN STORMWATER MITIGATION PLAN
(Repealed by Ord. 2055)

Chapter 61.12
INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT
Sections:

61.12.010    Authority to inspect.

61.12.020    Inspection procedures.

61.12.030    Authority to sample and establish sampling devices.

61.12.040    Notification of spills.

61.12.050    Requirement to test/monitor or mitigate.

61.12.060    Penalties for violation.

61.12.070    Continuing violation.

61.12.080    Concealment.

61.12.090    City permits and SWPPPs.

61.12.100    Violations deemed a public nuisance.

61.12.110    Administrative enforcement powers.

61.12.120    Coordination with hazardous materials inventory and response program.

61.12.010 Authority to inspect.
A. The enforcement agency, authorized enforcement official and authorized enforcement staff shall have the authority to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this title, whenever there is reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building, or upon any premises, any condition which constitutes a violation of the provisions of this title. The authorized enforcement official and/or authorized enforcement staff may:

1. Enter and inspect the premises at all reasonable times.

2. When any new structural BMP is installed on private property as part of a project that requires a City permit, the property owner shall grant to the City an easement to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner to ensure that the BMP is working properly. This includes the right to enter the property without prior notice once per year for routine inspections, to enter as needed for additional inspections when the City has a reasonable basis to believe that the BMP is not working properly, to enter for any needed follow-up investigations, and to enter when necessary for abatement of a nuisance or correction of a violation of this title.

3. Carry out any sampling activities necessary to enforce this title, including obtaining samples from any individual or taking samples from the property of any person, or from any vehicle, which the authorized enforcement official or authorized enforcement staff reasonably believes is currently, or has in the past, caused or contributed to causing an illicit discharge to the stormwater conveyance system. Upon request, split samples shall be given to the person from whom, or from whose property or vehicle, the samples were obtained.

4. Stop and inspect any vehicle reasonably suspected of causing or contributing to an illicit discharge to the stormwater conveyance system when accompanied by a uniformed police officer in a clearly marked vehicle.

5. Conduct tests, analyses, and evaluations to determine whether a discharge of stormwater or nonstormwater is an illicit discharge or whether the requirements of this title are met.

6. Photograph any effluent stream, material or waste, material or waste container, container label, vehicle, waste treatment process, waste disposal site, or condition contributing to stormwater or runoff pollution, and constituting a violation of this title found during an inspection.

7. Review and obtain a copy of the stormwater pollution prevention plan or any comparable plan prepared by a discharger, if such a plan is required of the facility.

8. Require the facility operator to retain evidence, as instructed by the inspector, for a period not to exceed 30 days.

B. If a building or premises is occupied, the authorized enforcement official and/or authorized enforcement staff shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If a building or premises is unoccupied, the authorized enforcement official and/or authorized enforcement staff shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry.

C. In the event the owner and/or occupant refuses entry after such request has been made, the authorized enforcement official and/or authorized enforcement staff is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining entry.

D. Routine or area inspections shall be based upon such reasonable selection processes as may be deemed necessary to carry out the objectives of this title, including, but not limited to, random sampling and/or sampling in areas with evidence of stormwater contamination, illicit discharges, discharge of nonstormwater to the stormwater conveyance system, or similar factors. (Ord. 2055 § 1 (Exh. 1), 2016; Ord. 1989 § 1 (Exh. 4), 2007)

61.12.020 Inspection procedures.
A. During the inspection, the authorized enforcement official and/or authorized enforcement staff shall comply with all reasonable security, safety and sanitation measures. In addition, the authorized enforcement official and/or authorized enforcement staff shall comply with reasonable precautionary measures specified by the facility operator.

B. A report listing any violation found during the inspection shall be prepared by the authorized enforcement official and shall be kept on file in the enforcement agency. A copy of the report shall be provided to the facility operator. If corrections are needed, the facility operator shall provide to the enforcement agency, as directed, a written plan of correction which states the actions to be taken and the expected dates of completion. (Ord. 2055 § 1 (Exh. 1), 2016; Ord. 1989 § 1 (Exh. 4), 2007)

61.12.030 Authority to sample and establish sampling devices.
The enforcement agency shall have the right to establish on any property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations of any discharge to the stormwater conveyance system or receiving waters. During all inspections as provided herein, the authorized enforcement official and/or authorized enforcement staff may take any samples deemed necessary to aid in the pursuit of the inquiry or in the recordation of the activities on site. (Ord. 2055 § 1 (Exh. 1), 2016; Ord. 1989 § 1 (Exh. 4), 2007)

61.12.040 Notification of spills.
As soon as any person in charge of a facility, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, has knowledge of any confirmed or unconfirmed significant release of materials, pollutants or waste which may result in pollutants or nonstormwater discharges entering the City of Coronado stormwater conveyance system, such person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release and shall notify the City of Coronado of the occurrence and/or Department of Health Services, Environmental Health Services’ Hazardous Materials Management Division, and any other appropriate agency, immediately upon the incident’s occurrence. (Ord. 2055 § 1 (Exh. 1), 2016; Ord. 1989 § 1 (Exh. 4), 2007)

61.12.050 Requirement to test/monitor or mitigate.
A. The enforcement agency may request that any person engaged in any activity and/or owning or operating any facility which may cause or contribute to stormwater pollution or contamination, illicit discharges, and/or discharge of nonstormwater to the stormwater conveyance system, undertake such monitoring activities, including physical and chemical monitoring, and/or analyses and furnish such reports as the enforcement agency may specify. The burden, including costs, of these activities, analyses and reports shall bear a reasonable relationship to the need for the monitoring, analyses and reports and the benefits to be obtained. The recipient of such request shall undertake and provide the monitoring, analyses and/or reports requested.

B. Any persons required to monitor pursuant to subsection A of this section will implement a stormwater monitoring plan to include, at a minimum:

1. Routine visual monitoring for dry weather flows.

2. Routine visual monitoring for spills which may pollute stormwater runoff.

3. A monitoring log including monitoring date, potential pollution sources, as noted in subsections (B)(1) and (2) of this section, and a description of the mitigation measures taken to eliminate any potential pollution sources. (Ord. 2055 § 1 (Exh. 1), 2016; Ord. 1989 § 1 (Exh. 4), 2007)

61.12.060 Penalties for violation.
A. Civil Penalties. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this title shall be liable for a civil penalty in accordance with Chapter 1.08 CMC for each day such a violation exists, and all pollution detection, response, cleaning and mitigation costs (if applicable). (Ord. 2055 § 1 (Exh. 1), 2016; Ord. 1989 § 1 (Exh. 4), 2007)

61.12.070 Continuing violation.
Unless otherwise provided, a person, a firm, corporation or organization shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which a violation of this title is committed, continued or permitted by the person, firm, corporation or organization and shall be punishable accordingly as herein provided. (Ord. 2055 § 1 (Exh. 1), 2016; Ord. 1989 § 1 (Exh. 4), 2007)

61.12.080 Concealment.
Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting or concealing a violation of any provision of this title, including any misrepresentation in a voluntary disclosure, any submission of a report that omits required material facts without disclosing such omission, any withholding of information required to be submitted by or pursuant to this title in order to delay City enforcement action, shall constitute a violation of such provision. (Ord. 2055 § 1 (Exh. 1), 2016; Ord. 1989 § 1 (Exh. 4), 2007)

61.12.090 City permits and SWPPPs.
Any failure to conform to an applicable stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP), construction BMP plan, or any comparable plan prepared pursuant to this title; any failure to comply with stormwater-related provisions of a City-issued demolition or building permit prepared to secure such a permit; and any failure to comply with stormwater-related provisions in any other City permit or approval, is also a violation of this title. For purposes of this title, a permit provision or condition of approval is “stormwater-related” if compliance with the provision or condition would have the effect of preventing or reducing contamination of stormwater or of moderating runoff flow rates or velocities, whether or not the provision or condition was initially imposed to promote those outcomes. (Ord. 2055 § 1 (Exh. 1), 2016; Ord. 1989 § 1 (Exh. 4), 2007)

61.12.100 Violations deemed a public nuisance.
A. In addition to the penalties hereinbefore provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this title is a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated and/or restored by the authorized enforcement official, and/or civil action to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken by the City of Coronado’s attorney.

B. The cost of such abatement and restoration shall be borne by the owner of the property and the cost thereof shall be a lien upon and against the property and such lien shall continue in existence until the same shall be paid. If the lien is not satisfied by the owner of the property within three months after the completion by the authorized enforcement official of the removal of the nuisance and the restoration of the property to its original condition, the property may be sold in satisfaction thereof in a like manner as other real property is sold under execution.

C. If any violation of this title constitutes a seasonal and recurrent nuisance, the City of Coronado shall so declare. Thereafter such seasonal and recurrent nuisance shall be abated every year without the necessity of any further hearing. (Ord. 2055 § 1 (Exh. 1), 2016; Ord. 1989 § 1 (Exh. 4), 2007)

61.12.110 Administrative enforcement powers.
A. In addition to the other enforcement powers and remedies established by this title, the authorized enforcement official has the authority to utilize the following administrative remedies:

1. Cease and Desist Orders. When the authorized enforcement official or authorized enforcement staff finds that an illegal discharge has taken place or is likely to take place in violation of this title, the authorized enforcement official or authorized enforcement staff may issue an order to cease and desist such discharge, or practice, or operation likely to cause such discharge and direct that those persons not complying shall:

a. Comply with the requirement; or

b. Comply with a time schedule for compliance; and/or

c. Take appropriate remedial or preventative action to prevent the violation from recurring.

2. Notice to Clean. Whenever the authorized enforcement official or authorized enforcement staff finds any oil, earth, dirt, grass, weeds, dead trees, tin cans, rubbish, refuse, waste or any other material of any kind, in or upon the sidewalk abutting or adjoining any parcel of land, or upon any parcel of land or grounds, which may result in an increase in pollutants entering the City of Coronado’s stormwater conveyance system or a nonstormwater discharge to the City of Coronado’s stormwater conveyance system, he or she may give notice to remove such oil, earth, dirt, grass, weeds, dead trees, tin cans, rubbish, refuse, waste or other material, in any manner that he or she may reasonably provide. The recipient of such notice shall undertake the activities as described in the notice.

3. Stop Work Orders. Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this title, or other laws implemented through enforcement of this title, an authorized enforcement official may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any person engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done, and any such person shall immediately stop such work until authorized by the authorized enforcement official to proceed with the work.

4. Permit Suspension or Revocation. Violations of this title may be grounds for permit and/or other City license suspension or revocation.

B. Judicial Authorities.

1. The City Attorney is hereby authorized to file civil actions in Superior Court to enforce this title, seeking civil penalties and/or other remedies as provided in this section and in Chapter 1.08 CMC. There is no requirement that administrative enforcement procedures be pursued before such actions are filed.

2. Any violation of this title may be enforced by a judicial action for injunctive relief.

3. The assistance of a peace officer may be enlisted to arrest violators as provided in California Penal Code, Ordinance 5, 5c, and 5d, Title 3, Part 2 (or as amended) and/or a citation and notice to appear as prescribed in Ordinance 5c of Title 3, Part 2 of the Penal Code, including Section 853.6 (or as amended) may be issued. There is no requirement that administrative enforcement authorities be used before such actions are filed. The immunities prescribed in Section 836.5 of the Penal Code are applicable to the authorized enforcement official and authorized enforcement staff acting in the course and scope of their employment pursuant to this title. (Ord. 2055 § 1 (Exh. 1), 2016; Ord. 1989 § 1 (Exh. 4), 2007)

61.12.120 Coordination with hazardous materials inventory and response program.
The first revision of the business plan for any facility subject to the hazardous materials inventory and response program, Chapter 6.95 of the California Health and Safety Code, shall include a program for compliance with this title, including the prohibitions on nonstormwater discharges and illegal discharges, and the requirement to reduce stormwater pollutants to the maximum extent practicable. (Ord. 2055 § 1 (Exh. 1), 2016; Ord. 1989 § 1 (Exh. 4), 2007)

Title 62
SOLID WASTE
Chapters:

62.04    Solid Waste Management

62.10    Illicit Scavenging of Recyclable Materials

62.12    Recycling

62.30    Litter Control

62.40    Medical Waste

Chapter 62.04
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
Sections:

62.04.010    Citation.

62.04.012    Authority.

62.04.014    Enforcement agencies.

62.04.020    Policy.

62.04.022    Tax for solid waste management.

62.04.024    Regulations.

62.04.030    Unlawful to permit garbage or waste matter to accumulate.

62.04.032    Solid waste storage.

62.04.034    Collection schedules.

62.04.036    Excluded materials.

62.04.040    Regulation of operators.

62.04.050    Disposal.

62.04.060    Building requirements.

62.04.010 Citation.
This chapter may be cited as the City of Coronado Solid Waste Management Ordinance. (Gov. Code § 66730) (Ord. 1801; Ord. 1427)

62.04.012 Authority.
The State of California Government Code (Title 7.3) directs the establishment of a solid waste management and resource recovery policy to formulate and adopt such a policy. The policy is set forth in the California Administrative Code (Division 7 of Title 14). In accordance with the legislative intent expressed in the Government Code, primary responsibility for solid waste management rests with local government. In the San Diego region these local efforts are coordinated through the countywide Solid Waste Management Plan approved by the Solid Waste Management Board. This chapter covers material pertaining to the City of Coronado enacted in accordance with the California Administrative Code and the San Diego Regional Solid Waste Management Plan.

62.04.014 Enforcement agencies.
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 66796 of the California Government Code (Subsection (a) (3)), the City Council will by resolution designate an enforcement agency to carry out the provisions of the Z’Berg-Kapiloff Solid Waste Control Act of 1976.

62.04.020 Policy.
The accumulation, collection, removal and disposal of garbage and waste matter must be controlled by the City to safeguard the public health and its environment. The Council find that to give practical effect to this policy, a comprehensive system for the collection, removal and disposal of garbage and waste matter from all premises in the City is essential and benefits all occupants of premises in the City, and therefore, all such occupants are made liable for the garbage and waste matter collection and disposal taxes and fees as may be authorized under this chapter.

62.04.022 Tax for solid waste management.
A. It shall be the duty of the Council to provide for the collection and disposal, in a sanitary manner, of all garbage and refuse within this City, and to levy, and collect a sufficient tax each year for the purpose of paying the cost of the collection and disposal of such garbage and City refuse. The tax so levied and collected shall not be in addition to, but shall be included as part of, the general tax now authorized to be collected for municipal purposes within cities of the class of this City. (Added by Initiative, November 1944)

B. It shall be the duty of the City Council to provide for the collection and disposal, in a sanitary manner, of the garbage and refuse from each lot where commercial or business activity with a principal place of business located on the lot that is generating garbage and refuse within the City, not to exceed a once-a-week pick up of more than three cubic yards. Other collection and disposal service for commercial and business activities shall be paid for by the person requesting such service at a rate fixed, from time to time, by resolution of the City Council. (Added by Initiative, November 1988)

62.04.024 Regulations.
The Director of Public Services shall make and enforce regulations necessary to administration of this chapter and may amend such regulations from time to time as conditions require. These regulations shall be consistent with the general policy established by this chapter and shall be approved by the City Council by resolution.

62.04.030 Unlawful to permit garbage or waste matter to accumulate.
In accordance with the California Administrative Code, the owner or tenant of any premises, business establishment or industry shall be responsible for the satisfactory removal of all refuse accumulated on the property or premises. Excepting disruptions in normal refuse collections schedules, garbage shall not be allowed to remain on the premises more than seven days, to prevent propagation, harborage, or attraction of flies, rodents, or other vectors, and the creation of nuisances. Where it is deemed necessary by the Health Officer because of the propagation of vectors and for the protection of public health, more frequent removal of garbage may be required. Where garbage and rubbish are containerized together, the period of removal shall be that applied to garbage. However, nothing in these provisions shall be construed to interfere with any occupant keeping building materials upon the premises during construction, reconstruction or repair of a building or structure thereon under a valid building permit nor with the keeping of wood neatly piled upon such premises for household use. (CAC § 17331)

62.04.032 Solid waste storage.
In accordance with the California Administrative Code, the owner, operator and/or occupant of any premises, business establishment, industry or other property, vacant or occupied, shall be responsible for the safe and sanitary storage of all solid waste accumulated on the property and shall provide adequate on-site storage space for the number of waste containers required. In all cases in which garbage and rubbish are combined, the standards for garbage shall prevail. The property owner or occupant shall store solid waste on his premises or property, or shall require it to be stored or handled, in such a manner so as not to promote the propagation, harborage or attraction of vectors, or the creation of nuisances. (CAC §§ 17311 and 17312)

62.04.034 Collection schedules.
Pursuant to the requirements of CMC 62.04.022, the City shall make provision for the routing, collection and disposal of solid waste on a weekly or more frequent basis. In addition, provision shall be made at least annually for the special collection from residential property and disposal of bulky waste such as, but not limited to, water heaters, refrigerators, broken furniture and yard trimmings.

62.04.036 Excluded materials.
Solid waste collection and disposal services provided by the City shall not include the removal of household goods, moving crates or other containers, materials accumulated in connection with building enterprises and other similar matter. Such waste removal is the responsibility of the owner, tenant or builder.

62.04.040 Regulation of operators.
In accordance with the provisions of the California Administrative Code, each person providing residential, commercial or industrial solid waste collection services shall comply with City license, permits or written approval requirements applicable to the operation. Such approval shall be contingent upon the operator’s demonstrated capability to comply with prescribed standards and the use of equipment which is safe and sanitary. A list shall be maintained of all persons holding written approval to provide solid waste collection services within the City, which list shall contain the name and address of each such person, the office location, telephone number and number and types of vehicles employed by such person in providing solid waste collection service. (CAC § 17332)

62.04.050 Disposal.
All solid waste shall be disposed of outside the City in approved disposal facilities except where special arrangements have been made for other disposal methods with the approval of the appropriate enforcement agency. In order to most effectively support resource recovery efforts outlined in the countywide Solid Waste Management Plan, solid waste may be directed to be disposed of at specifically designed resource recovery facilities.

62.04.060 Building requirements.
In accordance with the provisions of the California Administrative Code, the design of any new, remodeled or expanded building or complex of buildings shall make provision for adequate storage and handling facilities which will accommodate the solid waste loading anticipated and which will allow for efficient and safe waste removal or collection. The design shall demonstrate that it includes the required provisions for storage capabilities and access to waste containers. Every new location for waste receptacles shall be screened by a wall or fence so that the receptacles are not visible from any adjacent street or property. (CAC § 17313)

Chapter 62.10
ILLICIT SCAVENGING OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS
Sections:

62.10.010    Purpose and intent.

62.10.020    Definitions.

62.10.030    Illicit scavenging of recyclable or solid waste materials.

62.10.050    Violation – Infraction.

62.10.060    Violation – Penalty.

62.10.070    Violation – Separate offenses.

62.10.010 Purpose and intent.
To reduce the amount of materials landfilled from the residents and businesses of Coronado, the City’s mandatory recycling ordinance (Chapter 62.12 CMC) requires all occupants of the City to recycle materials designated by the Council. Scavenging of recyclables undermines the City’s solid waste management program as codified in Chapter 62.04 CMC and the City’s mandatory recycling ordinance by:

A. Raising health and safety concerns (potentially harmful waste may be contacted or scattered due to searching through waste containers);

B. Raising security concerns (possible identity theft by obtaining names and other information from mail, prescription bottles; scavengers may steal property from side yards or garages);

C. Removing (stealing) revenue from the City’s solid waste program (scavengers remove the most valuable materials which the City otherwise uses to help pay for program costs); and

D. Attracting organized groups of scavengers into the City who have made scavenging of recyclables a commercial operation.

The regulations in this chapter are intended to eliminate scavenging of recyclables or any solid waste materials. (Ord. 2052 § 2, 2015; Ord. 1801; Ord. 1753)

62.10.020 Definitions.
Whenever the following words and phrases are used in this chapter, they shall have the definition of meaning established by this section, unless it is clearly apparent from the context in which the word or phrase appears that a different definition or meaning is intended:

A. “City agent” means any person designated by the City Manager or City Council as being responsible for administering, directing, supervising, collecting or providing for the disposal of garbage, rubbish, and other refuse.

B. “Permittee” means a recycling operator issued a permit by the City Council, pursuant to the procedures established by this title.

C. “Recyclable materials” means discarded materials which may be recycled, reused, remanufactured, or reconstituted that have been segregated from other solid waste and placed at a designated collection location or in a designated container for the purposes of collection and recycling.

D. “Recycling” means using, reusing or reclaiming a recyclable material as established by California Health and Safety Code Section 25121.1.

E. “Recycling operator” means a person or persons, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, or corporation engaged in the collection and recycling of waste and other discarded materials.

F. “Receptacle” means any container used for storage of recyclable materials, solid waste or green waste including, but not limited to, metal or plastic cans, carts, bins, tubs and drop boxes that are used by the generator or provided by the hauler.

G. “Salvaging” or “salvageable” shall mean the controlled and/or authorized storage and removal of solid waste, designated recyclables, reclaimable and/or reusable materials.

H. “Scavenger” means individual(s) who are involved in the unauthorized taking of recyclable materials either in or near a container set out for solid waste collection.

I. “Scavenging” means the uncontrolled and/or unauthorized searching, collecting or removing of items either in or near a solid waste container set out for collection.

J. “Solid waste material” means any material discarded by the owner, whether it is trash or recyclable material. (Ord. 2052 § 2, 2015)

62.10.030 Illicit scavenging of recyclable or solid waste materials.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the owner thereof, the owner’s agents or employees, a City agent, or a permittee, or a permittee’s agents or employees, to do any of the following:

1. Tamper or meddle with any container for recyclable or solid waste materials;

2. Scavenge the contents of any container designated for recyclable or solid waste materials;

3. Remove any container designated for recyclable or solid waste materials from the location where said container has been placed by the owner of the container or owner’s agent; or

4. Remove, tamper or meddle with any recyclable or solid waste material set out for collection, pursuant to the provisions of this title, on private property or on any sidewalk, street or public right-of-way.

B. The provisions of this section do not apply to:

1. A permittee performing under the authority of their permit;

2. A City agent performing within the authority granted by the City; or

3. The owner (or the owner’s authorized representative) of the recyclable materials or its container. (Ord. 2052 § 2, 2015)

62.10.050 Violation – Infraction.
Any person violating a provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 2052 § 2, 2015)

62.10.060 Violation – Penalty.
A person convicted of an infraction under this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00 for a first violation; $200.00 for a second violation within a 12-month period; and $500.00 for each additional violation within a 12-month period. (Ord. 2052 § 2, 2015)

62.10.070 Violation – Separate offenses.
Each person shall be charged with a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted by such person and shall, upon conviction, be punished accordingly. (Ord. 2052 § 2, 2015)

Chapter 62.12
RECYCLING
Sections:

62.12.010    Mandatory recycling.

62.12.015    Definitions.

62.12.020    Preparation of designated recyclable materials for collection.

62.12.030    Title to recyclables.

62.12.010 Mandatory recycling.
A. By resolution, the City Council shall designate the solid waste material which constitutes “designated recyclable material.”

B. All responsible occupants are required to divert designated recyclable material from the City’s normal solid waste stream by segregating designated recyclable materials from other solid waste and disposing of the designated recyclable material through the collection service provided by the City.

C. As an alternative to the City’s collection service for designated recyclable material, a responsible occupant may use a collection and disposal method that is not in conflict with the provisions of this code. (Ord. 1790)

62.12.015 Definitions.
Whenever the following defined words and phrases are used in this title, they shall have the definition or meaning established by this section, unless it is clearly apparent from the context in which the word or phrase appears that a different definition or meaning is intended:

“Designated recyclable materials” means solid waste materials that have been designated by City Council resolution as being subject to the provisions of this code relating to recycling.

“Franchisee” means any solid waste collector or recycling agent authorized by the City Council, pursuant to the provisions of this code, to collect and dispose of solid waste.

“Garbage” includes, but is not restricted to, every accumulation of animal, vegetable, or other matter:

1. Resulting from the preparation and consumption of edible foodstuffs; or

2. Resulting from decay, dealing in storage of meats, fish, fowl, fruits or vegetables including the cans, containers or wrappers wasted along with such materials; or

3. Such industrial, domestic, and organic solid wastes or residue of animals sold for meat; or

4. Fruit, vegetable, and animal matter from kitchens, dining rooms, markets, food establishments, or any other place using, dealing in or handling meats, fish, fowls, fruits, vegetables, or grains; or

5. Offal, animal excrete, or the carcasses of animals, fish or fowl; or

6. Nonrecyclable glass, paper or metal products.

“Glass bottles and jars” means food and beverage glass containers including container glass covered by the deposit law, and excluding household and kitchen containers such as drinking glasses, cups, cooking and serving dishes.

“Metal” means recoverable aluminum, tin, and bi-metal materials such as used beverage containers, siding and other recyclable manufactured metal items.

“Newspaper” means materials printed on newsprint.

“Office paper” means waste paper grades of white and colored ledgers. Examples include forms, copy paper, stationery, and other papers that are generally associated with desk activity.

“Plastic beverage bottles” means plastic containers with narrow necks, or mouth openings smaller than the diameter of the container bottles used for containing milk, juice, soft drinks, or water intended for human consumption; to be distinguished from nonfood bottles such as those for containing motor oil, detergent, or other household products.

“Responsible occupant” means and includes the owner, tenant, person in possession of, the inhabitant of, or a person who has the care and control of real property from whence solid waste is generated.

“Rubbish” includes, but is not restricted to, all nonbiodegradable waste or debris such as paper, cardboard, grass, tree or shrub trimmings, rugs, straw, clothing, wood or wood products, crockery, glass, rubber, metal, plastic, construction waste and debris, and other similar materials.

“White goods” means kitchen or other large appliances.

62.12.020 Preparation of designated recyclable materials for collection.
For designated recyclable materials generated on the subject property, the responsible occupant using the City collection service shall:

A. Separate all designated recyclable materials from other solid waste.

B. Group together all designated recyclable materials and place the group for collection in the same place, manner and time as normal solid waste is collected in accordance with the other provisions of this code; provided, that the responsible occupant shall comply with a designation of the franchisee who may designate some other place, manner or time for the placement of containers and receptacles to expedite collection of designated recyclable material.

C. Use the collection containers for designated recyclable material provided by the franchisee.

62.12.030 Title to recyclables.
The responsible occupant of the real property from whence the designated recyclable materials was generated shall retain title to the designated recyclable materials until placed for collection. Upon placement of the designated recyclable material for collection by a franchisee, the City shall have title to all designated recyclable materials so placed, to include, without limitation, the control of its disposition.

Chapter 62.30
LITTER CONTROL
Sections:

62.30.010    Citation.

62.30.020    Authority.

62.30.022    Definition.

62.30.030    Litter control regulations.

62.30.040    Unlawful to litter.

62.30.042    Distribution of printed materials.

62.30.050    Litter receptacles.

62.30.052    Receptacle standards.

62.30.054    Abuse or improper use of litter receptacles prohibited.

62.30.060    Property owner responsibility.

62.30.070    Clearing litter from private property.

62.30.010 Citation.
This chapter may be cited as the City of Coronado Litter Control Ordinance. (Ord. 1801; Ord. 1428)

62.30.020 Authority.
Litter is a type of solid waste and as such comes under the provisions of the State Solid Waste Management Program established by Titles 7.3 and 7.8 of the California Government Code. The Government Code makes the Solid Waste Management Board responsible for developing Statewide policy in the solid waste management field and the Board’s directives are found in the California Administrative Code (Division 7 of Title 14). However, in accordance with the legislative intent expressed in the Government Code, primary responsibility for solid waste management rests with local governmental agencies. (See also Chapter 62.04 CMC.)

62.30.022 Definition.
The California Administrative Code defines “litter” as all improperly discarded waste material, including, but not limited to, convenience food, beverage and other product packages or containers constructed of steel, aluminum, glass, paper, plastic and other natural and synthetic materials, thrown or deposited on the lands and waters of the State, but not including the properly discarded waste of the primary processing of agriculture, mining, logging, sawmilling or manufacturing.

62.30.030 Litter control regulations.
The Director of Public Services shall make and enforce regulations necessary for the control of litter within the City and may amend such regulations from time to time as conditions require. These regulations shall be consistent with the general policy established by this chapter and shall be approved by the City Council by resolution.

62.30.040 Unlawful to litter.
No person shall throw or deposit, or cause to be deposited, litter in or upon any public street, alley, sidewalk, other public right-of-way or public place within the City except in public receptacles or authorized private receptacles for collection. Further, no person shall throw or deposit, or allow or cause to be deposited, litter on any private property within the City, vacant or occupied, whether owned by such person or not.

62.30.042 Distribution of printed materials.
No person shall distribute, deliver, or throw, or cause or permit to be distributed, delivered or thrown, any newspaper, magazine, handbill, dodger, advertising material or other written or printed matter or substance on any private property in the City or in any street, alley, park or other public place in the City unless such matter is so placed as to render it impossible to be blown about or scattered about by the wind upon such private or public property.

62.30.050 Litter receptacles.
In accordance with the provisions of the California Administrative Code, litter receptacles meeting acceptable standards shall be placed in public places including, but not limited to, the following:

A. Drive-in restaurants and fast food outlets.

B. Gasoline service stations.

C. Shopping centers.

D. Grocery stores.

E. Boat launching and takeout areas.

F. Boat mooring and fueling stations.

G. Public piers.

H. Parks and campgrounds.

I. Beaches.

J. Outdoor parking lots which have the capacity of 50 or more automobiles and which are contiguous to the public places listed herein.

K. Movie theaters and playhouses.

Litter receptacles shall be required to be in place at the above locations only when said places are open to the public.

62.30.052 Receptacle standards.
Standards for the design, marking and maintenance of litter receptacles shall be established by the Director of Public Services.

62.30.054 Abuse or improper use of litter receptacles prohibited.
A. No person shall damage, deface, abuse or misuse any litter receptacle not owned by him so as to interfere with its proper function or to detract from its proper appearance.

B. No person shall deposit leaves, clippings, prunings or gardening refuse in any litter receptacle.

C. No person shall deposit household refuse or garbage in any litter receptacle; provided, that this subsection shall not be construed to mean that waste food consumed on the premises at any public place may not be deposited in litter receptacles.

62.30.060 Property owner responsibility.
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection is not prohibited.

62.30.070 Clearing litter from private property.
Whenever the owner or person in control of any private property fails to maintain the premises free of litter as required by this chapter, the City may proceed to remove and dispose of such litter in accordance with the provisions of this code governing the removal of weeds, refuse and other kinds of waste material.

Chapter 62.40
MEDICAL WASTE
Sections:

62.40.010    Regulations.

62.40.020    Effective date.

62.40.030    Health Officer.

62.40.040    Enforcement.

62.40.010 Regulations.
There was hereby adopted by reference, by the City, for the purpose of prescribing rules and regulations for the protection of the public health and safety, Chapter 12, Division 8 of Title 6 of the San Diego County Code regulating medical waste, together with such secondary references as are included in those portions, effective as of the date set forth in CMC 62.40.020. The provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the City to include, without limitation, the fees, regulatory provisions and definitions, but excluding the procedural provisions beyond those specified for processing applications, conducting investigations, issuing permits and enforcing regulatory provisions. (Ord. 1801; Ord. 1535)

62.40.020 Effective date.
The effective date of this chapter is October 5, 1989. (Ord. 1746)

62.40.030 Health Officer.
The San Diego County Health Officer, together with the Department of Health Services for the County of San Diego, is hereby designated as the Health Officer for the City of Coronado with authority to enforce and observe within the City the provisions of this chapter.

62.40.040 Enforcement.
A. A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the County Jail not to exceed one year, or a fine not exceeding $10,000, or both.

B. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $15,000 for each such violation.

Title 64
WATER CONSERVATION
Chapters:

64.06    Water-Efficient Landscape Regulations

Chapter 64.06
WATER-EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS
Sections:

64.06.010    Purpose.

64.06.020    Definitions.

64.06.030    Applicability.

64.06.040    Administration and enforcement.

64.06.050    Landscape documentation package.

64.06.060    Soil management report.

64.06.070    Grading design plan.

64.06.080    Planting, irrigation and maintenance plans.

64.06.090    Water-efficient landscape worksheet.

64.06.100    Maximum applied water use.

64.06.110    Estimated total water use.

64.06.120    Certificate of completion.

64.06.130    Enforcement.

64.06.140    Fees.

64.06.010 Purpose.
The State Legislature determined in the Water Conservation in Landscaping Act (the “Act”), Government Code sections 65591 et seq., that the State’s water resources are in limited supply. The Legislature also recognized that while landscaping is essential to the quality of life in California, landscape design, installation, maintenance and management must be water-efficient. The general purpose of this chapter is to establish water use standards for landscaping in the City of Coronado that implement the 2006 development landscape design requirements established by the Act. Consistent with the Legislature’s findings, the purpose of this chapter is to:

A. Promote the values and benefits of landscapes while recognizing the need to utilize water and other resources as efficiently as possible.

B. Establish a structure for planning, designing, installing, maintaining and managing water-efficient landscapes in new construction.

C. Encourage the protection and preservation of native species and vegetation, and the selection of water-conserving plant and turf species.

D. Use water efficiently without waste by setting a maximum applied water allowance (MAWA) as an upper limit for water use and reduce water use to the lowest practical amount. (Ord. 2014 § 2 (Att. A), 2010)

64.06.020 Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:

A. “Automatic irrigation controller” means an automatic timing device used to remotely control valves that operate an irrigation system. Automatic irrigation controllers shall schedule irrigation events using either evapotranspiration (ETo) (weather-based) or moisture sensor data.

B. “Estimated total water use” (ETWU) means the estimated total water use in gallons per year for a landscaped area.

C. “ET adjustment factor” (ETAF) means a factor that, when applied to reference ETo, adjusts for plant water requirements and irrigation efficiency, two major influences on the amount of water that is required for a healthy landscape.

D. “Evapotranspiration” (ETo) means the quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil and other surfaces and transpired by plants during a specified time period. “Reference evapotranspiration” means a standard measurement of environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants. ETo is given in inches per day, month, or year and is an estimate of the ETo of a large field of four-inch- to seven-inch-tall, cool season turf that is well watered. Reference ETo is used as the basis of determining the MAWA so that regional differences in climate can be accommodated.

E. “Hardscape” means any durable surface material, pervious or nonpervious.

F. “Hydrozone” means a portion of the landscape area having plants with similar water needs. A hydrozone may be irrigated or nonirrigated.

G. “Invasive species” means vegetation that is not native to the area where it occurs and interferes with native species growing or attempting to grow in the area based on applicable federal or state guidelines for the location.

H. “Irrigation efficiency” means the measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices.

I. “Landscaped area” means an area with outdoor plants, turf and other vegetation. A landscaped area includes a water feature either in an area with vegetation or that stands alone. A landscaped area may also include design features adjacent to an area with vegetation when allowed under CMC 64.06.080(B)(7). A landscaped area does not include the footprint of a building, decks, patio, sidewalk, driveway, parking lot or other hardscape that does not meet the criteria in CMC 64.06.080(B)(7). A landscaped area also does not include an area without irrigation designated for nondevelopment such as designated open space or area with existing native vegetation.

J. “Low-volume irrigation” means the application of irrigation water at low pressure through a system of tubing or lateral lines and low-volume emitters such as drip lines or bubblers.

K. “Maximum applied water allowance” (MAWA) means the maximum allowed annual water use for a specific landscaped area based on the square footage of the area, the ETAF and the reference ETo.

L. “Overspray” means the water from irrigation that is delivered outside an area targeted for the irrigation and makes contact with a surface not intended to be irrigated.

M. “Pervious” means any surface or material that allows the passage of water through the material and into underlying soil.

N. “Plant factor” means a factor that, when multiplied by the ETo, estimates the amount of water a plant needs.

O. “Runoff” means water that is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from the landscaped area.

P. “Special landscaped area” means an area of the landscape dedicated to edible plants, an area irrigated with recycled water, or an area dedicated as turf area within a park, sports field or golf course where turf provides a passive or active recreational surface.

Q. “Subsurface irrigation” means an irrigation device with a delivery line and water emitters installed below the soil surface that slowly and frequently emit small amounts of water into the soil to irrigate plant roots.

R. “Water feature” means a design element where open water performs an aesthetic or recreational function. A water feature includes a pond, lake, waterfall, fountain, artificial streams, spa and swimming pool. Constructed wetlands used for on-site wastewater treatment or storm water best management practices are not water features.

S. “Water purveyor” means a public utility, municipal water district, municipal irrigation district or municipality that delivers water to customers.

T. “WUCOLS III” means water use classification of landscape species and refers to the Department of Water Resources 1999 publication or the most current version. (Ord. 2014 § 2 (Att. A), 2010)

64.06.030 Applicability.
A. This chapter shall apply to the following projects which require a building permit or a discretionary permit:

1. A new construction project for an industrial, commercial, institutional, public agency, or multifamily residential use where the landscaped area is greater than or equal to 2,500 square feet.

2. Developer-installed residential and common area landscapes where the total landscaped area for the development is greater than or equal to 2,500 square feet.

3. A new single-family residence with homeowner-provided landscaping, where the landscaped area is greater than or equal to 5,000 square feet.

4. A rehabilitated landscape for an existing industrial, commercial, institutional, public agency or multifamily use where a building permit or discretionary permit is being issued and the applicant is installing or modifying 2,500 square feet or more of landscaping.

B. This chapter shall not apply to the following:

1. Any project exempted from this chapter as determined by the exemption worksheet.

2. A registered local, State or Federal historical site.

3. An ecological restoration project that does not require a permanent irrigation system.

4. A botanical garden or arboretum open to the public.

5. Any single-family residence that is being rebuilt after it was destroyed due to a natural disaster, such as a fire, earthquake, or hurricane. (Ord. 2014 § 2 (Att. A), 2010)

64.06.040 Administration and enforcement.
A. The Director of Community Development or designee shall administer and enforce this chapter and shall provide guidance to applicants on how to comply with the requirements of this chapter.

B. The Director may designate another agency, such as a water purveyor, to implement some or all of the requirements contained in this chapter. (Ord. 2014 § 2 (Att. A), 2010)

64.06.050 Landscape documentation package.
A. Unless exempted, building permit applications for projects subject to these regulations shall include a landscape documentation package that complies with the provisions of this chapter, prepared by a licensed landscape architect, licensed civil engineer, licensed architect or other landscape professional appropriately licensed by the State.

B. The landscape documentation package shall contain the following:

1. A soil management report and plan that analyzes the soil within each landscaped area of the project and makes recommendations regarding soil additives.

2. Grading design plan that minimizes soil erosion, runoff, and water waste.

3. Planting and irrigation plans that describe the landscaping and irrigation for the project. (Ord. 2014 § 2 (Att. A), 2010)

64.06.060 Soil management report.
A. The soil management report shall contain the following information:

1. An analysis of the soil for the proposed landscaped areas of the project that includes information about the soil texture, soil infiltration rate, pH, total soluble salts, sodium, and percent organic matter.

2. Recommendations about soil amendments that may be necessary to foster plant growth and plant survival in the landscaped area using efficient irrigation techniques.

B. The soil management report shall include information regarding proposed soil amendments and mulch:

1. The report shall identify the type and amount of mulch for each area where mulch is applied. Mulch shall be used as follows:

a. A minimum two-inch layer of mulch shall be applied on all exposed soil surfaces in each landscaped area except in turf areas, creeping or rooting ground covers or direct seeding applications where mulch is contraindicated.

b. Stabilizing mulch shall be applied on slopes.

c. The mulching portion of seed/mulch slurry in hydroseeded applications shall meet the mulching requirement.

2. The report shall identify any soil amendments and their type and quantity. (Ord. 2014 § 2 (Att. A), 2010)

64.06.070 Grading design plan.
The grading design plan shall contain the following information:

A. The plan shall show that the grading on the project site is designed for the efficient use of water by minimizing soil erosion, runoff, and water waste, resulting from precipitation and irrigation.

B. The plan shall show the finished configurations and elevations of each landscaped area including the height of graded slopes, the drainage pattern, pad elevations, finish grade and any stormwater retention improvements. (Ord. 2014 § 2 (Att. A), 2010)

64.06.080 Planting, irrigation and maintenance plans.
A. The planting and irrigation plans shall include a cover sheet that contains the following information:

1. Include the MAWA for the project, and the calculations used to determine the MAWA. The calculations shall be based on the formula in CMC 64.06.100.

2. Include the ETWU for the project, and the calculations used to determine the ETWU. The calculations shall be based on the formula in CMC 64.06.110.

3. Include a statement signed under penalty of perjury by the person who prepared the plan that provides:

I am familiar with the requirements for landscape and irrigation plans contained in the City of Coronado Water-Efficient Landscape Regulations. I have prepared this plan in compliance with those regulations. I certify that the plan implements those regulations to provide efficient use of water.

B. The planting plan shall meet the following requirements:

1. A water-efficient landscape worksheet that complies with CMC 64.06.090 shall be included as part of the planting plan.

2. The plan shall include a list of all vegetation, by common and botanical plant name, which is proposed for each landscaped area. No invasive plant species shall be added to a landscaped area. The plan shall include the total quantities by container size and species. If the applicant intends to plant seeds, the plan shall describe the seed mixes and germination specifications.

3. The plan shall include a detailed description of each water feature that will be included in the landscaped area. Water features should incorporate recirculating water systems and, where possible, recycled water. The surface area of a water feature shall be included in the high water use hydrozone area of the water budget calculation.

4. The plan shall be accompanied by a drawing showing, on a page or pages, the specific location of all vegetation, retained or planted, the plant spacing and plant size, natural features, water features, and hardscape areas. The drawing shall include a legend listing the common and botanical plant name of each plant shown on the drawing.

5. All plants shall be grouped in hydrozones and the irrigation shall be designed to deliver water to hydrozones based on the moisture requirements of the plant grouping. A hydrozone may mix plants of moderate and low-water-use or mix plants of high-water-use with plants of moderate water use. No high-water-use plants shall be allowed in a low-water-use hydrozone.

6. The plan shall identify areas dedicated to edible plants.

7. Rock and stone or pervious design features, such as decomposed granite ground cover, that are adjacent to a vegetated area may be included in the calculation of the MAWA and ETWU.

8. On a commercial, industrial, institutional or multifamily project, no turf shall be allowed on a center island median strip or on a parking lot island.

C. The irrigation plan shall meet the following requirements:

1. The plan shall show the location, type and size of all components of the irrigation system that will provide water to the landscaped area, including the controller, water lines, valves, sprinkler heads, moisture sensing devices, rain switches, quick couplers, pressure regulators, and backflow prevention devices.

2. The plan shall show the static water pressure at the point of connection to the public water supply and the flow rate in gallons, the application rate in inches per hour and the design operating pressure in pressure per square inch for each station.

3. The irrigation system shall be designed to prevent runoff, overspray, low-head drainage and other similar conditions where irrigation water flows or sprays onto areas not intended for irrigation.

4. The plan shall identify each area irrigated with recycled water.

5. The plan shall provide that any slope greater than 25 percent will be irrigated with an irrigation system with a precipitation rate of .75 inches per hour or less to prevent runoff and erosion. An applicant may employ an alternative design if the plan demonstrates that no runoff or erosion will occur.

6. The plan shall provide that only low volume or subsurface irrigation shall be used to irrigate any vegetation within 24 inches of an impermeable surface unless the adjacent impermeable surfaces are designed and constructed to cause water to drain entirely into a landscaped area.

7. The irrigation system shall provide for the installation of a manual shutoff valve as close as possible to the water supply. Additional manual shutoff valves shall be installed between each zone of the irrigation system and the water supply.

8. The irrigation system shall provide that irrigation for any landscaped area will be regulated by an automatic irrigation controller.

9. The irrigation system shall be designed with a landscape irrigation efficiency necessary to meet the MAWA.

10. The plan shall describe each automatic irrigation controller the system uses to regulate the irrigation schedule and whether it is a weather-based system or moisture detection system. The plan shall depict the location of electrical service for the automatic irrigation controller or describe the use of batteries or solar power that will power valves or a smart controller.

11. Only low volume or subsurface irrigation shall be used for turf in a landscaped area:

a. On a slope greater than 25 percent grade where the toe of the slope is adjacent to an impermeable hardscape.

b. Where any dimension of the landscaped area is less than six feet wide.

12. Include an irrigation schedule providing the following information:

a. A description of the automatic irrigation system that will be used for the project.

b. The ETo data relied on to develop the irrigation schedule, including the source of the data.

c. The time period when overhead irrigation will be scheduled and confirm that no overhead irrigation shall be used between 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.

d. The parameters used for setting the irrigation system controller for watering times for:

i. The plant establishment period.

ii. Established landscaping.

iii. Temporarily irrigated areas.

iv. Different seasons during the year.

e. The consideration used for each station for the following factors:

i. The days between irrigation.

ii. Station run time in minutes for each irrigation event, designed to avoid runoff.

iii. Number of cycle starts required for each irrigation event, designed to avoid runoff.

iv. Amount of water to be applied on a monthly basis.

v. The root depth setting.

vi. The plant type setting.

vii. The soil type.

viii. The slope factor.

ix. The shade factor.

D. The maintenance plan shall provide for the following:

1. An applicant issued a landscape approval for a project under these regulations shall install the approved landscaping and irrigation system before final inspection of the project.

2. A property owner using water on property subject to a landscape approval under these regulations shall prepare a maintenance schedule for the landscaping and irrigation system on the project. The schedule shall provide for:

a. Routine inspection to guard against runoff and erosion and detect plant or irrigation system failure.

b. Eradication of invasive species.

c. Repairing the irrigation system and its components.

d. Replenishing mulch.

e. Soil amendment when necessary to support and maintain healthy plant growth.

3. After approval of a landscape plan, the owner is required to maintain the landscape in accordance with the maintenance plan. (Ord. 2014 § 2 (Att. A), 2010)

64.06.090 Water-efficient landscape worksheet.
A. The water-efficient landscape worksheet shall contain the following:

1. A hydrozone information table that contains a list of each hydrozone in the landscaped area of the project and complies with the following requirements:

a. For each hydrozone listed, the table shall identify the plant types and water features in the hydrozone, the irrigation methods used, the square footage and the percentage of the total landscaped area of the project that the hydrozone represents.

b. The plant types shall be categorized as turf, high water use, moderate water use or low water use.

2. Water budget calculations, which shall meet the following requirements:

a. The plant factor used shall be from WUCOLS III. The plant factor shall be 0.1 for very low-water-use plants, 0.3 for low-water-use plants, 0.5 for moderate-water-use plants and 0.8 for high-water-use plants. A plan that mixes plants in a hydrozone that require a different amount of water shall use the plant factor for the highest water using plant in the hydrozone.

b. Temporarily irrigated areas shall be included in the low-water-use hydrozone. “Temporarily irrigated” as used in this chapter means the period of time when plantings only receive water until they become established.

c. The surface area of a water feature, including swimming pools, shall be included in a high-water-use hydrozone.

d. The calculations shall use the formula for the MAWA in CMC 64.06.100 and for the ETWU in CMC 64.06.110.

e. Each special landscaped area shall be identified on the worksheet and the area’s water use calculated using an ETAF of 1.0. (Ord. 2014 § 2 (Att. A), 2010)

64.06.100 Maximum applied water use.
A. A landscape project subject to this chapter shall not exceed the MAWA. The MAWA for a landscape project shall be determined by the following calculation:

MAWA = (ETo)(0.62)[0.7 x LA + 0.3 x SLA].

B. The abbreviations used in the equation have the following meanings:

1. MAWA = Maximum Applied Water Allowance in gallons per year.

2. ETo = Evapotranspiration in inches per year.

3. 0.62 = Conversion factor to gallons per square foot.

4. 0.7 = ET adjustment factor for plant factors and irrigation efficiency.

5. LA = Landscaped area includes special landscaped area in square feet.

6. 0.3 = the additional ET adjustment factor for a special landscaped area (1.0 - 0.7 = 0.3).

7. SLA = Portion of the landscaped area identified as a special landscaped area in square feet. (Ord. 2014 § 2 (Att. A), 2010)

64.06.110 Estimated total water use.
A. An applicant for a project subject to this chapter shall calculate the ETWU for each landscaped area and the entire project using the following equation:

ETWU = (ETo)(0.62)(PF x HA / IE + SLA).

B. The abbreviations used in the equation have the following meanings:

1. ETWU = Estimated total water use in gallons per year.

2. ETo = Evapotranspiration in inches per year.

3. 0.62 = Conversion factor to gallons per square foot.

4. PF = Plant factor from WUCOLS.

5. HA = Hydrozone Area in square feet. Each HA shall be classified based upon the data included in the landscape and irrigation plan as high, medium or low water use.

6. IE = Irrigation Efficiency of the irrigation method used in the hydrozone.

7. SLA = Special landscaped area in square feet.

C. The ETWU for a proposed project shall not exceed the MAWA. (Ord. 2014 § 2 (Att. A), 2010)

64.06.120 Certificate of completion.
A signed certificate of completion, under penalty of perjury, on a form provided by the City of Coronado within 10 days of installation, or prior to final inspection.

A. The certificate shall include a statement verifying that the landscaping and irrigation were installed as detailed in the approved landscape and irrigation plan, all approved soil amendments were implemented, the installed irrigation system is functioning as designed and approved, the irrigation control system was properly programmed in accordance with the irrigation schedule, and the person operating the system has received all required maintenance and irrigation plans.

B. Where there have been significant changes to the landscape plan during the installation of landscaping or irrigation devices or irrigation system components, the professional of record for the landscape design shall show documentation that the plan change complies with the MAWA per the approved plan.

C. The certificate shall be signed by the professional of record for the landscape design.

D. A copy of the signed certificate shall be transmitted to the local water purveyor by the applicant. (Ord. 2014 § 2 (Att. A), 2010)

64.06.130 Enforcement.
A. This chapter shall be enforced using the civil and criminal provisions found in CMC Title 1 (General Provisions). All remedies are cumulative.

B. Nothing herein prevents the City, or its designated enforcement agency, from inspecting properties, in a manner allowed by law, to determine if violations of this chapter have occurred, including the use of landscape irrigation audit procedures as authorized by law. (Ord. 2014 § 2 (Att. A), 2010)

64.06.140 Fees.
An applicant for a project subject to this chapter shall include with the application all fees established by resolution by the City Council to cover the City’s cost to review an application, any required landscape documentation package and any other documents the City reviews pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2014 § 2 (Att. A), 2010)

Title 68
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE
Chapters:

68.10    Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Methods

68.20    Definitions

68.30    General Provisions

68.40    Administration

68.50    Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction

68.60    Variance Procedure

Chapter 68.10
STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND METHODS
Sections:

68.10.010    Statutory authorization.

68.10.020    Findings of fact.

68.10.030    Statement of purpose.

68.10.040    Methods of reducing flood losses.

68.10.010 Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of California has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560, and 65800 conferred upon local government units authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City Council of the City of Coronado does hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations. (Ord. 1886; Ord. 1717)

68.10.020 Findings of fact.
A. The flood hazard areas of the City of Coronado are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.

B. These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities also contribute to the flood loss.

68.10.030 Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this title to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:

A. Protect human life and health;

B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;

C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;

E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage;

G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and

H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions.

68.10.040 Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this title includes methods and provisions to:

A. Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities;

B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;

D. Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and

E. Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas.

Chapter 68.20
DEFINITIONS
Sections:

68.20.010    Definitions.

68.20.010 Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this title shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this title its most reasonable application.

“Accessory use” means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located.

“Alluvial fan” means a geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan-shaped deposit of boulders, gravel, and fine sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on the valley floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows, debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration.

“Apex” means the point of highest elevation on an alluvial fan, which on undisturbed fans is generally the point where the major stream that formed the fan emerges from the mountain front.

“Appeal” means a request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s interpretation of any provision of this title.

“Area of special flood hazard.” See “Special flood hazard area.”

“Area of special flood-related erosion hazard” is the land within a community which is most likely to be subject to severe flood-related erosion losses. The area may be designated as Zone E on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).

“Base flood” means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the “100-year flood”). “Base flood” is the term used throughout this title.

“Basement” means any area of the building having its floor subgrade, i.e., below ground level, on all sides.

“Breakaway walls” are any type of walls, whether solid or lattice, and whether constructed of concrete, masonry, wood, metal, plastic or any other suitable building material which is not part of the structural support of the building and which is designed to break away under abnormally high tides or wave action without causing any damage to the structural integrity of the building on which they are used or any buildings to which they might be carried by flood waters. A breakaway wall shall have a safe design loading resistance of not less than 10 and no more than 20 pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls must be certified by a registered engineer or architect and shall meet the following conditions:

1. Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less than that which would occur during the base flood; and

2. The elevated portion of the building shall not incur any structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously in the event of the base flood.

“Building.” See “Structure.”

“Coastal high hazard area” means an area of special flood hazard extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources. It is an area subject to high velocity waters, including coastal and tidal inundation or tsunamis. The area is designated on a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) as Zone V1-V30, VE, or V.

“Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.

“Encroachment” means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.

“Existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.

“Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).

“Flood,” “flooding,” or “flood water” means:

1. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.

2. The condition resulting from flood-related erosion. See “Flood-related erosion.”

“Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway.

“Flood Hazard Boundary Map” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated the areas of flood hazards.

“Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

“Flood Insurance Study” means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

“Flood-related erosion” means the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding.

“Flood-related erosion area” or “flood-related erosion-prone area” means a land area adjoining the shore of a lake or other body of water, which due to the composition of the shoreline or bank and high water levels or wind driven currents, is likely to suffer flood-related erosion damage.

“Flood-related erosion area management” means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood-related erosion damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood-related erosion control works, and floodplain management regulations.

“Floodplain” or “flood-prone area” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See “Flooding.”

“Floodplain Administrator” is the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.

“Floodplain management” means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.

“Floodplain management regulations” means this title and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes Federal, State or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.

“Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents.

“Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as “regulatory floodway.”

“Floodway fringe” is that area of the floodplain on either side of the “regulatory floodway” where encroachment may be permitted.

“Fraud and victimization” as related to Chapter 68.60 CMC, Variance Procedure, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the City Council will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for 50 to 100 years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates.

“Functionally dependent use” means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.

“Governing body” is the local governing unit, i.e., County or municipality, that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.

“Hardship” as related to Chapter 68.60 CMC, Variance Procedure, means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The City Council requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.

“Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

“Historic structure” means any structure that is:

1. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

2. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered Historic District or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered Historic District;

3. Individually listed on a State Inventory of Historic Places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or

4. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states with approved programs.

“Levee” means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.

“Levee system” means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices.

“Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement (See “Basement” definition).

1. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable nonelevation design requirements, including, but not limited to:

a. The wet floodproofing standard in CMC 68.50.010(C)(3).

b. The anchoring standards in CMC 68.50.010(A).

c. The construction materials and methods standards in CMC 68.50.010(B).

d. The standards for utilities in CMC 68.50.020.

2. For residential structures, all subgrade-enclosed areas are prohibited as they are considered to be basements (see “Basement” definition). This prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas.

“Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”

“Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

“Mean sea level” means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.

“New construction,” for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

“New manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community.

“Obstruction” includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream.

“One-hundred-year flood” or “100-year flood.” See “Base flood.”

“Primary frontal dune” means a continuous or nearly continuous mound or ridge of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes immediately landward and adjacent to the beach and subject to erosion and overtopping from high tides and waves during major coastal storms. The inland limit of the primary frontal dune occurs at the point where there is a distinct change from a relatively mild slope.

“Public safety and nuisance,” as related to Chapter 68.60 CMC, Variance Procedure, means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.

“Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:

1. Built on a single chassis;

2. Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

3. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and

4. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

“Regulatory floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.

“Remedy a violation” means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with State or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this title or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing State or Federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.

“Riverine” means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.

“Sand dunes” mean naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach.

“Special flood hazard area (SFHA)” means an area having special flood, or flood-related erosion hazards, and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, A1-A30, AE, A99, E, M, V1-V30, VE or V.

“Start of construction” includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days from the date of the permit. The “actual start” means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the “actual start of construction” means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

“Structure” means a walled and roofed building that is principally aboveground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home.

“Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

“Substantial improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:

1. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

2. Any alteration of a “historic structure”; provided, that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure.”

“V Zone.” See “Coastal high hazard area.”

“Variance” means a grant of relief from the requirements of this title which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this title.

“Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this title. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this title is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.

“Water surface elevation” means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.

“Watercourse” means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur.

Chapter 68.30
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

68.30.010    Lands to which this title applies.

68.30.020    Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.

68.30.030    Compliance.

68.30.040    Abrogation and greater restrictions.

68.30.050    Interpretation.

68.30.060    Warning and disclaimer of responsibility.

68.30.070    Severability.

68.30.010 Lands to which this title applies.
This title shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the City of Coronado.

68.30.020 Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the County of San Diego Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated June 19, 1997, and accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs), dated June 19, 1997, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this title. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this title and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this title and which are recommended to the City Council by the Floodplain Administrator. The study and FIRMs are on file at the City of Coronado City Hall Community Development Department at 1825 Strand Way, Coronado, California, 92118. (Ord. 1978 § 2, 2006)

68.30.030 Compliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the term of this title and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the City Council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.

68.30.040 Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This title is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this title and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.

68.30.050 Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this title, all provisions shall be:

A. Considered as minimum requirements;

B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes.

68.30.060 Warning and disclaimer of responsibility.
The degree of flood protection required by this title is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This title does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This title shall not create liability on the part of City of Coronado, any officer or employee thereof, the State of California, or the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this title or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.

68.30.070 Severability.
This title and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this title be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the title as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.

Chapter 68.40
Administration
Sections:

68.40.010    Establishment of development permit.

68.40.020    Designation of Floodplain Administrator.

68.40.030    Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.

68.40.040    Appeals.

68.40.010 Establishment of development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in CMC 68.30.020. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Floodplain Administrator and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:

A. Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures – elevation of highest adjacent grade and proposed elevation of lowest floor of all structures; or

B. Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, if required in CMC 68.50.010(C)(3); and

C. All appropriate certifications listed in CMC 68.40.030(D); and

D. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.

68.40.020 Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
The Community Development Director is hereby appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this title by granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions.

68.40.030 Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

A. Permit Review. Review all development permits to determine that:

1. Permit requirements of this title have been satisfied;

2. All other required State and Federal permits have been obtained;

3. The site is reasonably safe from flooding; and

4. The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this title, “adversely affects” means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.

B. Review and Use of Any Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with CMC 68.30.020, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal or State agency, or other source, in order to administer Chapter 68.50 CMC. Any such information shall be submitted to the City Council for adoption.

C. Notification of Other Agencies. In alteration or relocation of a watercourse:

1. Notify adjacent communities and the Department of Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation;

2. Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency;

3. Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained;

4. Where base flood elevations change due to physical alterations: Within six months of information becoming available or project completion, whichever comes first, the Floodplain Administrator shall submit or assure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data to FEMA for a letter of map revision (LOMR);

5. In the case of flood control projects, all LOMRs shall be approved by FEMA prior to the issuance of building permits. Approved conditional letters of map revision (CLOMR) allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the “start of construction” definition, but not the issuance of a building permit.

Such submissions are necessary so that, upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements are based on current data; and

6. Where there are changes in corporate boundaries: Notify FEMA in writing whenever the corporate boundaries have been modified by annexation or other means and include a copy of a map of the community clearly delineating the new corporate limits.

D. Documentation of Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following:

1. Certification required by CMC 68.50.010(C)(1) (lowest floor elevations);

2. Certification required by CMC 68.50.010(C)(2) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures);

3. Certification required by CMC 68.50.010(C)(3) (wet floodproofing standard);

4. Certification of elevation required by CMC 68.50.030(B) (subdivision standards);

5. Information required by CMC 68.50.060(F) (coastal construction standards).

E. Map Determinations. Make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Chapter 68.60 CMC.

F. Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this title as specified in CMC 68.30.030. (Ord. 2010 § 2, 2010)

68.40.040 Appeals.
The City Council of the City of Coronado shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this title.

Chapter 68.50
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
Sections:

68.50.010    Standards of construction.

68.50.020    Standards for utilities.

68.50.030    Standards for subdivisions.

68.50.040    Standards for manufactured homes.

68.50.050    Standards for recreational vehicles.

68.50.060    Coastal high hazard areas.

68.50.070    Flood-related erosion-prone areas.

68.50.010 Standards of construction.
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:

A. Anchoring.

1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.

2. All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of CMC 68.50.040.

B. Construction Materials and Methods. All new construction and substantial improvement shall be constructed:

1. With materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;

2. Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage; and

3. With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.

C. Elevation and Floodproofing. (See Chapter 68.20 CMC definitions for “basement,” “lowest floor,” “new construction,” “substantial damage” and “substantial improvement.”)

1. Residential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall have the lowest floor, including basement:

a. In an A Zone, elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation.

b. In all other zones, elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation.

Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, and verified by the Community Building Inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator.

2. Nonresidential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall either be elevated to conform with subsection (C)(1) of this section or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities:

a. Be floodproofed below the elevation recommended under subsection (C)(1) of this section so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;

b. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and

c. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator.

3. All new construction and substantial improvement with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must exceed the following minimum criteria:

a. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or

b. Have a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater.

4. Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in CMC 68.50.040. (Ord. 1956 § 9, 2004)

68.50.020 Standards for utilities.
A. All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate:

1. Infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and

2. Discharge from the systems into flood waters.

B. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding.

68.50.030 Standards for subdivisions.
A. All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood.

B. All subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pad(s). If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the lowest floor and pad elevations shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the Floodplain Administrator.

C. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

D. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.

E. All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards.

68.50.040 Standards for manufactured homes.
A. All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map on sites located:

1. Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;

2. In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;

3. In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or

4. In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site upon which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as the result of a flood;

shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation collapse and lateral movement.

B. All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved on sites located within Zones V1-30, V, and VE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map will meet the requirements of subsection A of this section and CMC 68.50.060.

C. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1-30, AH, AE, V1-30, V, and VE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map that are not subject to the provisions of subsection A of this section will be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation collapse and lateral movement, and elevated so that either the:

1. Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least one foot above the base flood elevation; or

2. Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and is securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.

68.50.050 Standards for recreational vehicles.
A. All recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map will either:

1. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, and be fully licensed and ready for highway use – a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or

2. Meet the permit requirements of Chapter 68.40 CMC and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in CMC 68.50.040(A); or

3. Meet the permit requirements of Chapter 68.40 CMC and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in CMC 68.50.040(A).

B. Recreation vehicles placed on sites within Zones V1-30, V, and VE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map will meet the requirements of subsection A of this section and CMC 68.50.060.

68.50.060 Coastal high hazard areas.
Within coastal high hazard areas as established under CMC 68.30.020, the following standards shall apply:

A. All new construction and substantial improvement shall be elevated on adequately anchored pilings or columns and securely anchored to such pilings or columns so that the lowest horizontal portion of the structural members of the lowest floor (excluding the pilings or columns) is elevated to or above the base flood level. The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto is anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components. Water loading values used shall be those associated with the base flood. Wind loading values used shall be those required by applicable State or local building standards.

B. All new construction and other development shall be located on the landward side of the reach of mean high tide.

C. All new construction and substantial improvement shall have the space below the lowest floor free of obstructions or constructed with breakaway walls as defined in Chapter 68.20 CMC. Such enclosed space shall not be used for human habitation and will be usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage.

D. Fill shall not be used for structural support of buildings.

E. Manmade alteration of sand dunes which would increase potential flood damage is prohibited.

F. The Floodplain Administrator shall obtain and maintain the following records:

1. Certification by a registered engineer or architect that a proposed structure complies with subsection A of this section.

2. The elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the bottom of the lowest structural member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings or columns) of all new and substantially improved structures, and whether such structures contain a basement.

68.50.070 Flood-related erosion-prone areas.
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall require permits for proposed construction and other development within all flood-related erosion-prone areas as known to the community.

B. Permit applications shall be reviewed to determine whether the proposed site alterations and improvements will be reasonably safe from flood-related erosion and will not cause flood-related erosion hazards or otherwise aggravate the existing hazard.

C. If a proposed improvement is found to be in the path of flood-related erosion or would increase the erosion hazard, such improvement shall be relocated or adequate protective measures shall be taken to avoid aggravating the existing erosion hazard.

D. Within Zone E on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, a setback is required for all new development from the ocean or bay to create a safety buffer consisting of a natural vegetative or contour strip. This buffer shall be designated according to the flood-related erosion hazard and erosion rate, in relation to the anticipated “useful life” of structures, and depending upon the geologic, hydrologic, topographic, and climatic characteristics of the land. The buffer may be used for suitable open space purposes, such as for agricultural, forestry, outdoor recreation and wildlife habitat areas, and for other activities using temporary and portable structures only.

Chapter 68.60
VARIANCE PROCEDURE
Sections:

68.60.010    Nature of variances.

68.60.020    Appeal board.

68.60.030    Conditions for variances.

68.60.010 Nature of variances.
A. The variance criteria set forth in this section are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this title would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners.

B. It is the duty of the City Council to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. The long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate.

68.60.020 Appeal board.
A. In passing upon requests for variances, the City Council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this title, and the:

1. Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

2. Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

3. Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property;

4. Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

5. Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

6. Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

7. Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

8. Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

9. Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

10. Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and

11. Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges.

B. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that:

1. The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage; and

2. Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be recorded by the Floodplain Administrator in the Office of the County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.

C. The Floodplain Administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency.

68.60.030 Conditions for variances.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the procedures of Chapters 68.40 and 68.50 CMC have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

B. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of “historic structures” (as defined in Chapter 68.20 CMC) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.

C. Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

D. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the “minimum necessary” considering the flood hazard to afford relief. “Minimum necessary” means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this title. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the City Council need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the City Council believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance.

E. Variances shall only be issued upon a:

1. Showing of good and sufficient cause;

2. Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional “hardship” (as defined in Chapter 68.20 CMC) to the applicant; and

3. Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance (as defined in Chapter 68.20 CMC – see “Public safety or nuisance”), cause fraud or victimization (as defined in Chapter 68.20 CMC) of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.

F. Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use; provided, that the provisions of subsections A through E of this section are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance.

G. Upon consideration of the factors of CMC 68.60.020(A) and the purposes of this title, the City Council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this title.

Title 70
BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION
Chapters:

70.01    Uniform Administrative Code

70.02    Building and Planning Permit Fees and Deposits

70.03    Building Numbers

70.04    Undergrounding of Utilities

70.05    Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings

70.06    Uniform Housing Code

70.10    California Administrative Code

70.20    California Building Code

70.25    California Residential Code

70.30    California Electrical Code

70.35    Small Residential Rooftop Solar Energy Systems

70.40    California Mechanical Code

70.50    California Plumbing Code

70.60    California Energy Code

70.70    (Reserved)

70.80    2016 California Historic Building Code

70.90    California Fire Code

70.100    California Existing Building Code

70.110    California Green Building Standards Code

70.120    California Referenced Standards Code

70.130    Requests for Reasonable Accommodations under the Fair Housing Act

Chapter 70.01
UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
Sections:

70.01.010    Code adopted.

70.01.020    Appendices.

70.01.030    Amendments.

70.01.040    Permit fees.

70.01.010 Code adopted.
The Uniform Administrative Code (UAC), 1997 Edition, as published by the International Conference of Building Officials, is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the City Administrative Code for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the City of Coronado and shall serve as the administrative, organizational, and enforcement rules and regulations for the technical codes which regulate site preparation and construction, alteration, moving, demolition, repair, use and occupancy of buildings, structures and building service equipment within this jurisdiction. (Ord. 2063 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016)

70.01.020 Appendices.
Reserved. (Ord. 2063 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016)

70.01.030 Amendments.
The City Council hereby expressly finds that the following revisions, additions, deletions and other changes to the Uniform Administrative Code and appendices thereto as adopted herein are needed in the City of Coronado as herein set forth:

A. Section 101.1 entitled “Title” shall be amended:

These regulations shall be known as the City of Coronado Administrative Code, may be cited as such and will be referred to herein as “this Code.”

B. Section 102.4, paragraph 2, entitled “Existing Occupancy” shall be amended:

A change in the use or occupancy of any existing structure shall comply with the provisions of Section 309 and Part 10 of the California Existing Code.

C. Section 301.2.1 item no. 2 entitled “Building permits” shall be amended:

Fences not over 2 feet high.

D. Section 301.2.1 item no. 5 entitled “Building permits” shall be amended:

Retaining walls which are not over 2 feet in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding flammable liquids.

E. Section 303.4 add Paragraph 2:

The Building official may extend a permit for a period not exceeding 180 days upon written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond control of the permittee have prevented action from being taken.

F. Section 304.1 entitled “General” shall be amended:

Fees shall be assessed in accordance with Chapter 70.02 of this Title.

G. Section 304.2, paragraph 1, sentence 1 entitled “Permit fees” shall be amended:

The fee for each permit shall be set forth in Chapter 70.02 of this Title.

H. Section 304.3 entitled “Plan review fees” shall be amended:

When submittal documents are required by Section 302.2, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submitting the submittal documents for plan review. Said plan review fee shall be as set forth in Chapter 70.02 of this Title.

The plan review fees for electrical, mechanical, fire and plumbing work shall be set forth in Chapter 70.02 of this Title.

The plan review fees specified in Chapter 70.02 of this Title are separate fees from permit fees specified in Chapter 70.02 of this Title and are in addition to the permit fees.

When submittal documents are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan review or when the project involves deferred submittal items as defined in Section 302.4.2, an additional plan review fee shall be charged at the rate set forth in Chapter 70.02 of this Title.

I. Section 304.4 entitled “Expiration of Plan Review” shall be amended:

Applications for which no permit is issued within 180 days following the date of application shall expire by limitation, and plans and other data submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the building official. The building official may extend the time for action by the applicant for a period not exceeding 180 days upon written request by the applicant showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken. An application shall not be extended if this code or any other pertinent laws or ordinances have been amended subsequent to the date of application. In order to renew action on an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit plans and pay a new plan review fee.

J. Section 304.5.2 entitled “Fee” shall be amended:

An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by this code. The investigation fee shall be set forth in Chapter 70.02. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt the applicant from compliance with all other provisions of either this code or technical codes nor from the penalty prescribed by law.

K. Table 3-A through Table 3–H shall be deleted. (Ord. 2063 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016)

70.01.040 Permit fees.
Permit fees shall be set forth in Chapter 70.02 CMC. (Ord. 2063 § 3 (Exh. A), 2016)

Chapter 70.02
BUILDING AND PLANNING PERMIT FEES AND DEPOSITS
Sections:

70.02.010    Purpose and intent.

70.02.020    Fees and deposits.

70.02.100    Mandated permit fees.

70.02.010 Purpose and intent.
A fee or deposit shall be paid to the City for building and planning permits and applications or other planning services performed, or authorized to be performed, by the City’s Community Development Department in accordance with an adopted fee schedule, which may be amended from time to time, and as needed, by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 2026 § 4, 2011)

70.02.020 Fees and deposits.
A. Unless specifically otherwise indicated or prohibited by ordinance of the City Council or by applicable law, building and planning permit fees and deposits will be set by resolution and shall be amended from time to time by resolution of the City Council. Said resolution shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk. The fee shall not exceed the costs incurred by the City in processing and providing the permit, accommodation, process or other authorization. As set forth by resolution of the City Council, a deposit in lieu of a fixed fee shall be paid in advance of providing the service with any unused portion of the deposit returned to payer.

B. The fees set forth pursuant to Ordinance No. 2018 (2010) shall remain in effect until such time as new fees become effective pursuant to a resolution adopted by the City Council. (Ord. 2026 § 4, 2011; Ord. 2018 § 2 (Att. A), 2010)

70.02.100 Mandated permit fees.
The Director of Community Development shall ensure that all City of Coronado, County of San Diego, State of California, and federally mandated fees are applied, as required, to building permits issued by this jurisdiction. (Ord. 2026 § 4, 2011)

Chapter 70.03
BUILDING NUMBERS
Sections:

70.03.010    Required numbering.

70.03.020    Plan of numbering.

70.03.030    North and south streets.

70.03.040    East and west streets.

70.03.050    Irregular streets.

70.03.060    Obtaining numbers.

70.03.010 Required numbering.
All owners of buildings in this City shall place and maintain upon such buildings the number thereof in figures not less than four inches in height which shall be visible from the street. (Ord. 2018 § 2 (Att. A), 2010)

70.03.020 Plan of numbering.
The plan of numbering buildings in this City is set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2018 § 2 (Att. A), 2010)

70.03.030 North and south streets.
The numbering of buildings on all streets running north and south in the City shall be from north to south, allowing one number to each 12.5 feet of lot frontage, thereby giving two numbers to each lot of 25 feet frontage; odd numbers on the east side and even numbers on the west side, commencing at First Street with 100, 102, 104, etc., for the numbers on the west side of the street, and with 101, 103, 105, etc., for the numbers on the east side of the street, using the succeeding figures for numbers up to 179, which will reach Second Street, when the numbering of the blocks must be increased by 100, Second Street 200, Third Street 300, Fourth Street 400, Fifth Street 500, Sixth Street 600, Seventh Street 700, Eighth Street 800, Ninth Street 900, Tenth Street 1,000, Tolita Avenue 1,100. (Ord. 2018 § 2 (Att. A), 2010)

70.03.040 East and west streets.
The numbering of buildings on all streets running west to east in the City shall be from west to east; allowing one number to each 20 feet of lot frontage; odd numbers on the north side and even numbers on the south side, commencing at the Boulevard with 100, Alameda Avenue 200, “K” Avenue 300, “J” Avenue 400, “I” Avenue 500, “H” Avenue 600, “G” Avenue 700, “F” Avenue 800, “E” Avenue 900, “D” Avenue 1,000, Orange Avenue 1,100, “C” Avenue 1,200, “B” Avenue 1,300, “A” Avenue 1,400, Adella Avenue 1,500 and Pomona Avenue 1,600. (Ord. 2018 § 2 (Att. A), 2010)

70.03.050 Irregular streets.
All irregular streets are numbered from north to south and west to east taking the block number from the corresponding regular block. (Ord. 2018 § 2 (Att. A), 2010)

70.03.060 Obtaining numbers.
Building numbers may be obtained from the maps on file in the Office of the Building Official. Requests for an additional building number or to change an existing building number must be made in writing to the Office of the Building Official. (Ord. 2018 § 2 (Att. A), 2010)

Chapter 70.04
UNDERGROUNDING OF UTILITIES
Sections:

70.04.010    Definitions.

70.04.020    Public hearing by Council.

70.04.030    City Council may designate underground utility districts by resolution.

70.04.040    Penalty for violation.

70.04.050    Exception, emergency, or unusual circumstances.

70.04.060    Other exceptions.

70.04.070    Exception resolution.

70.04.080    Notice to property owners and utility companies.

70.04.090    Responsibility of utility companies.

70.04.100    Responsibility of property owners.

70.04.110    Notice – Delivery.

70.04.120    Notice – Contents.

70.04.130    Failure to provide.

70.04.140    Notice of assessment.

70.04.150    Assessment – Council hearing.

70.04.160    Assessment – Lien.

70.04.170    Responsibility of City.

70.04.180    Extension of time.

70.04.010 Definitions.
Whenever in this chapter the words or phrases hereinafter in this section defined are used, they shall have the following meanings assigned to them:

A. “Commission” means the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California.

B. “Person” means and includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships, and their agents and employees.

C. “Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures” means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located aboveground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service.

D. “Underground utility district” or “district” shall mean that area in the City within which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of CMC 70.04.030.

E. “Utility” includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. (Public Utilities Code Section 11501 et seq.) (Ord. 2018 § 2 (Att. A), 2010)

70.04.020 Public hearing by Council.
The Council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the City and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication or similar associated service. The City Clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least 10 days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the City Council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 2018 § 2 (Att. A), 2010)

70.04.030 City Council may designate underground utility districts by resolution.
If after any such public hearing the Council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the City Council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. Immediately following the adoption, the City Clerk shall cause a certified copy of such resolution to be recorded in the Office of the County Recorder. (Ord. 2018 § 2 (Att. A), 2010)

70.04.040 Penalty for violation.
Whenever the Council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in CMC 70.04.030, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when the overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution except as the overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in CMC 70.04.100, and for such reasonable time required to remove the facilities after the work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. Any person who violates this section is guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 2018 § 2 (Att. A), 2010)

70.04.050 Exception, emergency, or unusual circumstances.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed 10 days without authority of the Council in order to provide emergency service. The City Council or the City Manager or an authorized representative may grant special permission, on such terms as the City Council may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. (Ord. 2018 § 2 (Att. A), 2010)

70.04.060 Other exceptions.
The following exceptions shall be contained in any resolution adopted pursuant to CMC 70.04.030:

A. Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the Director of Engineering;

B. Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;

C. Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of 34,500 volts;

D. Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures to be used in conjunction with construction projects for a period ending not later than 30 days following the commencement of service to the completed structure. (Ord. 2018 § 2 (Att. A), 2010)

70.04.070 Exception resolution.
In any resolution adopted pursuant to CMC 70.04.030, the City Council may authorize any or all of the following exceptions:

A. Overhead (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited;

B. Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of 34,500 volts;

C. Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street;

D. Antennas, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for furnishing communication services;

E. Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts. (Ord. 2018 § 2 (Att. A), 2010)

70.04.080 Notice to property owners and utility companies.
Within 10 days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to CMC 70.04.030, the City Clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by the resolution of the adoption thereof. The City Clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication or similar associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location, subject to the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utilities on file with the Commission.

Notification by the City Clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to CMC 70.04.030, together with a copy of this chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. (Ord. 2018 § 2 (Att. A), 2010)

70.04.090 Responsibility of utility companies.
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to CMC 70.04.030, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the Commission. (Ord. 2018 § 2 (Att. A), 2010)

70.04.100 Responsibility of property owners.
Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in CMC 70.04.090 and the termination facility on or within the building or structure being served, subject to the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utilities on file with the Commission. In the event any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting the property does not comply with the above requirements within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to CMC 70.04.030, the Director of Engineering shall post written notice on the property being served and 30 days thereafter shall have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to the property.

As an alternative method of securing compliance with the foregoing, the Director of Engineering shall, when directed by the City Council, give notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide the required underground facilities within 10 days after receipt of such notice. (Ord. 2018 § 2 (Att. A), 2010)

70.04.110 Notice – Delivery.
The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail on either of such persons, the notice must be deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of such premises at such premises, and the notice must be addressed to the owner thereof as such owner’s name appears, and must be addressed to such owner’s last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll, and when no address appears, to General Delivery, City of Coronado. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within 48 hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such premises, the Director of Engineering shall, within 48 hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight inches by 10 inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. (Ord. 2018 § 2 (Att. A), 2010)

70.04.120 Notice – Contents.
The notice given by the Director of Engineering to provide the required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be done, and shall state that if the work is not completed within 10 days after receipt of such notice, the Director of Engineering will provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefitted and become a lien upon such property. (Ord. 2018 § 2 (Att. A), 2010)

70.04.130 Failure to provide.
If, upon the expiration of the 10-day period, the required underground facilities have not been provided, the Director of Engineering shall forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, if such premises are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished thereto, the Director of Engineering shall, in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to said property. Upon completion of the work by the Director of Engineering, he shall file a written report with the City Council setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed. The City Council shall thereupon fix a time and a place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which time shall not be less than 10 days thereafter. (Ord. 2018 § 2 (Att. A), 2010)

70.04.140 Notice of assessment.
The Director of Engineering shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing such protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing thereof to the owner thereof, in the manner hereinabove provided for the giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the Council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment. (Ord. 2018 § 2 (Att. A), 2010)

70.04.150 Assessment – Council hearing.
Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the City Council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there be any, and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment. (Ord. 2018 § 2 (Att. A), 2010)

70.04.160 Assessment – Lien.
If any assessment is not paid within five days after its confirmation by the Council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the Director of Engineering and the Director of Engineering is directed to turn over to the assessor and tax collector a notice of lien on each of the properties on which the assessment has been paid, and the assessor and tax collector shall add the amount of the assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which the assessment was not paid. The assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as the property taxes are due and payable, and, if not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per year. (Ord. 2018 § 2 (Att. A), 2010)

70.04.170 Responsibility of City.
The City shall remove at its own expense all City-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to CMC 70.04.030. (Ord. 2018 § 2 (Att. A), 2010)

70.04.180 Extension of time.
In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to CMC 70.04.030 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. (Ord. 2018 § 2 (Att. A), 2010)

Chapter 70.05
UNIFORM CODE FOR THE ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
Sections:

70.05.010    Code adopted.

70.05.020    Appendices.

70.05.030    Amendments.

70.05.040    Permit fees.

70.05.010 Code adopted.
The Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings (UCADB), 1997 Edition, as published by the International Conference of Building Officials, is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the City Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the City of Coronado to provide a just, equitable, and practicable method, to be cumulative with and in addition to any remedy provided by the Building Code, Housing Code or otherwise available at law, whereby buildings and structures which from any cause endanger the life, limb, health, morals, property, safety or welfare of the general public or their occupants may be required to be repaired, vacated or demolished. (Ord. 2063 § 4 (Exh. B), 2016)

70.05.020 Appendices.
Reserved. (Ord. 2063 § 4 (Exh. B), 2016)

70.05.030 Amendments.
Reserved. (Ord. 2063 § 4 (Exh. B), 2016)

70.05.040 Permit fees.
Permit fees shall be as set forth in Chapter 70.02 CMC. (Ord. 2063 § 4 (Exh. B), 2016)

Chapter 70.06
UNIFORM HOUSING CODE
Sections:

70.06.010    Code adopted.

70.06.020    Appendices.

70.06.030    Amendments.

70.06.040    Permit fees.

70.06.010 Code adopted.
The Uniform Housing Code (UHC), 1997 Edition, as published by the International Conference of Building Officials (ICBO), is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the City Code for Housing for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the City of Coronado to provide minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the use and occupancy, location and maintenance of all residential buildings and structures within this jurisdiction. (Ord. 2063 § 5 (Exh. C), 2016)

70.06.020 Appendices.
Reserved. (Ord. 2063 § 5 (Exh. C), 2016)

70.06.030 Amendments.
Reserved. (Ord. 2063 § 5 (Exh. C), 2016)

70.06.040 Permit fees.
Permit fees shall be as set forth in Chapter 70.02 CMC. (Ord. 2063 § 5 (Exh. C), 2016)

Chapter 70.10
CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
Sections:

70.10.010    Code adopted.

70.10.020    Appendices.

70.10.030    Amendments.

70.10.040    Permit fees.

70.10.010 Code adopted.
The California Administrative Code (CAC), 2016 Edition, California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 1, as published by the California Building Standards Commission, is adopted and incorporated by reference for the City of Coronado. (Ord. 2063 § 6 (Exh. D), 2016)

70.10.020 Appendices.
Reserved. (Ord. 2063 § 6 (Exh. D), 2016)

70.10.030 Amendments.
Reserved. (Ord. 2063 § 6 (Exh. D), 2016)

70.10.040 Permit fees.
Permit fees shall be as set forth in Chapter 70.02 CMC. (Ord. 2063 § 6 (Exh. D), 2016)

Chapter 70.20
CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE
Sections:

70.20.010    Code adopted.

70.20.020    Appendices.

70.20.030    Amendments.

70.20.040    Permit fees.

70.20.010 Code adopted.
The California Building Code (CBC), 2016 Edition, California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 2, Volumes 1 and 2 as published by the California Building Standards Commission based on the 2015 Edition of the International Building Code, is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the City Building Code for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the City of Coronado for the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area, and maintenance of building and structures or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures within this jurisdiction. (Ord. 2063 § 7 (Exh. E), 2016)

70.20.020 Appendices.
A. Appendix J: Grading.

B. Appendix I: Patio Covers. (Ord. 2063 § 7 (Exh. E), 2016)

70.20.030 Amendments.
Reserved. (Ord. 2063 § 7 (Exh. E), 2016)

70.20.040 Permit fees.
Permit fees shall be as set forth in Chapter 70.02 CMC. (Ord. 2063 § 7 (Exh. E), 2016)

Chapter 70.25
CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE
Sections:

70.25.010    Code adopted.

70.25.020    Appendices

70.25.030    Amendments.

70.25.040    Permit fees.

70.25.010 Code adopted.
The California Residential Code (CRC), 2016 Edition, California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 2.5, as published by the California Building Standards Commission based on the 2015 Edition of the International Residential Code, is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the City Residential Code for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the City of Coronado for erection, construction, alteration, enlargement, repair, use and occupancy, removal, demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses not more than three stories above grade plane in height with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures not more than three stories above grade plane in height within this jurisdiction. (Ord. 2063 § 8 (Exh. F), 2010)

70.25.020 Appendices
None of the appendices to the 2016 California Residential Code are adopted by the City of Coronado. (Ord. 2063 § 8 (Exh. F), 2016)

70.25.030 Amendments.
Reserved. (Ord. 2063 § 8 (Exh. F), 2016)

70.25.040 Permit fees.
Permit fees shall be as set forth in Chapter 70.02 CMC. (Ord. 2063 § 8 (Exh. F), 2016)

Chapter 70.30
CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE
Sections:

70.30.010    Code adopted.

70.30.020    Appendices.

70.30.030    Amendments.

70.30.040    Permit fees.

70.30.010 Code adopted.
The California Electrical Code (CEC), 2016 Edition, California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 3, as published by the California Building Standards Commission, based on the 2014 Edition of the National Electrical Code, is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the City Electrical Code for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the City of Coronado for the installation, alteration or repair of electrical systems and permit requirements and inspections within this jurisdiction. (Ord. 2063 § 9 (Exh. G), 2016)

70.30.020 Appendices.
Reserved. (Ord. 2063 § 9 (Exh. G), 2016)

70.30.030 Amendments.
Reserved. (Ord. 2063 § 9 (Exh. G), 2016)

70.30.040 Permit fees.
Permit fees shall be as set forth in Chapter 70.02 CMC. (Ord. 2063 § 9 (Exh. G), 2016)

Chapter 70.35
SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
Sections:

70.35.010    Small residential rooftop solar energy systems.

70.35.010 Small residential rooftop solar energy systems.
A. Definitions. The following definitions are adopted from California Government Code Section 65850.5, as may be amended from time to time. These definitions shall apply to this chapter and are restated here for reference.

1. A “feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact” includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the City on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit. The City shall use its best efforts to ensure that the selected method, condition, or mitigation meets the conditions of subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of Section 714 of the Civil Code.

2. “Small residential rooftop solar energy system” means all of the following:

a. A solar energy system that is no larger than 10 kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or 30 kilowatts thermal.

b. A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the City and all state and City health and safety standards.

c. A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex family dwelling.

d. A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the City.

3. “Solar energy system” means either of the following:

a. Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating.

b. Any structural design feature of a building, whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating or cooling, or for water heating.

4. “Specific, adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete.

B. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to adopt an expedited solar permitting process for small residential rooftop solar energy systems pursuant to Government Code Section 65850.5(g).

C. Applicability. This section applies to the permitting of eligible small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the City.

D. Permitting. Applicants desiring to qualify for the expedited review shall submit an application to the City, in a form approved by the City’s Building Official. The Building Official is authorized to administratively act on such applications, pursuant to this section. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, decisions made by the Building Official pursuant to this chapter may be appealed to the Planning Commission.

E. Eligibility Checklists. The City Building Official is authorized and directed to develop checklists of all requirements with which small rooftop solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review. The initial checklists shall be developed on or before September 30, 2015, and shall be the City’s checklists, in accordance with Government Code Section 65850.5.

F. An application that satisfies the requirements of the eligibility checklists, as determined by the Building Official, shall be deemed complete and eligible for the expedited permitting process. Upon receipt of an incomplete application, the Building Official shall issue a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be eligible for the expedited permitting process.

G. Upon confirmation by the Building Official of the application and supporting documentation being complete and that the solar energy system substantially conforms to all applicable local, state, and federal health and safety requirements, the Building Official shall administratively approve the application and issue required permits. Such approval does not authorize an applicant to connect the small residential rooftop energy system to the local utility provider’s electricity grid. The applicant is responsible for obtaining such approval or permission from the local utility provider.

H. For a small residential rooftop solar energy system eligible for expedited review, one consolidated building inspection shall be required, which shall be done in a timely manner. If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, re-inspections are required. However, the subsequent inspection need not conform to the requirements of this section.

I. Fees. Permit fees for eligible small residential rooftop solar systems shall be as specified in the most current adopted fee schedule.

J. Use Permit. If the Building Official makes a finding, based on substantial evidence, that the proposed solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact on the public health and safety, the Building Official may require the applicant to apply for a use permit from the Building Official. The decision of the Building Official may be appealed to the Planning Commission.

K. Denial. If a use permit is required, the City may deny an application if it makes written findings based on substantial evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact on the public health or safety, and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact. (Ord. 2053 § 1, 2015)

Chapter 70.40
CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE
Sections:

70.40.010    Code adopted.

70.40.020    Appendices.

70.40.030    Amendments.

70.40.040    Permit fees.

70.40.010 Code adopted.
The California Mechanical Code (CMC), 2016 Edition, California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 4, as published by the California Building Standards Commission, based on the 2015 Edition of the Uniform Mechanical Code, is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the City Mechanical Code for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the City of Coronado for the addition to or erection, installation, alteration, repair, relocation, replacement, use or maintenance of any heating, ventilating, cooling, refrigeration systems, incinerators, or other miscellaneous heat-producing appliances within this jurisdiction. (Ord. 2063 § 10 (Exh. H), 2016)

70.40.020 Appendices.
None of the appendices to the 2016 California Mechanical Code are adopted by the City of Coronado. (Ord. 2063 § 10 (Exh. H), 2016)

70.40.030 Amendments.
Reserved. (Ord. 2063 § 10 (Exh. H), 2016)

70.40.040 Permit fees.
Permit fees shall be as set forth in Chapter 70.02 CMC. (Ord. 2063 § 10 (Exh. H), 2016)

Chapter 70.50
CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE
Sections:

70.50.010    Code adopted.

70.50.020    Appendices.

70.50.030    Amendments.

70.50.040    Permit fees.

70.50.010 Code adopted.
The California Plumbing Code (CPC), 2016 Edition, California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 5, as published by the California Building Standards Commission, based on the 2015 Edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code, is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the City Plumbing Code for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the City of Coronado for the installation, alteration, relocation, addition to, use, maintenance, repair and replacement of plumbing systems, including gas, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and where connected to a water or sewage system and all aspects of medical gas systems in or on any building or structure or outdoors on any premises or property within this jurisdiction. (Ord. 2063 § 11 (Exh. I), 2016)

70.50.020 Appendices.
None of the appendices to the 2016 California Plumbing Code are adopted by the City of Coronado. (Ord. 2063 § 11 (Exh. I), 2016)

70.50.030 Amendments.
Reserved. (Ord. 2063 § 11 (Exh. I), 2016)

70.50.040 Permit fees.
Permit fees shall be as set forth in Chapter 70.02 CMC. (Ord. 2063 § 11 (Exh. I), 2016)

Chapter 70.60
CALIFORNIA ENERGY CODE
Sections:

70.60.010    Code adopted.

70.60.020    Appendices.

70.60.030    Amendments.

70.60.040    Permit fees.

70.60.010 Code adopted.
The California Energy Code (CENC), 2016 Edition, California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 6, as published by the California Building Standards Commission, is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the City Energy Code for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the City of Coronado for the conservation of energy and all matters governing the design and construction of buildings for energy efficiency within this jurisdiction. (Ord. 2063 § 12 (Exh. J), 2016)

70.60.020 Appendices.
Reserved. (Ord. 2063 § 12 (Exh. J), 2016)

70.60.030 Amendments.
Reserved. (Ord. 2063 § 12 (Exh. J), 2016)

70.60.040 Permit fees.
Permit fees shall be as set forth in Chapter 70.02 CMC. (Ord. 2063 § 12 (Exh. J), 2016)

Chapter 70.70
(RESERVED)
Chapter 70.80
2016 CALIFORNIA HISTORIC BUILDING CODE
Sections:

70.80.010    Code adopted.

70.80.020    Appendices.

70.80.030    Amendments.

70.80.040    Permit fees.

70.80.010 Code adopted.
The California Historic Building Code (CHBC), 2016 Edition, California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 8, as published by the California Building Standards, is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the City Historic Building Code for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the City of Coronado for the preservation, restoration, rehabilitation, relocation or reconstruction of buildings or properties designated as qualified historical buildings or properties within this jurisdiction.

The 2016 California Historic Code does not provide guidance as to how a building or property may be designated as a historic resource of the City of Coronado. Historic designation rules and regulations are delineated in CMC Title 84. (Ord. 2063 § 13 (Exh. K), 2016)

70.80.020 Appendices.
Reserved. (Ord. 2063 § 13 (Exh. K), 2016)

70.80.030 Amendments.
Reserved. (Ord. 2063 § 13 (Exh. K), 2016)

70.80.040 Permit fees.
Permit fees for projects to be designated historic resources shall be as set forth in Chapter 70.02 CMC and CMC Title 84. (Ord. 2063 § 13 (Exh. K), 2016)

Chapter 70.90
CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE
Sections:

70.90.010    Code adopted.

70.90.020    Appendices.

70.90.030    Amendments.

70.90.040    Permit fees.

70.90.010 Code adopted.
The California Fire Code (CFC), 2016 Edition, California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 9, as published by the California Building Standards Commission, based on the 2015 Edition of the International Fire Code, is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the City Fire Code for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the City of Coronado for safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, equipment use, and maintenance of buildings and structures, including that providing for the issuance of permits; from conditions hazardous to life, property or public welfare in the occupancy of structures or premises; and from the construction, extension, repair, alteration or removal of fire suppression, automatic sprinkler systems and alarm systems or fire hazards in the structure or on the premises from occupancy or operation and conditions affecting the safety of firefighters and emergency responders during emergency operations within this jurisdiction. (Ord. 2063 § 14 (Exh. L), 2016)

70.90.020 Appendices.
None of the appendices to the 2016 California Fire Code are adopted by the City of Coronado. (Ord. 2063 § 14 (Exh. L), 2016)

70.90.030 Amendments.
The City of Coronado adopts the following amendments to the CFC:

A. Section 202 of Chapter 2 of the CFC is hereby amended to change the definition of “fireworks” to read as follows:

FIREWORKS. Fireworks shall mean any composition or device for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect for entertainment purposes by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, including “safe and sane fireworks” as defined by section 12529 of the California Health and Safety Code, “dangerous fireworks” as defined by section 12505 of the California Health and Safety Code, and fireworks, 1.4G and fireworks, 1.3G as set forth hereafter.

(Ord. 2084 § 3, 2018; Ord. 2063 § 14 (Exh. L), 2016)

70.90.040 Permit fees.
Permit fees shall be as set forth in Chapter 70.02 CMC. (Ord. 2063 § 14 (Exh. L), 2016)

Chapter 70.100
CALIFORNIA EXISTING BUILDING CODE
Sections:

70.100.010    Code adopted.

70.100.020    Appendices.

70.100.030    Amendments.

70.100.040    Permit fees.

70.100.010 Code adopted.
The California Existing Building Code (CEBC), 2016 Edition, California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 10, as published by the California Building Standards Commission based on the 2015 Edition of the International Existing Building Code, is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the City Existing Building Code for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the City of Coronado for promoting public safety and welfare by reducing the risk of death or injury that may result from the effects of earthquakes on existing unreinforced masonry-bearing-wall buildings within this jurisdiction.

The CEBC does not apply to existing electrical, plumbing, mechanical or fire safety systems. (Ord. 2063 § 15 (Exh. M), 2016)

70.100.020 Appendices.
Reserved. (Ord. 2063 § 15 (Exh. M), 2016)

70.100.030 Amendments.
Reserved. (Ord. 2063 § 15 (Exh. M), 2016)

70.100.040 Permit fees.
Permit fees shall be as set forth in Chapter 70.02 CMC. (Ord. 2063 § 15 (Exh. M), 2016)

Chapter 70.110
CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
Sections:

70.110.010    Code adopted.

70.110.020    Appendices.

70.110.030    Amendments.

70.110.040    Permit fees.

70.110.010 Code adopted.
The California Green Building Standards Code (CGC), 2016 Edition, California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 11, as published by the California Building Standards Commission, is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the City Green Building Code for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the City of Coronado to improve public health, safety and general welfare by enhancing the design and construction of buildings through the use of building concepts having a reduced negative impact or positive environmental impact and encouraging sustainable construction practices in the following categories:

A. Planning and design;

B. Energy efficiency;

C. Water efficiency and conservation;

D. Material conservation and resource efficiency;

E. Environmental quality. (Ord. 2063 § 16 (Exh. N), 2016)

70.110.020 Appendices.
None of the appendices to the 2016 California Green Building Code are adopted by the City of Coronado. (Ord. 2063 § 16 (Exh. N), 2016)

70.110.030 Amendments.
Reserved. (Ord. 2063 § 16 (Exh. N), 2016)

70.110.040 Permit fees.
Permit fees shall be as set forth in Chapter 70.02 CMC. (Ord. 2063 § 16 (Exh. N), 2016)

Chapter 70.120
CALIFORNIA REFERENCED STANDARDS CODE
Sections:

70.120.010    Code adopted.

70.120.020    Appendices.

70.120.030    Amendments.

70.120.040    Permit fees.

70.120.010 Code adopted.
The California Referenced Standards, 2016 Edition, California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 12, as published by the California Building Standards Commission, is adopted and incorporated by reference for the City of Coronado. (Ord. 2063 § 17 (Exh. O), 2016)

70.120.020 Appendices.
Reserved. (Ord. 2063 § 17 (Exh. O), 2016)

70.120.030 Amendments.
Reserved. (Ord. 2063 § 17 (Exh. O), 2016)

70.120.040 Permit fees.
Permit fees shall be as set forth in Chapter 70.02 CMC. (Ord. 2063 § 17 (Exh. O), 2016)

Chapter 70.130
REQUESTS FOR REASONABLE ACCOMMODATIONS UNDER THE FAIR HOUSING ACT
Sections:

70.130.010    Purpose.

70.130.020    Definitions.

70.130.030    Applicability.

70.130.040    Application requirements.

70.130.050    Review authority and procedure.

70.130.060    Reasonable accommodation criteria and findings.

70.130.070    Appeal of determination.

70.130.010 Purpose.
This chapter provides a procedure to request reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities seeking equal access to housing under the Federal Fair Housing Act and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (the “Acts”) in the application of zoning laws and other land use regulations, policies and procedures. (Ord. 2063 § 18 (Exh. P), 2016)

70.130.020 Definitions.
“Acts” shall mean the Federal Fair Housing Act and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act.

“Building Official” means the Director of Community Development of the City of Coronado.

“Decision-making body” shall mean the City body which is authorized to approve the discretionary permit or other entitlement required to carry out the proposed project.

“Person with a disability” is: a person who has a physical or mental impairment that limits or substantially limits one or more major life activities; anyone who is regarded as having such impairment; or anyone who has a record of such impairment. (Ord. 2063 § 18 (Exh. P), 2016)

70.130.030 Applicability.
A. A request for reasonable accommodation may be made by any person with a disability, or by an entity acting on behalf of a person or persons with disabilities, to provide or secure equal access to housing to prevent the application of any zoning law or other land use regulation, policy, or practice of the City from acting as a barrier to fair housing opportunities. This section is intended to apply to those persons who are defined as disabled under the Acts.

B. A request for reasonable accommodation may include an application for a modification or exception to the application of zoning and building standards and use of housing or housing-related facilities in order to eliminate identifiable regulatory barriers to provide a person with a disability an equal opportunity to housing. Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be made in the manner prescribed by CMC 70.130.040. (Ord. 2063 § 18 (Exh. P), 2016)

70.130.040 Application requirements.
A request for reasonable accommodation shall be submitted to the Community Development Department on application forms prescribed by the Community Development Department to include, but not be limited to, the following items:

A. Application form signed by the property owner or authorized agent;

B. The applicant’s name, address and telephone number;

C. The street address and assessor’s parcel number of the property for which the request is being made;

D. The current and proposed use of the property;

E. The basis for the claim that the individual (or group of individuals, if application is made by an entity acting on behalf of a person or persons with disabilities) is considered disabled under the Acts;

F. The zoning law, provision, building regulation or policy from which reasonable accommodation is being requested;

G. Why the requested accommodation is necessary to make the specific property accessible to the individual or group of individuals;

H. Credible documentation shall be provided with respect to each element described above so that the City can fully evaluate the application and verify the factual basis underlying the need for the accommodation. The documentation shall be provided in a manner to permit the City to independently make this assessment;

I. Application fee established by City Council resolution. (Ord. 2063 § 18 (Exh. P), 2016)

70.130.050 Review authority and procedure.
A. An application request for reasonable accommodation must be submitted with and processed concurrently with an application for the associated land use, building, or similar determination, whether such determination is ministerial or discretionary.

B. An application request for reasonable accommodation associated with a ministerial land use, building, or similar determination shall be reviewed by the Building Official. The Building Official shall make a written determination within 30 days and either grant, grant with modifications, or deny such a request for reasonable accommodation in accordance with CMC 70.130.060.

C. An application for reasonable accommodation associated with a discretionary land use, building, or similar determination shall be reviewed by the decision-making body which is authorized to approve the discretionary permit for the project. Notice and hearing shall be as required for the associated discretionary land use, building, or other determination. The decision-making body shall make a written determination and either grant, grant with modifications, or deny such a request for reasonable accommodation in accordance with CMC 70.130.060. (Ord. 2063 § 18 (Exh. P), 2016)

70.130.060 Reasonable accommodation criteria and findings.
A. The Building Official or decision-making body may grant the requested accommodation or grant it with modifications if all of the following findings can be made:

1. The housing which is the subject of the request will be used by an individual or a group of individuals considered disabled under the Acts;

2. The accommodation requested is reasonable and necessary to make specific housing available to the individual or group of individuals with disability or disabilities under the Acts;

3. The requested reasonable accommodation would not impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the City; and

4. The requested reasonable accommodation would not require a fundamental alteration in the nature of a City program or law including, but not limited to, land use and zoning.

B. The following criteria, among other factors, may be considered by the decision-making body or Building Official regarding the reasonableness of the requested accommodation:

1. Whether there are alternative reasonable accommodations available that would provide an equivalent level of benefit; and

2. Whether the requested reasonable accommodation substantially affects the physical attributes of the property or has impacts on surrounding properties that would fundamentally alter a City program or law.

C. The decision-making body or Building Official may impose any conditions of approval needed to ensure that the project complies with the required findings in subsection A of this section. Conditions may include, but are not limited to, ensuring that any removable structures or physical design features that are constructed or installed in association with a reasonable accommodation shall be removed once those structures or physical design features are no longer necessary to provide access to the dwelling unit for the current occupants.

D. If an application for reasonable accommodation is approved, the request shall be granted to an individual and shall not run with the land unless it is determined that: (1) the modification is physically integrated into the residential structure and cannot easily be removed or altered to comply with the code, or (2) the accommodation is to be used by another individual with a disability. (Ord. 2063 § 18 (Exh. P), 2016)

70.130.070 Appeal of determination.
The decision of the Building Official or decision-making body to grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation shall become final 10 calendar days after the notice of decision unless a notice of appeal to the City Council is filed with the City Clerk in accordance with Chapter 1.12 CMC. (Ord. 2063 § 18 (Exh. P), 2016)

Title 80
DESIGN REVIEW
Chapters:

80.00    Design Review

Chapter 80.00
DESIGN REVIEW
Sections:

80.00.010    Purpose.

80.00.020    Jurisdiction.

80.00.030    Scope of authority.

80.00.032    Design review exemption.

80.00.035    Previously approved design and color schemes.

80.00.037    Predesign meetings.

80.00.040    Procedure.

80.00.045    Hotels and motels in the Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan.

80.00.050    Approval criteria.

80.00.060    Relationship of building to site.

80.00.070    Relationship of building and site to surrounding area.

80.00.075    Findings for denial for commercial development.

80.00.080    Landscape and site treatment.

80.00.085    Water conservation.

80.00.090    Building design.

80.00.100    Signs.

80.00.110    Miscellaneous structures and street furniture.

80.00.113    Formula fast food restaurants.

80.00.115    Satellite antennas.

80.00.120    Maintenance – Planning and design factors.

80.00.130    Other applicable provisions.

80.00.140    Appeals.

80.00.150    Recognition for exceptional design.

80.00.160    Expiration of design review approval.

80.00.010 Purpose.
The City Council finds that a design review process will support and assist in the implementation of the Coronado General Plan which has as its goal “...to preserve and improve Coronado principally as a beautiful, pleasant, residential community in which to live, work, shop and pursue leisure time activities.” The City Council further finds that certain commercial, institutional, industrial, manufacturing, high density and other nonresidential developments and uses have substantial impact on the visual appeal, environmental soundness, economic stability, and property values of the City. It is therefore the purpose of this chapter to achieve a beautiful, pleasant, principally residential community by fostering and encouraging good design, harmonious colors and materials, good proportional relationships and generous landscaping, and to protect the health, safety, comfort and general welfare of the citizens of Coronado by providing for a design review process as hereinafter described. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

80.00.020 Jurisdiction.
No building permit or occupancy permit shall be issued or given unless and until the proposed construction, exterior alteration, exterior remodeling, relocation or exterior repainting has been referred to the Design Review Commission for review as heretofore established, and a final disposition made by the Commission or, on appeal, by the City Council as hereafter provided. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

80.00.030 Scope of authority.
The Commission has design review authority over the following and related landscaping:

A. Construction, exterior alteration, addition to or an exterior repainting of any public building or structure including street furniture;

B. Relocation of any nonresidential building or multiple-family dwelling;

C. All development requiring a special use permit, planned unit development, or similar proceeding as exists now or as may in the future be established by the City;

D. Any exterior alteration, addition, new construction or exterior repainting in the C-R or H-M Zones, or Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan with the exception of single-family development;

E. All multiple-family dwelling units;

F. Any exterior alteration, addition, new construction or exterior repainting in the R-3 Zone except for single-family or duplex development which meets the minimum requirements of the R-3 Zone, excluding floor area ratio and structural coverage which shall comply with the R-1B Zone standards as provided in CMC 86.10.035 and 86.10.100;

G. Signs and advertising structures except as provided in CMC 86.60.100, 86.60.115 and 86.60.140;

H. Any matter referred to the Design Review Commission by the Planning Commission or City Council consistent with the purposes of this chapter;

I. Any matter referred to the Design Review Commission by the Community Development Department as provided in CMC 86.56.820, Vacant premises;

J. Any exterior alteration, addition, new construction, or exterior repainting of all nonconforming professional, commercial and manufacturing uses in Residential Zones;

K. Satellite antennas larger than three feet in diameter;

L. Any roof deck or balcony whose walking surface is 14 feet or greater above “grade” in the R-1A and R-1A Subzones, R-1B, R-3 and R-4 Zones. Design review shall be limited to features of the roof deck and how the deck and access to said deck is integrated into the building roof and building architecture and impacts to neighbors;

M. Single-family or duplex development in the R-1A and R-1A Subzones, R-1B and R-4 Zones when the property owner has voluntary elected Design Review Commission approval for a floor area ratio design feature bonus point in accordance with CMC 86.08.035, 86.09.050, 86.10.035 and the Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan Chapter V.B.13, respectively;

N. Any building with one or more “structural nonconformity” or “floor area ratio nonconformity” that is proposed to be enlarged by 150 percent or greater of the existing building gross floor area without correcting the nonconformities and the property owner has voluntary elected Design Review Commission approval in accordance with CMC 86.50.105(B). (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

80.00.032 Design review exemption.
A resource that has been designated as a historic resource by the City and listed on the historic resource inventory shall be exempt from the Design Review Commission process. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

80.00.035 Previously approved design and color schemes.
Design review shall not be required for maintenance and repair of any improvement previously reviewed and approved by the Design Review Commission when such work will not result in a change of color or design, unless such approval was expressly conditioned otherwise, and when such work is not otherwise in conflict with existing ordinances. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

80.00.037 Predesign meetings.
Predesign meetings are recommended with a Design Review Commission subcommittee prior to formal design review submittal. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

80.00.040 Procedure.
The following procedure shall govern the submission and review of site and building plan:

A. The following items must be submitted to the Community Development Department at least 21 days prior to a regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission:

1. An application for design review on forms prescribed by the Community Development Department and accompanied by the required fees established by City Council resolution.

2. Nine copies of each of the following:

a. Plot plan drawn to a scale of not less than one-eighth inch equals one foot showing dimensions and size of each lot to be built upon or otherwise used; the size, shape and location of existing and proposed buildings; and the location and layout of parking areas, parking spaces, and driveways.

b. A landscaping plan including location of proposed plantings and screenings and proposed location of fences, signs, and advertising structures. The Director of the Community Development Department may, at his discretion, waive this requirement when such applications as required in subsection (A)(1) of this section apply to other such minor changes where the submission of landscape plans would not, in his opinion, assist in describing the proposed change.

c. Exterior elevations of all sides of proposed new buildings and additions to existing buildings; exterior elevations of proposed remodeling or face lifting. In the case of additions to existing buildings, exterior elevations of both the addition and the existing building are required.

d. Exterior color samples.

e. Such other information, drawings, plans, material samples, models or renderings that may be required by the Community Development Department to assist the Commission in arriving at a decision. The use of color renderings and photographs is encouraged.

B. The Community Development Department shall determine whether the application is complete, and shall refer complete submittals, with its comments, to the Commission at its next available regular meeting. The Commission shall act on the application within 30 days after such referral, unless applicant requests, and the Commission grants, an extension of time.

C. The Department shall notify the applicant in writing within 30 days of the application submittal if (and why) the application is incomplete. The applicant may appeal to the Planning Commission the Department’s determination that the application is incomplete up to 10 days after receiving notice of the Department’s decision. The Community Development Department shall refer the appeal, with its comments, to the Planning Commission at its next available regular meeting. The Planning Commission shall act on the appeal within 60 days after the appeal is received by the City unless the appellant and the City agree to a time extension of no more than 60 days.

D. The Community Development Department shall advise the applicant in writing of the time, date and place of the Commission’s consideration of the application, or appeal to the Planning Commission, and the final disposition thereof.

E. The decision of the Design Review Commission is final unless appealed as provided for in CMC 80.00.140. The decision of the Planning Commission on whether an application is complete is final. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

80.00.045 Hotels and motels in the Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan.
Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, an application for design review involving the establishment, or expansion by more than 1,000 square feet of floor area, of a hotel or motel in the Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan shall be submitted to the Design Review Commission for approval. The decision of the Design Review Commission is final unless appealed to the City Council. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

80.00.050 Approval criteria.
The Design Review Commission may approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove any project or item under its review authority after considering whether the criteria are complied with. Projects located in Commercial and R-4 (Multiple-Family Residential) Zones shall also comply with the design criteria, contained in CMC Title 88, of the Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan. These criteria are not intended to restrict imagination, innovation, or variety, but rather to assist in focusing on design principles that can result in creative solutions to assist in promoting the purpose of this chapter. The issuance of a building permit or occupancy permit by the Community Development Department in any matter subject to the Commission’s scope of authority shall be subject to the Commission’s actions on the project or item. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

80.00.060 Relationship of building to site.
A. The site shall be planned to accomplish a desirable transition with the streetscape, and to provide for adequate planting, pedestrian movement, and parking areas.

B. Site planning in which setbacks and yards which exceed current regulations are encouraged to provide an inviting streetscape.

C. Parking areas shall be treated with decorative elements, building wall extension, plantings, berms or other innovative means so as to largely screen parking areas from view from public ways.

D. The height and scale of each building of different architectural styles shall be made compatible by such means as screens, site breaks, colors, and materials. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

80.00.070 Relationship of building and site to surrounding area.
A. Adjacent buildings of different architectural styles shall be made compatible by such means as screens, site breaks, colors, and materials.

B. Attractive landscape transition to surrounding properties shall be provided.

C. Harmony in texture, lines, and masses is required. Monotony shall be avoided.

D. Buildings shall have compatible scale to those in the surrounding area. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

80.00.075 Findings for denial for commercial development.
A. The purpose of the standards in this section is to regulate Commercial Zones in order to maintain the City’s unique village character, the vitality of our commercial districts, and the quality of life of Coronado residents.

B. The Design Review Commission shall deny the application for a design review permit for property in the Central Commercial, Limited Commercial, or Hotel-Motel Zones if one or more of the following is found:

1. Proposed improvements will conflict with other development in the area, in terms of design, landscape, or scale;

2. Proposed improvements will result in visual clutter or garish color, or cause a building facade to have inappropriate, conflicting design elements;

3. Proposed improvements will fail to achieve human scale, will be excessively massive, or will dominate the neighborhood;

4. Proposed signage:

a. Is not in keeping with the design of the structure;

b. Is not in scale with the size of the building facade and adjacent properties;

c. Emphasizes corporate logos; or

d. Incorporates unnatural or fluorescent colors, or intense lighting that intrudes on the nightscape; and

5. Proposed improvements will adversely impact the quality of life in Coronado by:

a. Discouraging business vitality and diversity;

b. Detracting from the village ambiance;

c. Detracting from the pedestrian-friendly environment; or

d. Detracting from the rhythm of the street (i.e., incompatibility with the scale, facade plane offsets, detailing, fenestration, etc., of existing store facades of the streetscape). (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

80.00.080 Landscape and site treatment.
Landscape elements included in these criteria consist of all forms of planting and vegetation, ground forms, rock groupings, water patterns, and all visible construction except buildings and utilitarian structures.

A. Where natural or existing topographic patterns contribute to beauty and utility of a development, they shall be preserved and developed. Modification to topography will be permitted where it contributes to good appearance.

B. Grades of walks, parking spaces, terraces, and other paved areas shall provide an inviting and stable appearance for walking and, if seating is provided, for sitting.

C. Landscape treatment shall be provided to enhance architectural features, strengthen vistas and important areas, and provide shade.

D. Unity of design shall be achieved by repetition of certain plant varieties and other materials, and by correlation with adjacent developments.

E. Plant material shall be selected for interest in its structure, texture, and color and for its ultimate growth.

F. In locations where plants will be susceptible to injury by pedestrians or motor traffic, they shall be protected by appropriate curbs, tree guards, or other devices.

G. Parking areas and trafficways shall be enhanced with landscaped spaces containing trees or tree groupings which shall be adequately irrigated and maintained. Shrubs shall be used only where they will not obscure vision.

H. The placement of trees in parkways or paved areas is encouraged.

I. Service yards, and other places which tend to be unsightly, shall be screened by use of walls, fencing, plantings, or combinations of these.

J. In areas where general planting does not prosper, other materials, such as fences, walls, and paving of wood, brick, stone, gravel or cobbles, shall be used. Carefully selected plants shall be combined with such materials where possible.

K. Exterior lighting, when used, shall enhance the building design and the adjoining landscape. Lighting standards and fixtures shall be of a design and size compatible with the building and adjacent areas. Lighting shall be restrained in design, color, and brilliance. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

80.00.085 Water conservation.
The semi-arid climate zone in which the City of Coronado is located requires the appropriate use of landscape materials and irrigation methods to conserve water.

A. Xeriscape principles shall be used in the design of a landscape and irrigation plan to ensure water conservation.

B. Drought-tolerant landscape materials which will demand less water and will continue to flourish in drought conditions shall be planted wherever possible.

C. Low volume irrigation, moisture sensors, and rain sensors are water-conserving irrigation methods which shall be included in irrigation systems and plans wherever possible. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

80.00.090 Building design.
A. Evaluation of the appearance of a project shall be based on the quality of its design and its relationship to its surroundings. Inappropriate, incompatible, bizarre, and exotic designs shall be avoided.

B. Buildings shall have good scale and be in harmonious conformance with permanent neighboring development.

C. Materials shall have good architectural character, be of durable quality, and shall be selected for harmony of the building with surrounding buildings. In any design in which the structural frame is exposed to view, the structural materials shall meet the other criteria for materials.

D. New building components, such as windows, doors, eaves, and parapets, shall have good proportions and relationship to one another.

E. Colors shall be harmonious.

F. Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware on roof, ground, or buildings shall be screened from public view with materials harmonious with the building, or they shall be located so as not to be visible from any public ways.

G. Exterior lighting shall be part of the architectural concept. Fixtures, standards and all exposed accessories shall be harmonious with building design.

H. Refuse and waste removal areas, service yards, storage yards, and exterior work areas shall be screened from view from public ways, using materials as stated in criteria for equipment screening.

I. Monotony of design in single- or multiple-building projects shall be avoided. Variation of detail, form, and siting shall be used to provide visual interest. In multiple-building projects, variable siting or individual buildings may be used to prevent a monotonous appearance. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

80.00.100 Signs.
A. Wall signs shall be part of the architectural concept. Size, color, lettering, location, and arrangement shall be harmonious with the building design, and shall be compatible with approved signs on adjoining buildings. Signs shall have good proportions.

B. Ground signs shall be designed to be compatible with the architecture of the building. The same criteria applicable to wall signs shall apply to ground signs.

C. Materials used in signs shall have good architectural character and be harmonious with building design and surrounding landscape.

D. Every sign shall have good scale in its design and in its visual relationship to buildings and surroundings.

E. Colors shall be used harmoniously and with restraint. Lighting shall be harmonious with the design. If external spot or floodlighting is used, it shall be arranged so that the light source is shielded from view. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

80.00.110 Miscellaneous structures and street furniture.
A. Miscellaneous structures include any structures, other than buildings, visible to view from any public way or ways. Street furniture includes all objects not commonly referred to as structures and located in streets and public ways and outside of buildings.

B. Miscellaneous structures and street furniture located on private property shall be designed to be part of the architectural concept of design and landscape. Materials shall be compatible with buildings, scale shall be good, colors shall be in harmony with buildings and surroundings, and proportions shall be attractive.

C. Lighting in connection with miscellaneous structures and street furniture shall meet the criteria applicable to site, landscape, buildings, and signs. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

80.00.113 Formula fast food restaurants.
A. The purpose of the standards in this section is to regulate the construction of formula fast food restaurants in order to maintain the City’s unique village character, the vitality of our commercial districts, and the quality of life of Coronado residents.

B. In addition to the other regulations in this code, the regulations in this section shall be used to review an application for a design review permit for proposed improvements to a formula fast food restaurant.

C. The Design Review Commission shall deny the application for a design review permit if one or more of the following is found:

1. Proposed improvements will conflict with other development in the area, in terms of design, landscape, or scale;

2. Proposed improvements will result in visual clutter or garish color, or cause the formula fast food restaurant to have conflicting design elements;

3. Proposed improvements will fail to achieve human scale, will be excessively massive, or will dominate the neighborhood;

4. Proposed signage:

a. Is not in keeping with the design of the resulting formula fast food restaurant;

b. Is not in scale with the size of the building facade and adjacent properties;

c. Emphasizes corporate logos; or

d. Incorporates unnatural or fluorescent colors, or intense lighting that intrudes on the nightscape; and

5. Proposed improvements will adversely impact the quality of life in Coronado by:

a. Discouraging business vitality and diversity;

b. Detracting from the village ambiance;

c. Detracting from the pedestrian-friendly environment; or

d. Detracting from the rhythm of the street (i.e., incompatibility with the scale, facade plane offsets, detailing, fenestration, etc., of existing store facades of the streetscape). (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

80.00.115 Satellite antennas.
A. An apparatus capable of receiving communications from a transmitter or a transmitter relay located in a planetary orbit or a dish microwave antenna shall be subject to the applicable regulations of this title, subject to such conditions as may be necessary to accomplish the purposes of this title.

B. The proposal will be approved so long as the location, size, design and operating characteristics of the proposed apparatus is compatible with and does not adversely affect, in a material manner, adjacent uses, residences, structures or natural resources, with consideration given to, among other things, the following:

1. The effect on the character of the neighborhood;

2. The effect upon views from public and private vantage points;

3. The effect upon environmental quality or natural resources; and

4. The susceptibility of the site for the type and intensity of use or development which is proposed.

C. Satellite antennas shall be located and designed and screened so as to cause the least visual impact on views from surrounding properties and from public areas.

D. Notwithstanding the above, the regulations of this section shall not be administered so as to:

1. Prevent reception of satellite-delivered signals from major communication satellites that, when viewed on a conventional television set, are at least equal in picture quality to those received from local commercial television stations; or

2. Impose costs on the potential user of the antenna that are excessive in light of the purchase and installation costs of the equipment.

E. If an applicant claims that an imposed regulation violates one or both of the provisions of subsection D of this section, the applicant shall deposit with the City a sum determined by the Director of Community Development sufficient to obtain an expert evaluation and opinion. Any unused portion of the deposit shall be refunded to the applicant upon a final determination on the application.

F. Upon the acceptance of an application, the Community Development Department shall cause the application to be set for a public hearing before the Design Review Commission no less than 14 days nor more than 60 days from the date of acceptance.

G. Notice shall be mailed to all owners of property within 100 feet of the site of the proposed project, as shown in the latest tax rolls. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

80.00.120 Maintenance – Planning and design factors.
A. Continued good appearance depends upon the extent and quality of maintenance. The choice of materials and their use, together with the types of finishes and other protective measures, must be conducive to easy maintenance and upkeep.

B. Materials and finishes shall be selected for their durability and wear as well as for their beauty. Proper measures and devices shall be incorporated for protection against the elements, neglect, damage, and abuse.

C. Provision for washing and cleaning of new buildings and structures, and control of dirt and refuse, shall be included in the design. Such configurations that tend to catch and accumulate debris, leaves, trash, dirt, and rubbish shall be avoided. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

80.00.130 Other applicable provisions.
Applicable provisions of this code, including but not limited to the zoning, subdivision, and sign ordinances, shall be a part of these criteria. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

80.00.140 Appeals.
Any person may appeal a decision of the Design Review Commission to the City Council by filing with the City Clerk a written notice of appeal within 10 calendar days after a decision of the Commission in accordance with Chapter 1.12 CMC. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

80.00.150 Recognition for exceptional design.
The Commission may establish a procedure whereby outstanding developments or projects receive public recognition and an appropriate certificate issued on behalf of the City. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

80.00.160 Expiration of design review approval.
Unless extended pursuant to this provision, approval of a design review application shall expire if substantial work on the project has not commenced within three years of the date of final City approval. The Director of Community Development, upon a written request of the applicant, may grant an extension of an approval up to an additional year. The Design Review Commission, upon a written request of the applicant, may grant or extend an approval for a determinant period greater than what would otherwise be allowed, if the Commission’s motion or resolution incorporates a finding of the ongoing nature of the project, and specifically states the duration of the approval. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

Title 82
SUBDIVISIONS
Chapters:

82.01    General Provisions

82.04    Definitions

82.08    Reserved

82.12    Design Requirements

82.16    Improvements

82.20    Dedications – General

82.21    Dedication – Affordable Housing Assistance

82.22    Dedication – Bike Path

82.23    Dedication – Elementary School

82.24    Dedication – Local Transit Facility

82.25    Dedication – Park/Recreation

82.26    Dedication – Public Access

82.27    Dedication – Solar Access

82.28    Dedication – Drainage/Flood Control

82.30    Development Fee – Bridge/Major Thoroughfares

82.31    Development Fee – Drainage Facility

82.32    Development Fee – Groundwater Recharge Facility

82.34    Regional Transportation Congestion Improvement Program

82.40    Conversion of Residential Property

82.44    Conversion of Mobilehome Park

82.48    Vesting Map

82.50    Major Subdivisions – Tentative Map Procedure

82.54    Major Subdivisions – Final Map Procedure

82.60    Minor Subdivisions – Tentative Parcel Map Procedure

82.64    Minor Subdivisions – Parcel Map Procedure

82.70    Lot Line Adjustments

82.74    Reversion to Acreage

82.80    Enforcement

Chapter 82.01
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

82.01.010    Citation.

82.01.020    Application.

82.01.030    Prohibition.

82.01.040    Advisory agency.

82.01.050    Environmental impact review.

82.01.060    Grading and erosion control.

82.01.070    Soils report.

82.01.080    Disapproval of maps.

82.01.090    Discharge of waste.

82.01.100    Condominium, community apartment or stock cooperative project.

82.01.110    Waiver of nonmaterial error.

82.01.120    Current equalized County assessment roll.

82.01.130    Public hearings.

82.01.140    Reserved.

82.01.150    Monuments.

82.01.160    Times to report and act.

82.01.170    Fees.

82.01.180    Severability.

82.01.010 Citation.
This title shall be known as the “Subdivision Ordinance” and may be cited as such and is adopted to supplement and implement the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 1800; Ord. 1581; Ord. 1380)

82.01.020 Application.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this title, all of the provisions of the Act and this title shall apply to the creation of subdivisions.

B. In applying this title the City shall consider the effect of its ordinances and actions on the housing needs of the region and balance these needs against the public service needs of its residents and available fiscal and environmental resources. (Gov. Code § 66412.3)

C. This division shall not apply to the construction, financing, or leasing of dwelling units pursuant to Section 65852.1 or second units pursuant to Section 65852.2, but this division shall be applicable to the sale or transfer, but not leasing of those units. (Ord. 1601)

82.01.030 Prohibition.
No person shall create a subdivision except in accordance with the provisions of the Act and this title.

82.01.040 Advisory agency.
The Planning Commission is hereby designated as the advisory agency and may prescribe, subject to review by the City Council, such additional rules and procedures as are necessary to accomplish their advisory duties. (Gov. Code § 66415)

82.01.050 Environmental impact review.
A. All tentative maps and tentative parcel maps shall be subject to environmental review in accordance with this code and the rules and procedures adopted by the City Council pursuant to the Environmental Quality Act of 1970. Consequently, decisions to approve, conditionally approve or deny any tentative map or tentative parcel map shall be subject to the following:

1. Tentative Maps.

a. Negative Declaration. Upon receipt of a negative declaration with respect to any tentative map or tentative parcel map, the Planning Commission and the City Council may proceed to consider the map without an environmental impact report.

b. Environmental Impact Report. With respect to any tentative map or tentative parcel map for which an environmental impact report is required, the City Council shall consider such report as independent evidence in determining whether to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the map.

B. An application for approval of a subdivision shall not be complete, pursuant to Section 65943 of the Government Code, until after the environmental review for such subdivision has been accomplished.

C. The City may approve a tentative map likely to cause substantial environmental damage based upon a finding of overriding consideration. (Gov. Code § 66474.01) (Ord. 1658)

82.01.060 Grading and erosion control.
All subdivisions shall, as a condition of approval, comply with the City standards for erosion and grading control, including prevention of sedimentation or damage to off-site property. (Gov. Code § 66411)

82.01.070 Soils report.
A. For every subdivision, a preliminary soils report, prepared by a registered civil engineer and based upon adequate test borings, shall be submitted to the Building Official with respect to the subdivision lots and to the City Engineer with respect to public improvements. (Gov. Code § 66490)

B. A preliminary soils report may be waived by the City providing the City finds that due to the knowledge of the City as to the soils qualities of the soils in the subdivision, no preliminary analysis is necessary.

C. If the preliminary soils report indicate the presence of critically expansive soils or other soils problems which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects, a soils investigation of each lot in the subdivision may be required by the City. Such soils investigation shall be done by a registered civil engineer, who shall recommend the corrective action which is likely to prevent structural damage to each structure proposed to be constructed in the area where such soils problem exists.

D. The City Council may approve the subdivision or portion thereof where such soils problem exists if it determines that the recommended action is likely to prevent structural damage to each structure to be constructed and as a condition to the issuance of any building permit may require that the approved recommended action be incorporated in the construction of each structure. (Gov. Code § 66491)

82.01.080 Disapproval of maps.
The City Council shall not approve or conditionally approve any map if:

A. The City Council makes any of the findings contained in Section 66474 of the Act.

B. The final or parcel map is not in substantial compliance with the previously approved tentative map. (Gov. Code § 66474.1)

C. The City Council has not taken action in accordance with Section 66474.5 of the Act relating to land projects.

D. In accordance with Sections 66473 and 66474.2 of the Act, the map does not comply with the requirements or conditions imposed by this title and the Act.

E. The map does not comply with the provisions of Government Code Section 66474.4, herein incorporated by reference.

F. The City Council is unable to find that the proposed subdivision is consistent with the General Plan, as required by Government Code Section 66473.5. (Ord. 1658)

82.01.090 Discharge of waste.
In accordance with Section 66474.6 of the Act, the City Council may disapprove a map based upon the discharge of waste.

82.01.100 Condominium, community apartment or stock cooperative project.
A map of a condominium project, a community apartment project or of the conversion of five or more existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative project shall be processed in accordance with Section 66427 of the Act.

82.01.110 Waiver of nonmaterial error.
When the failure of a map is the result of a technical and inadvertent error which does not materially affect the validity of the map, the failure shall be waived and the map approved. (Gov. Code § 66473)

82.01.120 Current equalized County assessment roll.
Nothing in this title shall prevent a purchaser of a unit of land created under the provisions of the Act or this title from subdividing such land one time, pursuant to the provisions of the Act prior to the time that an equalized County assessment roll has been completed reflecting the creation of the unit proposed to be subdivided. (Gov. Code § 66424.l)

82.01.130 Public hearings.
A. Whenever a public hearing is held pursuant to this title, notice of the time and place thereof, including a general description of the location of the subdivision or proposed subdivision, shall be given in accordance with Section 66451.3 of the Act.

B. Additional notice shall be given in accordance with Section 66451.4 of the Act.

C. Failure to receive notice herein shall not invalidate any action taken by the City. (Gov. Code § 66451.5)

82.01.140 Reserved.
82.01.150 Monuments.
A. Every subdivision shall be marked by the following monuments:

1. Boundary monuments: The exterior boundary of the subdivision shall be monumented with permanent monuments, such monuments shall be a cylinder of concrete, six inches in diameter, not less than one foot in length set one foot below the ground with a copper identification disk firmly set in the top, set at each corner and at intermediate points along the boundary not more than 500 feet apart and at the beginning and end points of all curves, provided if any existing record and identified monument meeting foregoing requirements is found at any such corner or point, such monument may be used in lieu of a new monument.

2. Lot corner monuments: All lot corners, except when coincident with exterior boundary corner shall be monumented with permanent monuments of one of the following types:

a. A three-quarter-inch diameter iron pipe at least 24 inches long set at least 18 inches in the ground;

b. A lead plug and copper identification disk set in concrete sidewalks or curbs.

3. Centerline monuments: The centerline of all street rights-of-way at not more than 500-foot intervals and all street rights-of-way intersections.

4. Such additional monuments to mark the limiting lines of streets as the City Engineer may require.

5. All other monuments set or proposed to be set.

B. The subdivider shall cause the foregoing monuments to be set by a licensed surveyor or engineer.

C. All monuments and their installation shall conform to the City standards and Section 8771 of the Business and Professions Code.

D. All of the foregoing monuments shall be set at the time of making the survey for a final map and prior to the approval of the map by the City Council unless the City Engineer determines that such monuments might be disturbed by the construction of improvements.

E. Where the setting of monuments is deferred following filing of a final map, such monuments shall be set within 30 days after the completion of the required improvements prior to the acceptance thereof by the City. The setting of monuments shall not be deferred if a parcel map is filed unless expressly allowed by the City Engineer.

F. At least one exterior boundary line of the real property being subdivided shall be adequately monumented, as directed by the City Engineer, before the map is recorded. (Gov. Code § 66495)

G. Payment of the engineer or surveyor for setting of the final monuments shall be accomplished in compliance with Government Code Section 66497. (Ord. 1658)

82.01.160 Times to report and act.
A. The time limits specified in this title for reporting and acting on maps may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the body required to report or act. However, no body may require a routine waiver of time limits as a condition of accepting the application for, or processing of, a map unless the routine waiver is obtained for the purpose of permitting concurrent processing of a related approval or an environmental review on the same development project.

B. At the time that the subdivider makes an application pursuant to this division, the Director of Community Development shall determine whether or not the City is able to meet the time limits specified in this chapter for reporting and acting on maps. If it will be unable to meet such time limits, the Director of Community Development shall, upon request of a subdivider and for the purpose of meeting such time limits, contract or employ a private entity or persons on a temporary basis to perform such services as necessary to permit the City to meet such time limits. However, the City need not enter into such a contract or employ such persons if it determines either that (1) no such entities or persons are available or qualified to perform such services or (2) the City would be able to perform service in a more rapid fashion than would any available and qualified persons or entities.

C. Such entities or persons employed by the City may, pursuant to an agreement with the City, perform all functions necessary to process maps and to comply with other requirements imposed pursuant to this title except those functions reserved by this title to the City Council. The City Council may charge the subdivider fees in an amount necessary to defray costs directly attributable to employing or contracting with entities or persons performing services pursuant to this section. (Gov. Code § 66451.1)

82.01.170 Fees.
At the time of filing, the applicant shall pay a fee to the City for the examination, review, processing and inspection related to such application in an amount established by resolution of the City Council. (Gov. Code § 66451.2)

82.01.180 Severability.
If any provision of this title or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or application thereof, and to this end the provisions of this title are severable.

Chapter 82.04
DEFINITIONS
Sections:

82.04.010    General.

82.04.020    Bicycle.

82.04.030    Bicycle route.

82.04.040    Cable to television lines.

82.04.050    City standards.

82.04.060    Lot area.

82.04.066    Lot width.

82.04.070    Subdivision.

82.04.080    Subdivision Map Act.

82.04.010 General.
Terms used in this title that are not specifically defined in this chapter or the Subdivision Map Act shall bear the meaning assigned to them by general usage.

82.04.020 Bicycle.
“Bicycle” shall be considered to include a device upon which any person may ride, propelled by human power through a belt, chain or gears, and having either two or three wheels in a tandem or tricycle arrangement.

82.04.030 Bicycle route.
“Bicycle route” means the generic term for all facilities that explicitly provide for bicycle travel.

82.04.040 Cable to television lines.
“Cable to television lines” means electronic cable, conduit and any other appurtenances thereto which distribute television or other electronic signals.

82.04.050 City standards.
“City standards” refers to those standards and specifications, including standard drawings, as may be adopted by resolution by the City Council from time to time. Three copies of these standards are to be on file in the Office of the City Clerk and one copy in the Office of the City Engineer.

82.04.060 Lot area.
“Lot area” means the square footage within the boundary lines of a lot exclusive of: (a) the area of any street right-of-way or road easement; (b) any flood control easement or walkway which must be fenced; and (c) any portion of the lot which is less than 12 feet wide for a distance of 50 feet or more and which is designated or used to provide vehicular or pedestrian access to the part of such lot which is designed for use as a building site.

82.04.066 Lot width.
“Lot width” means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the depth at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines. (Ord. 1832)

82.04.070 Subdivision.
A. “Subdivision” as defined by Section 66424 of the Act.

B. “Subdivision” does not include:

1. Those things described in Government Code Sections 66412 and 66412.1;

2. Subdivisions of a portion of the operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation defined as such by Section 230 of the Public Utilities Code, which are created by short-term leases terminable by either party on not more than 30 days’ notice in writing; (Gov. Code § 66411)

3. Land conveyed to or from a governmental agency, public entity, or public utility or for land conveyed to a subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance to such public utility for rights-of-way unless a showing is made in individual cases, upon substantial evidence that public policy necessitates a map; (Gov. Code § 66428) or

4. Any conveyance of land to a governmental agency, public entity, public utility or subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance to such public utility for rights-of-way shall not be considered a division of land for purposes of computing the number of parcels. (Gov. Code § 66426.5)

82.04.080 Subdivision Map Act.
“Subdivision Map Act” or “Act” means the Subdivision Map Act as set forth in Division 2 of Title 7 of the Government Code of the State of California commencing with Section 66410 et seq.

Chapter 82.08
(Reserved)
Chapter 82.12
Design Requirements
Sections:

82.12.010    Application.

82.12.020    Suspension of requirements.

82.12.030    Lot size and configuration.

82.12.040    Lot lines.

82.12.050    Lot front.

82.12.060    Street plans.

82.12.070    Bicycle route plans.

82.12.080    Natural heating and cooling.

82.12.090    Telephone service.

82.12.010 Application.
Unless expressly exempted, every subdivision shall comply with the requirements in this chapter. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

82.12.020 Suspension of requirements.
Suspension of any requirement of this chapter may be granted by the City Council in a particular case, upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission. Application for such suspension must show that there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the property in question; also, that such suspension is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant; also, that such suspension, if granted, will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the immediate vicinity. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

82.12.030 Lot size and configuration.
A. Every lot shall contain the minimum lot area specified in the zoning ordinance for the zone in which said lot is located at the time the tentative map is submitted for approval.

B. All residential lots shall be of the width recommended by the Planning Commission but in no case shall the width be less than 25 feet.

C. All residential lots shall have a depth of not less than 50 feet.

D. All business lots shall have a width of not less than 25 feet and a depth of not less than 70 feet.

E. Panhandle lots, if approved, shall have a minimum frontage of 12 feet for access on a dedicated street. Panhandles may not serve as access to any lot except the lot of which said panhandle is a part, nor shall any panhandle have a length of more than two-thirds of the distance from the street on which the panhandle fronts to the rear lot line.

F. Lots must not be cut by a City boundary line. City boundary lines may be lot lines or center lines of streets or alleys. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

82.12.040 Lot lines.
A. The side line of lots shall be approximately at right angles or radial to the street upon which the lots face.

B. Whenever practicable, side and rear lot lines shall be located along the top of manmade slopes instead of at the bottom or at intermediate locations on said slopes. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

82.12.050 Lot front.
A. Every lot shall front on a dedicated street or street offered for dedication.

B. No new subdivision, lot line adjustment or lot consolidation shall be permitted that would require a new curb-cut or driveway to access off-street parking from the following streets:

1. Third Street between Pomona Avenue and Alameda Boulevard;

2. All of Fourth Street;

3. Pomona Avenue between Third and Fourth Streets.

C. Subdivision of residential property shall be designed so that lots do not front on or have direct access to:

1. Railroads;

2. Transmission lines; or

3. Open flood control channels. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

82.12.060 Street plans.
All streets shown on a tentative or tentative parcel map shall be in substantial conformance to the circulation element of the General Plan and they shall relate to the existing streets in the areas adjoining the subdivision. Such streets shall conform to any applicable master plans, specific plans or other officially adopted street plans. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

82.12.070 Bicycle route plans.
Bicycle routes shall conform to applicable master plans, specific plans or other officially adopted bicycle routes. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

82.12.080 Natural heating and cooling.
The design of a subdivision shall provide for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in accordance with Section 66473.1 of the Act. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

82.12.090 Telephone service.
The design of the subdivision shall provide, to the extent feasible, for the availability of individual household telephone service to each residential unit in the subdivision (Government Code Section 66473.2). (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

Chapter 82.16
IMPROVEMENTS
Sections:

82.16.010    Required improvements generally.

82.16.020    Improvements benefiting property outside subdivision.

82.16.030    Required improvements for specified minor subdivisions.

82.16.040    Improvement plan review.

82.16.050    Improvement of remainder parcel.

82.16.060    Agreements to improve.

82.16.070    Off-site improvements acquisition of property interests.

82.16.080    Improvement security required.

82.16.090    Amount of security.

82.16.100    Release of security.

82.16.110    Forfeiture of security.

82.16.120    Lien contract for improvements.

82.16.130    Covenant not to oppose an improvement district.

82.16.140    Reimbursement for relocation of telephone or cable facilities.

82.16.010 Required improvements generally.
Before a final or parcel map is approved by the City Council or by operation of law, it shall be required:

A. That the subdivider grade and improve or agree to grade and improve all land dedicated or to be dedicated for streets or easements, bicycle routes, and all private streets and private easements laid out on a final map or parcel map in such manner and with such improvements as are necessary for the use of the lot owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood traffic and drainage needs, and in accordance with the City standards.

B. That the subdivider install or agree to install all drainage and flood control structures and facilities required by the City Engineer, which drainage and flood control structures and facilities shall conform to the City standards.

C. That the subdivider install or agree to install fire hydrants and connections of a type and location approved by the Director of Fire Services.

D. That the subdivider provide all necessary easements and rights-of-way to accommodate all streets, drainage and flood control structures and facilities and sewer systems extending beyond the boundaries of the subdivision.

E. That the subdivider shall provide that the subdivision be connected to a domestic water system approved by the City and all water mains shall be a material subject to the requirements of the water company or agency serving the subdivisions. That the subdivider shall install or agree to install all required water systems necessary to serve the subdivision and that all water lines, appurtenances and service connections have been constructed or laid prior to paving or provisions have been made to insure said construction.

F. That, where a sewer line is constructed or laid within a street or road, the subdivider has installed or agreed to install sewer lines of a type, size and location approved by the City Engineer to the property line of each lot within the subdivision and that all sanitary sewer lines, appurtenances and service connections have been constructed or laid prior to paving or provisions have been made to insure said construction. No surfacing is required on any private street laid out on any parcel map where each parcel shown on such map contains a gross area of 20 acres or more; provided, however, this provision shall not be construed as relieving a subdivider of the obligation of:

1. Grading such private streets to grades in widths required by the City standards;

2. Installing all drainage structures and facilities required by the City Engineer which shall conform to the City standards; and

3. Installing water supply pipelines, fire hydrants and connections as may be required.

G. All new and existing utility distribution facilities, including cable television conduit and lines within the boundaries of any new subdivision and within any half street abutting a new subdivision, shall be placed underground. The subdivider is responsible for complying with the requirements of this subsection, and he shall make the necessary arrangements with each of the serving utilities, including franchised cable television operators, for the installation of such facilities. Transformers, terminal boxes, meter cabinets, pedestals, concealed ducts and other facilities necessarily appurtenant to such underground utilities and street lighting systems may be placed aboveground subject to approval of the City Engineer. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to the installation and maintenance of overhead electric transmission lines in excess of 34,500 volts and long distance and trunk communication facilities. The installation of cable television lines may be waived when, in the opinion of the City Council, no franchised cable television operator is found to be willing and able to install cable television lines in the subdivision. Notwithstanding any such waiver, the installation of cable television conduit is required.

H. That the subdivider shall construct or shall cause to be constructed at his cost a street lighting system conforming to the City standards.

I. Where the City has adopted a flood control element or drainage element of the General Plan, all improvements shall conform to such element wherever possible.

J. That the subdivider comply or agree to comply with all the conditions of approval contained in the resolution approving the tentative or tentative parcel map and not otherwise provided for by this chapter.

82.16.020 Improvements benefiting property outside subdivision.
A. The City Council may require that improvements installed by the subdivider for the benefit of the subdivision shall contain supplemental size, capacity, number or length for the benefit of property not within the subdivision, and that such improvements be dedicated to the public. Supplemental length may include minimum sized off-site sewer lines necessary to reach a sewer outlet in existence at that time. (Gov. Code § 66485).

B. The City Council shall enter into a reimbursement agreement with the subdivider in accordance with Section 66486 of the Act.

C. In order to pay the costs as required by the reimbursement agreement, the City Council may proceed in accordance with Section 66487 of the Act. (Ord. 1601)

82.16.030 Required improvements for specified minor subdivisions.
Whenever a proposed subdivision is for four or less lots, required Improvements shall be limited in accordance with Section 66411.1 of the Act.

82.16.040 Improvement plan review.
A. Prior to filing the final map or parcel map, all improvement plans shall be subject to plan review by the City Engineer and other appropriate departments.

B. Construction and installation of all improvements shall be subject to inspection by the City Engineer and other appropriate agencies.

C. A minimum of two copies of the improvement plans shall be submitted to the City Engineer, or as many copies as is deemed necessary by the City Engineer for plan review and inspection by other appropriate departments. The costs to the City in examining improvement plans, inspecting improvements and monuments shall be paid by the subdivider. Upon approval of the improvement plans by the City Engineer, the originals of the improvement plans shall remain on file in the City Engineer’s Office. Additional copies can be obtained through the Engineering Division or by a bonded carrier approved by the City Engineer.

82.16.050 Improvement of remainder parcel.
When a subdivision is of a portion of any unit or units of improved or unimproved land, the subdivider may designate as a remainder that portion which is not divided for the purpose of sale, lease or financing. The fulfillment of construction requirements for improvements on the remainder parcel shall be in accordance with Section 66424.6 of the Act.

82.16.060 Agreements to improve.
A. The City Council may require a subdivider to enter into one of the types of agreements set forth in subsection B of this section as specified by the City Council:

1. As a condition precedent to the approval of the final or parcel map announced at the time of the approval or conditional approval of the tentative map or tentative parcel map;

2. If, at the time of approval of a final or parcel map, any improvement required by the City Council has not been completed and accepted in accordance with standards established by the City Council at the time of the approval or conditional approval of the tentative map or tentative parcel map.

B. The City Council may require the subdivider to enter into one of the following types of agreements as specified by the City Council:

1. An agreement with the City Council upon mutually agreeable terms to thereafter complete such improvements at the subdivider’s expense.

2. An agreement with the City Council to thereafter:

a. Initiate and consummate proceedings under an appropriate special assessment act for the financing and completion of all such improvements; or

b. If not completed under such special assessment act, to complete such improvements at the subdivider’s expense.

C. The City Council entering into any agreement pursuant to this chapter shall require that performance of such agreement be guaranteed by the security specified in this chapter and that the agreement be recorded. (Gov. Code § 66462)

82.16.070 Off-site improvements acquisition of property interests.
Whenever a subdivider is required as a condition of a tentative map to construct or install off-site improvements on property which neither the subdivider nor the City possesses a sufficient interest to permit the improvements to be made, the subdivider shall provide to the City, no later than 60 days prior to filing the final map, sufficient information, reports and data, including but not limited to an appraisal and title report, to enable the City to commence proceedings to acquire an interest in the land. The subdivider shall agree to complete the improvements at such time as the City has sufficient interest in the property to permit the construction of the improvements. The subdivider shall bear all costs associated with the acquisition of the property interests and the estimated costs thereof shall be secured as provided in this title. (Gov. Code § 66462.5)

82.16.080 Improvement security required.
The improvement agreement referred to in this chapter shall be secured, at the election of the City Council, in accordance with Section 66499 of the Act. The form of bonds shall be in substantial compliance with Section 66499.1 and 66499.2 of the Act.

82.16.090 Amount of security.
Security to guarantee the performance of any Act or agreement in this title shall be fixed by the City Council in accordance with Sections 66499.3 and 66499.4 of the Act.

82.16.100 Release of security.
The improvement security required shall be released in the following manner:

A. In accordance with Section 66499.7 of the Act, subject to subsection B of this section.

B. The City Engineer may release a portion of the security in conjunction with the acceptance of the performance of the act or work as it progresses upon application therefor by the subdivider; provided, however, that no such release shall be for an amount more than 25 percent of the total improvement security given for faithful performance of the act or work and that the security shall not be reduced to an amount less than 50 percent of the total improvement security given for faithful performance until final completion and acceptance of the act or work. In no event shall the City Engineer authorize a release of the improvement security which would reduce such security to an amount below that required to guarantee the completion of the act or work and any other obligation imposed by this title, the Act or the improvement agreement.

82.16.110 Forfeiture of security.
Upon the failure of the subdivider to complete any improvement, acts or obligations within the time specified, the City Council may, upon notice in writing of not less than 10 days served upon the person responsible for the performance thereof, or upon notice in writing of not less than 20 days served by registered mail addressed to the last known address of such person, determine that the subdivider is in default and may cause the improvement security, or such portion thereof as is necessary to complete the work or act and any other obligations of the subdivider secured thereby, to be forfeited to the City.

82.16.120 Lien contract for improvements.
The City Council may require the subdivider, as a condition on approving the map, to enter into an agreement with the City to construct the improvements in the future, and require the subdivider to grant the City a lien on the property to be divided securing such future improvements. The lien granted under authority herein may be used to secure future improvements in easements, right-of-way or irrevocable offers of dedication or any other improvements or conditions of the map. The City Manager is authorized to sign such agreements on behalf of the City.

82.16.130 Covenant not to oppose an improvement district.
In connection with a lien contract under this title, the City Council may require that the subdivider execute a covenant not to oppose the formation of an improvement district. The City Manager is authorized to sign such covenants on behalf of the City.

82.16.140 Reimbursement for relocation of telephone or cable facilities.
For relocation of telephone or cable facilities, the City shall require reimbursement from developers, and hereby incorporates by reference the authority contained in Government Code Section 66473.6. (Ord. 1658)

Chapter 82.20
DEDICATIONS – GENERAL
Sections:

82.20.010    Dedications generally.

82.20.020    Dedication procedure.

82.20.030    Dedication of streets.

82.20.040    Reservation of area for public use.

82.20.010 Dedications generally.
Subject to the other provisions of this title, the City Council may require, as a condition precedent to the approval of a final or parcel map, that the subdivider dedicate or irrevocably offer to dedicate real property within the subdivision for streets, alleys, access rights, abutter’s rights, drainage, public utility easements and other public easements. (Gov. Code § 66475)

82.20.020 Dedication procedure.
A. All dedications or offers of dedication required by the provisions of this title shall be by certificate on the final or parcel map.

B. An offer of dedication shall be in such terms as to be binding on the owner, his heirs, assigns, or successors in interest, and except as provided in Section 66477.2 of the Act, shall continue until such dedication is accepted or the offer is abandoned or otherwise terminated. Any such dedication or offer of dedication shall be free of any burden or encumbrance which would interfere with the purposes of which the dedication or offer of dedication is required.

C. The subdivider shall provide a current preliminary title report or equivalent proof of title satisfactory to the City Engineer.

D. At the time the City Council approves the final or parcel map, it shall also accept, accept subject to improvement, or reject any offer of dedication. The City Clerk shall certify on the map the action taken. The City Engineer is authorized to act on behalf of the City Council in rejecting or accepting dedications. (Gov. Code § 66477.1)

82.20.030 Dedication of streets.
A. The subdivider shall offer to dedicate rights-of-way for streets within the subdivision in accordance with the City standards.

B. No final or parcel map shall be approved unless the street or streets providing primary access to the subdivision are dedicated to and maintained by the City, a County or State and the street or streets meeting City standards.

C. Streets which are proposed on the boundaries of a subdivision shall have a dedicated width of no less than 80 feet together with a strip of land one foot wide on its outer edge which shall be offered to the City for street purposes and over which access rights are relinquished.

D. All streets proposed to be terminated at the subdivision boundary shall include a strip of land one foot wide across said street at its point of termination at said boundary which shall be portions of the adjacent lots, offered for street purposes and over which access rights are relinquished.

E. Where it is necessary to extend a street beyond the boundaries of a subdivision to provide adequate circulation for residents of the subdivision, the subdivider shall cause the required easements to be dedicated to the City and shall improve said easements in accordance with City standards.

F. The City Engineer may impose a requirement that any dedication or offer of dedication of a street shall include a waiver of direct access rights to such street from any property shown on the final or parcel map as abutting thereon, and that if the dedication is accepted, such waiver shall become effective in accordance with the provisions of the waiver of direct access. (Gov. Code § 66476)

82.20.040 Reservation of area for public use.
The City Council may require that areas of real property within the subdivision be reserved for parks, recreational facilities, fire stations, libraries or other public uses in accordance with Sections 66479 through 66482 of the Act.

Chapter 82.21
DEDICATION – AFFORDABLE HOUSING ASSISTANCE
Sections:

82.21.010    Intent.

82.21.020    Requirement.

82.21.030    Filing.

82.21.040    Amount of reservation/in-lieu fee required.

82.21.050    Affordable housing fund.

82.21.060    Procedure.

82.21.070    Refund.

82.21.080    New housing rental agreement.

82.21.010 Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to ensure that the private sector, as well as the public sector, contributes to and shares our government’s responsibility of providing adequate housing opportunities for all segments of the population.

82.21.020 Requirement.
As a condition of approval of any tentative parcel map or tentative subdivision map for residential dwellings, condominiums, community apartments, stock cooperatives or conversions comprising two or more lots or two or more dwelling units, the subdivider shall reserve 20 percent of the units within the development “for rental” to persons qualified by the County Housing Authority as meeting Section 8 Rental Assistance requirements or to persons qualifying within very low and low income categories as established annually by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), or “for sale” to persons qualifying within moderate income categories as established annually by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), or shall pay a fee in lieu thereof for every unit within the project, at the option of the subdivider, for the purpose of providing affordable housing assistance. (Ord. 1813)

82.21.030 Filing.
At the time of filing of a tentative parcel map or tentative subdivision map, the subdivider shall, as part of the filing, elect whether to reserve a unit or units or to pay the in lieu fee. (Ord. 1813)

82.21.040 Amount of reservation/in-lieu fee required.
A. Unit Reservation. If the subdivider elects to reserve units, the number of units required shall be equal to 20 percent of the total number of units within the proposed development. If the calculation of the number of housing units to be reserved results in a fraction of a whole number, the developer shall reserve one housing unit. A unit or units reserved for rental shall be rented at or below the “Fair Market Rent” established by HUD to persons qualified for Section 8 Rent Subsidies by the County Housing Authority or to persons within very low and low income categories as established annually by HUD. A unit or units reserved for sale shall be sold at affordable prices to persons within moderate income categories as established annually by HUD.

Said unit or units reserved “for rental” or “for sale” may be at a location other than the subject development site provided it is within the boundaries of the City of Coronado and maintained as affordable for a minimum period of time as determined by the Community Development Director and approved by the City Council. The condition of said unit or units both interior and exterior shall be maintained in a decent, safe and sanitary manner and in accordance with the standard of maintenance of similar housing units within the City of Coronado.

B. In Lieu Fee. If the subdivider elects to make payment in lieu of unit reservation, the amount of the fee shall be fixed by a schedule adopted, from time to time, by resolution of the City Council. Said amount shall be reasonably calculated to provide the subdivider’s fair share contribution towards meeting the City’s affordable housing objective without placing an unreasonable financial burden on any applicant. (Ord. 1813)

82.21.050 Affordable housing fund.
All fees collected hereunder shall be deposited in an affordable housing fund. Said fund shall be administered by the City and shall be used only for the purpose of providing funding assistance for the provision of new affordable housing units within the City consistent with the goals and policies contained in the Housing Element of the General Plan.

82.21.060 Procedure.
A. Where the subdivider has elected to reserve a unit or units, the election shall be memorialized by covenants, conditions and restrictions noted on the map and any subsequent conveyances of interest to include a deed to a Public Housing Authority.

B. Where the subdivider has elected to pay fees in lieu of unit reservations, the subdivider shall pay said fees prior to recordation of the final map, or shall post a faithful performance bond, or shall otherwise provide adequate security to the City to ensure payment of the required fee.

82.21.070 Refund.
A. Any fee paid pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be refunded upon written request by the subdivider following withdrawal of the application or abandonment of the approval of the subdivision, provided such withdrawal or abandonment occurs prior to the recordation of the final map.

B. The in lieu funds shall be segregated from City funds. The in lieu funds may be invested in the same manner and at the same rate as allowed for City funds. If land use rights for real property to carry out the purposes of this title are not obtained within a three-year period from the receipt of any in lieu funds, or the City has not, within a 10-year period from the receipt of in lieu funds committed the funds to a low or moderate income housing project, then the in lieu funds, together with any earnings thereon, shall be retained for the benefit of the City. The three-year and 10-year periods shall be suspended during the pendency of any litigation involving the above.

82.21.080 New housing rental agreement.
Notwithstanding any other provisions in this title, the City may enter into an agreement with the subdivider proposing to construct a condominium development to provide apartment rental units in accordance with Section 66452.50 of the Act.

Chapter 82.22
DEDICATION – BIKE PATH
Sections:

82.22.010    Requirement.

82.22.010 Requirement.
Whenever a subdivider is required to dedicate roadways, the City Council may require a subdivider to dedicate such real property as may be necessary and feasible to provide bicycle paths for the use and safety of the residents of the subdivision; provided that the subdivision, as shown on the final map, contains 200 or more lots. (Gov. Code § 66475.1)

Chapter 82.23
DEDICATION – ELEMENTARY SCHOOL
Sections:

82.23.010    Requirement.

82.23.010 Requirement.
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 66478 of the Act, the City Council may require the subdivider to dedicate such land as deemed necessary for the construction of elementary schools.

Chapter 82.24
DEDICATION – LOCAL TRANSIT FACILITY
Sections:

82.24.010    Reserved.

82.24.010 Reserved.
(Reference Section 66475.2 of the Act).

Chapter 82.25
DEDICATION – PARK/RECREATION
Sections:

82.25.010    Reserved.

82.25.010 Reserved.
(Reference Sections 66477 and 66477.5 of the Act).

Chapter 82.26
DEDICATION – PUBLIC ACCESS
Sections:

82.26.010    Requirement.

82.26.010 Requirement.
Whenever any land to be subdivided is bound by an inlet, bay, estuary, lagoon, river, stream, lake, reservoir or by the Pacific Ocean, there shall be a street to and along such inlet, bay, estuary, lagoon, river, stream, lake, reservoir or ocean front, or adequate public access to and along such boundary shall be provided or be made otherwise available in lieu of such street or any combination as the City may require to ensure compliance with Chapter 4, Article 3.5, of the Act.

Chapter 82.27
DEDICATION – SOLAR ACCESS
Sections:

82.27.010    Reserved.

82.27.010 Reserved.
(Reference Section 66475.3 of the Act).

Chapter 82.28
DEDICATION – DRAINAGE/FLOOD CONTROL
Sections:

82.28.010    Requirement.

82.28.010 Requirement.
A. Where a drainage facility or flood control facility is necessary for the use of lot owners or for the protection of lots, adequate rights-of-way for such drainage facilities or flood control facilities shall be offered for dedication to the City or to such other public entities as the City Council designates and shall be shown on the map.

B. Where it is necessary to extend a drainage facility or flood control facility beyond the boundaries of the subdivision for adequate drainage or flood control needs, the required rights-of-way shall be offered for dedication.

C. Drainage facilities and flood control facilities within and without the subdivision shall be provided so as to carry storm runoff, both tributary to and originating within the subdivision.

Chapter 82.30
DEVELOPMENT FEE – BRIDGE/MAJOR THOROUGHFARES
Sections:

82.30.010    Reserved.

82.30.010 Reserved.
(Reference Section 66484 of the Act).

Chapter 82.31
DEVELOPMENT FEE – DRAINAGE FACILITY
Sections:

82.31.010    Reserved.

82.31.010 Reserved.
(Reference Sections 66483 – 66483.2 of the Act).

Chapter 82.32
DEVELOPMENT FEE – GROUNDWATER RECHARGE FACILITY
Sections:

82.32.010    Reserved.

82.32.010 Reserved.
(Reference Section 66484.5 of the Act).

Chapter 82.34
REGIONAL TRANSPORTATION CONGESTION IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM
Sections:

82.34.010    Title.

82.34.020    Findings.

82.34.030    Definitions.

82.34.040    Establishment of the transportation uniform mitigation fee.

82.34.050    Reimbursements.

82.34.060    Procedures for the levy, collection, and disposition of fees.

82.34.070    RTCIP Fee Administrator.

82.34.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the “Coronado Regional Transportation Congestion Improvement Program (RTCIP) Ordinance.” (Ord. 1991 § 2, 2008)

82.34.020 Findings.
In adopting this chapter, the City Council of the City of Coronado finds and determines that:

A. The City is a member agency of the San Diego Association of Governments (“SANDAG”), a joint powers agency consisting of the City, the County of San Diego, and the 17 other cities situated in San Diego County. Acting in concert, the member agencies of SANDAG, acting in their capacity as the San Diego County Regional Transportation Commission, developed a plan whereby the shortfall in funds needed to enlarge the capacity of the regional system of highways and arterials in San Diego County (the “regional arterial system”) could be made up in part by a transportation uniform mitigation fee on future residential development. As a member agency of SANDAG, the City participated in the preparation of a certain “RTCIP Impact Fee Nexus Study,” dated November 26, 2007 (the “Nexus Study”), prepared pursuant to California Government Code Section 66000 et seq., the Mitigation Fee Act.

B. The City Council has been informed and advised, and finds, that future development within San Diego County and the cities therein will result in traffic volumes exceeding the capacity of the regional arterial system as it presently exists.

C. The City Council has been further informed and advised, and finds, that if the capacity of the regional arterial system is not enlarged, the result will be substantial traffic congestion in all parts of San Diego County and the City, with unacceptable levels of service throughout San Diego County by 2030.

D. The City Council has been further advised, and so finds, that funding, in addition to those fees adopted pursuant to the Nexus Study, will be inadequate to fund construction of the regional arterial system. Absent implementation of a regional transportation congestion improvement plan (“RTCIP”) fee based on the Nexus Study, existing and known future funding sources will be inadequate to provide necessary improvements to the regional arterial system, resulting in an unacceptably high level of traffic congestion within and around San Diego County and the City.

E. The City Council has reviewed the Nexus Study, and finds that future development within the County and City will substantially adversely affect the regional arterial system, and that unless such development contributes to the cost of improving the regional arterial system, the regional arterial system will operate at unacceptable levels of service.

F. The City Council finds and determines that the failure to mitigate growing traffic impacts on the regional arterial system within San Diego County and the City will substantially impair the ability of public safety services (police and fire) to respond. The failure to mitigate impacts on the regional arterial system will adversely affect the public health, safety and welfare.

G. The City Council further finds and determines that there is a reasonable and rational relationship between the use of the RTCIP fee and the type of development projects on which the fees are imposed because the fees will be used to construct the transportation improvements that are necessary for the safety, health and welfare of the residential and nonresidential users of the development projects on which the RTCIP fee will be levied.

H. The City Council finds and determines that there is a reasonable and rational relationship between the need for the improvements to the regional arterial system and the type of development projects on which the RTCIP fee is imposed because it will be necessary for the residential users of such projects to have access to the regional arterial system. Such development will benefit from the regional arterial system improvements and the burden of such development will be mitigated in part by the payment of the RTCIP fee.

I. The City Council further finds and determines that the cost estimates set forth in the Nexus Study are reasonable cost estimates for constructing the regional arterial system improvements, and that the amount of the RTCIP fee expected to be generated by new development will not exceed the total fair share cost to such development.

J. The City Council further finds that the cost estimates set forth in the Nexus Study are reasonable cost estimates for the facilities that comprise the regional arterial system, and that RTCIP fee program revenues to be generated by new development will not exceed the total fair share of these costs.

K. The fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be used to help pay for the construction and acquisition of the regional arterial system improvements identified in the Nexus Study. The need for the improvements is related to new development because such development results in additional traffic, thus creating the demand for the improvements.

L. The City Council finds that the Nexus Study proposes a fair and equitable method for distributing a portion of the unfunded costs of improvements to the regional arterial system.

M. The City Council adopts the Nexus Study and incorporates it in this chapter as though set forth in full. (Ord. 1991 § 2, 2008)

82.34.030 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the following meanings:

“Commission” means the San Diego County Regional Transportation Commission, formed pursuant to the San Diego County Regional Transportation Commission Act (California Public Utilities Code Section 132000, et seq.), which is governed by the board of directors of SANDAG.

“Development project” or “project” means any project undertaken for the purpose of residential development, or development that includes, as a component, residential development, such as “mixed use” development, including the issuance of a permit for construction.

“Low-income residential housing” means new moderate-, low-, very low-, and extremely low-income residential units as defined in Health and Safety Code Sections 50079.5, 50093, 50105, 50106, and by reference in Government Code Section 65585.1.

“Multifamily residential property” means property which, under the current City land use plan or any specific plan, is designated as R-3, R-4, or R-5, with or without any overlay, or equivalent.

“Nexus Study” means the RTCIP Impact Fee Nexus Study pursuant to California Government Code Section 66000 et seq., which Nexus Study is on file in the City Clerk’s office.

“Residential dwelling unit” means a building or portion thereof used by one family and containing but one kitchen, which is designed primarily for residential occupancy including single-family and multifamily dwellings. “Residential dwelling unit” shall not include hotels or motels.

“RTCIP administrative plan” means the transnet extension ordinance and extension plan adopted by the San Diego County Regional Transportation Commission Ordinance No. 04-01 on May 28, 2004, containing the detailed administrative procedures concerning the implementation of this chapter, the RTCIP program, as may be amended from time to time, a copy of which is on file in the City Clerk’s office.

“SANDAG” means the San Diego Association of Governments, a joint powers agency consisting of the City of Coronado, the County of San Diego, and the 17 other cities situated in San Diego County.

“Single-family residential unit” means each residential dwelling unit in a development on property which, under the current City land use plan or any specific plan, is designated as H-M, R-1A, R-A(BF), R-1B, R-PCD, or PCD, with or without any overlay, or equivalent. (Ord. 1991 § 2, 2008)

82.34.040 Establishment of the transportation uniform mitigation fee.
A. Adoption. The schedule of fees shall be adopted by resolution approved by the City Council (“resolution”).

B. Fee Calculation. The fees shall be calculated according to the calculation methodology set forth in Table 11 of the Nexus Study, as may be amended from time to time.

C. Fee Adjustment. The fee schedule may be periodically reviewed and the amounts adjusted by the San Diego County Regional Transportation Commission. By amendment to the resolution, the fees may be increased or decreased to reflect changes in actual and estimated costs of the regional arterial system including, but not limited to, debt service, lease payments and construction costs. The adjustment of the fees may also reflect changes in the facilities required to be constructed, in estimated revenues received pursuant to this chapter, as well as the availability or lack thereof of other funds with which to construct the regional arterial system. SANDAG shall review the RTCIP fee program no less than every 10 years after July 1, 2009.

D. Purpose. The purpose of the RTCIP fee is to fund those certain improvements to the regional arterial system identified in the Nexus Study. The Nexus Study is applicable to specific residential construction impacts on State Routes 75 and 282 within the boundaries of the City. Nothing herein prevents the City from collecting fees pursuant to Chapter 82.30 CMC or any other fee program for other impacts from residential or nonresidential development not specifically addressed in the Nexus Study for bridges or other infrastructure within the City. The amount of fees adopted under this chapter may also exceed the amount of the Nexus Study based on further studies prepared by the City or SANDAG that justify an increased amount.

E. Applicability. The RTCIP shall apply to all new development projects within the City, which include the development of one or more residential dwelling units, unless otherwise exempted by the provision of this chapter.

F. Exemptions. The following new development shall be exempt from the RTCIP fee:

1. Low-income residential housing;

2. Government/public buildings, public schools and public facilities;

3. The rehabilitation and/or reconstruction of any legal, residential structure and/or the replacement of a previously existing residential dwelling unit;

4. All new, rehabilitated, and/or reconstructed nonresidential structures;

5. Development projects which are the subject of a public facilities development agreement entered into pursuant to Government Code Section 65864 et seq., prior to the effective date of this chapter, wherein the imposition of new fees are expressly prohibited; provided, however, that if the term of such a development agreement is extended by amendment or by any other manner after July 1, 2008, the RTCIP fee shall be imposed;

6. Guest dwellings, as defined in CMC Title 86;

7. Additional residential units located on the same parcel pursuant to the provisions of any agricultural zoning classifications set forth in CMC Title 86;

8. Kennels and catteries established in connection with an existing residential unit and as defined in CMC Title 86;

9. The sanctuary building of a church, mosque, synagogue, or other house of worship, eligible for a property tax exemption;

10. Residential units that have been issued a building permit prior to July 1, 2008; and

11. Condominium conversions.

G. Credit. Regional system improvements may be credited toward the RTCIP fee in accordance with the RTCIP administrative plan and the following:

1. Regional Tier.

a. Arterial Credits. If a developer funds or constructs arterial improvements identified on SANDAG’s regional arterial system and/or that arise out of SANDAG’s congestion management program, the developer shall receive credit for all costs associated with the arterial improvements, offsetting the revenue requirements of the RTCIP administrative plan.

b. Other Credits. In special circumstances, when a developer constructs off-site improvements such as an interchange, bridge, or railroad grade separation, credits shall be determined by the City in consultation with the developer.

c. The amount of the development fee credit shall not exceed the revenue requirements of the City’s most current funding program (determined by the most current unit cost assumptions) for its share of the regional system or actual costs, whichever is less.

2. Local Tier.

a. The City shall compare facilities in local fee programs against the regional system and eliminate any overlap in its local fee program except where a recognized financing district has been established.

b. If there is a recognized financing district established, the City may credit that portion of the facility identified in both programs against the RTCIP fee in accordance with the RTCIP administrative plan. (Ord. 1991 § 2, 2008)

82.34.050 Reimbursements.
Should a developer construct regional arterial system improvements in excess of the RTCIP fee obligation, the developer may be reimbursed based on actual costs or the approved unit cost assumptions, whichever is less. Reimbursements shall be enacted through a three-party agreement including the developer, SANDAG and the City, contingent on funds being available. In all cases, however, reimbursements under such special agreements must coincide with construction of the transportation improvements as scheduled in the five-year capital improvements program adopted annually by SANDAG. (Ord. 1991 § 2, 2008)

82.34.060 Procedures for the levy, collection, and disposition of fees.
A. Authority of the Engineering and Project Development Department. The Director of Engineering and Project Development, or his/her designee, is authorized to levy and collect the RTCIP fee and make all determinations required by this chapter.

B. Payment. Payment of the fees shall be as follows:

1. The fees shall be paid at the time a certificate of occupancy is issued for the development project or upon final inspection, whichever comes first (the “payment date”). However, this section should not be construed to prevent payment of the fees prior to issuance of an occupancy permit or final inspection. Fees may be paid at the time application is made for a building permit and the fee payment shall be calculated based on the fee in effect at that time, provided the developer tenders the full amount of his/her RTCIP fee obligation. If the developer makes only a partial payment prior to the payment date, the amount of the fee due shall be based on the RTCIP fee schedule in place on the payment date. The fees shall be calculated according to the fee schedule set forth in the resolution and the calculation methodology set forth in Table 11 of the Nexus Study, in effect on the payment date.

2. The fees required to be paid shall be the fee amounts in effect at the time payment is due under this chapter, not the date the ordinance approving this chapter is initially adopted. The City shall not enter into a development agreement which freezes future adjustments of the RTCIP fee.

3. If all or part of any development project is sold prior to payment of the fee, the property shall continue to be subject to the requirement for payment of the fee; accordingly, the fees shall run with the land.

4. Fees shall not be waived.

C. Disposition of Fees. All fees collected hereunder shall be transmitted to a fund established and designated by the City for deposit, investment, accounting and expenditure in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the Mitigation Fee Act.

D. Appeals. Appeals shall be filed with the City Council in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.12 CMC. Appealable issues shall be the application of the fee, application of credits, application of reimbursement, application of the legal action stay, and application of exemption.

E. Reports to SANDAG. The Director of Engineering and Project Development, or his/her designee, shall prepare and deliver to the Executive Director of SANDAG periodic reports as will be established under CMC 82.34.070. (Ord. 1991 § 2, 2008)

82.34.070 RTCIP Fee Administrator.
A. The Director of Engineering and Project Development is appointed as the Administrator of the transportation uniform mitigation fee program. He or she is authorized to receive all fees generated from the RTCIP fee within the City, and to invest, account for and expend such fees in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the Mitigation Fee Act. The detailed administrative procedures concerning the implementation of this chapter shall be contained in the RTCIP administrative plan developed by the RTCIP Administrator. Furthermore, the RTCIP Administrator shall use the Nexus Study for the purpose of calculating a developer’s RTCIP fee obligation. In addition to detailing the methodology for calculating all RTCIP fee obligations of different categories of new development, the purpose of the Nexus Study is to clarify for the RTCIP Administrator, where necessary, the definition and calculation methodology for uses not clearly defined in this chapter.

B. The City shall expend only that amount of the funds generated from the RTCIP fee for staff support, audit, administrative expenses, and contract services that is necessary and reasonable to carry out its responsibilities and in no case shall the funds expended for salaries and benefits exceed the annual net amount of revenue raised by the RTCIP fee. The RTCIP administrative plan further outlines the fiscal responsibilities and limitations of the Administrator. (Ord. 1991 § 2, 2008)

Chapter 82.40
CONVERSION OF RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY
Sections:

82.40.010    Purpose.

82.40.020    Physical elements report.

82.40.030    Acceptance of reports.

82.40.040    Copy to buyers.

82.40.050    Physical standards for condominium conversions.

82.40.060    Specific physical standards.

82.40.070    Notice to tenants.

82.40.080    Stock cooperatives owners’ vote.

82.40.090    Conversion to stock cooperative.

82.40.100    Findings.

82.40.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is:

A. To establish criteria for the conversion of existing multiple-family, rental housing to condominiums.

B. To reduce the impact of such conversions on residents in rental housing who may be required to relocate due to the conversion of apartments to condominiums by providing for procedures for notification and adequate time and assistance for such relocation.

C. To assure that purchasers of converted housing have been properly informed as to the physical conditions of the structure which is offered for purchase.

D. To ensure that converted housing achieves a high degree of appearance, quality, and safety and is consistent with the goals of the City.

82.40.020 Physical elements report.
A report on the physical elements of all structures and facilities shall be submitted with the tentative subdivision or parcel map. The report shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

A. A report detailing the structural condition of all elements of the property including foundations, electrical, plumbing, utilities, walls, ceiling, windows, recreational facilities, sound transmission of each building, mechanical equipment, parking facilities and appliances. Regarding each such element, the report shall state, to the best knowledge or estimate of the applicant, when such element was built; the condition of each element; when said element was replaced; the approximate condition of each element; the approximate date upon which said application for conversion was filed and accepted by the City. The report shall identify any defective or unsafe elements and set forth the proposed corrective measures to be employed.

B. A report from a licensed structural pest control operator, approved by the City, on each structure and each unit within the structure.

C. A report on any known soil and geological conditions regarding soil deposits, rock formations, faults, groundwater, and landslides in the vicinity of the project and a statement regarding any known evidence of soils problems relating to the structures. Reference shall be made to any previous soils reports for the site and a copy submitted with said report.

D. A statement of repairs and improvements to be made by the subdivider necessary to refurbish and restore the project to achieve a high degree of appearance and safety.

82.40.030 Acceptance of reports.
The final form of the physical elements report and other documents shall be subject to approval by the City. The reports in their accepted form shall remain on file with the Department of Community Development for review by any interested persons. The report shall be referenced in the subdivision report to the Planning Commission.

82.40.040 Copy to buyers.
The subdivider shall provide each purchaser with a copy of all reports (in their final, accepted form), prior to said purchaser executing any purchase agreement or other contract to purchase a unit in the project and said developer shall give the purchaser sufficient time to review said reports. Copies of the reports shall be made available at all times at the sales office and shall be posted at various locations, as approved by the City, at the project site.

82.40.050 Physical standards for condominium conversions.
A. To achieve the purpose of this chapter, the City shall require that all condominium conversions conform to the Municipal Code in effect at the time of tentative map approval except as otherwise provided in this chapter.

B. All provisions of the Municipal Code must be met and violations corrected prior to the approval of the final map.

82.40.060 Specific physical standards.
The City shall require conformance with the standards of this section in approving the map.

A. Building Regulations. The project shall conform to the applicable standards of the City building code in effect on the date that the last building permit was issued for the subject structure or structures except as herein provided.

B. Zoning Regulations. The project shall conform to all applicable standards of the zoning ordinance, in effect at the time the application for conversion was accepted by the City except as herein provided.

C. Fire Prevention.

1. Smoke Detectors. Each living unit shall be provided with approved detectors of products of combustion other than heat conforming to the latest UBC standards, mounted on the ceiling or wall at a point centrally located in the corridor or area giving access to rooms used for sleeping purposes.

2. Maintenance of Fire Protection Systems. All fire hydrants, fire alarm systems, portable fire extinguishers and other fire protective appliances shall be retained in an operable condition at all times.

D. Sound Transmission.

1. Shock Mounting of Mechanical Equipment. All permanent mechanical equipment such as motors, compressors, pumps, and compactors which is determined by the department of community development to be a source of structural vibration or structure borne noise shall be shock mounted with inertia blocks or bases and/or vibration isolators in a manner approved by the Department of Community Development.

2. Noise Standards. The structure shall conform to all interior and exterior sound transmission standards of the Uniform Building Code. In such cases where present standards cannot reasonably be met, the City Council may require the applicant to notify potential buyers of the noise deficiency currently existing within these units.

E. Utility Metering. Each dwelling unit shall be separately metered for gas and electricity. A plan for equitable sharing of communal water metering shall be developed prior to final map approval and included in the covenants, conditions and restrictions. In such cases where the subdivider can demonstrate that this standard cannot or should not reasonably be met, this standard may be modified by the City Council.

F. Private Storage Space. Each unit shall have at least 200 cubic feet of enclosed weather proofed and lockable private storage space in addition to guest, linen, pantry and closets customarily provided. Such space may be provided in any location approved by the Department of Community Development, but shall not be divided into two or more locations. In such cases where the subdivider can demonstrate that this standard cannot or should not reasonably be met, this standard may be modified by the City Council.

G. Laundry Facilities. A laundry area shall be provided in each unit, or if common laundry areas are provided, such facilities shall consist of not less than one automatic washer and dryer for each five units or fraction thereof. In such cases where the subdivider can demonstrate that this standard cannot or should not reasonably be met, this standard may be modified by the City Council.

H. Landscape Maintenance. All landscaping shall be restored as necessary and maintained to achieve a high degree of appearance and quality.

I. Condition of Equipment and Appliances. The developer shall provide written certification to the buyer of each unit at the close of escrow that any dishwashers, garbage disposals, stoves, refrigerators, hot water tanks, and air conditioners that are provided are in operable working condition as of the close of escrow. At such time as the homeowners’ association takes over management of the development, the developer shall provide written certification to the association that any pool and pool equipment (filter, pumps, chlorinator) and any appliances and mechanical equipment to be owned in common by the association is in operable working condition.

82.40.070 Notice to tenants.
A. The City Council shall not approve a final map or parcel map for a subdivision to be created from the conversion of residential real property into a condominium project, a community apartment project, or a stock cooperative project unless it makes all of the findings set forth in Section 66427.1 of the Act relating to notices and offers to tenants.

B. The subdivider shall give notice to prospective tenants in accordance with Section 66452.8 of the Act.

C. In accordance with Section 66452.9 of the Act, the subdivider shall give notice of the filing of the tentative map or tentative parcel map.

D. Subdivider shall provide evidence of receipt of each tenant of the notices required herein.

82.40.080 Stock cooperatives owners’ vote.
In accordance with Section 66452.10 of the Act, a stock cooperative will not be converted to a condominium unless a majority of the owners have voted in favor of the conversion.

82.40.090 Conversion to stock cooperative.
The City shall approve or disapprove the conversion of an existing building to a stock cooperative within 120 days following receipt of a completed application for approval of such conversion. (Gov. Code § 66427.2)

82.40.100 Findings.
The City Council shall not approve an application for conversion unless the City Council finds that:

A. All provisions of this chapter are met.

B. The proposed conversion is consistent with the City General Plan.

C. The proposed conversion will conform to the Municipal Code in effect at the time of tentative map approval except as otherwise provided in this chapter.

D. The overall design and physical condition of the condominium conversion achieves a high degree of appearance, quality and safety.

E. The conversion would not displace predominantly low and moderate income families or tenants without adequate provision for the suitable relocation of such families or tenants.

F. 1. The vacancy factor in the City is not less than five percent of the total available apartment rental housing stock, determined in accordance with a resolution adopted by the City Council.

2. Property owners of multiple-family dwelling “apartment complexes” containing three or more dwelling units may, upon successful designation and acceptance of their property by the City as a historic resource, make application to subdivide said property to condominiums per this chapter. Any such application for conversion of a designated resource will be exempt from the requirements of the apartment vacancy factor in subsection (F)(1) of this section. (Ord. 1940, 2002; Ord. 1797)

Chapter 82.44
CONVERSION OF MOBILEHOME PARK
Sections:

82.44.010    Report required.

82.44.020    Procedure.

82.44.010 Report required.
At the time of filing a tentative or tentative parcel map for subdivision to be created from the conversion of a mobilehome park to another use, the subdivider shall file a report in accordance with Section 66427.4 of the Act.

82.44.020 Procedure.
In approving a conversion of a mobilehome park to another use, the City Council shall comply with the requirements of Section 66427.4 of the Act.

Chapter 82.48
VESTING MAP
Sections:

82.48.010    Purpose.

82.48.020    Filing and processing.

82.48.030    Additional requirements.

82.48.040    Discretionary approvals required.

82.48.050    Disapproval of proposed vesting map.

82.48.060    Rights conferred.

82.48.010 Purpose.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of Section 66498.8 of the Act which requires the City to adopt procedures for processing vesting tentative maps and vesting tentative parcel maps (referred to in this chapter as “vesting maps”) under the Vesting Tentative Map Statute set forth in Section 66498.1 et seq. of the Act. (Ord. 1644)

82.48.020 Filing and processing.
A. Whenever this title requires the filing of a tentative map or a tentative parcel map for a residential development, a subdivider may file a proposed, vesting map subject to the provisions of this chapter.

B. Except as provided in this chapter, the proposed vesting map shall be filed and processed in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a tentative map or tentative parcel map.

C. The proposed vesting map shall have conspicuously printed on its face either “Vesting Tentative Map” or “Vesting Tentative Parcel Map.”

D. The subdivider shall pay an additional fee in an amount established by City Council resolution for processing the proposed vesting map.

82.48.030 Additional requirements.
To be deemed a complete application, the application for a vesting map must be accompanied with the following information in a form satisfactory to the City:

A. The height, size and location of structures proposed for the property to be subdivided with sufficient plans and specifications to constitute a complete application for a building permit.

B. General architectural renderings.

C. Detailed landscaping plans.

D. Detailed final grading plans showing existing and proposed finished grades at one-foot intervals.

E. The design and specifications for all public facilities and improvements, both on-site and off-site.

F. Detailed geological, drainage, flood control, soils, traffic and other reports deemed necessary by the City to permit a complete review of the design of improvements proposed for the subdivision.

G. A detailed description of the uses to which the real property and structures will be put.

H. A report demonstrating that all public facilities necessary to serve the subdivision or mitigate any impact created by the subdivision will be available for the entire time that the approved vesting map is valid plus any time during which the rights conferred by this chapter exist.

I. A complete record of all required discretionary approvals obtained as per CMC 82.48.040.

82.48.040 Discretionary approvals required.
The application for a vesting map shall not be deemed complete until all applicable discretionary approvals necessary to construct the project are obtained to include, without limitation, the following:

A. Design Review Commission permit for landscaping and building plans.

B. Zone variance for purposes of constructing the building on the site.

C. Zone variance for purposes of creating the lots as proposed.

D. General Plan amendment.

E. Zone boundary change.

F. Local coastal program amendment.

G. Coastal permit.

H. Special use permit.

I. Zoning interpretation.

J. Zoning determination of use.

K. Zoning determination of development standards.

82.48.050 Disapproval of proposed vesting map.
A proposed map shall be disapproved if:

A. Either the proposed subdivision or the proposed development are inconsistent with the General Plan, a specific plan or a zoning ordinance of the City.

B. The development of the proposed project has not already received all required discretionary approvals to construct the project.

C. The City Council finds that all public facilities necessary to serve the subdivision or mitigate any impact created by the subdivision will not be available for the entire time that the approved vesting map is valid plus any time during which the rights conferred by this chapter exist.

82.48.060 Rights conferred.
A. Approval or conditional approval of a vesting map shall confer a right to proceed with development in accordance with Section 66498.1 of the Act.

B. Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, the City may condition or deny a subsequent permit, approval, extension or entitlement in accordance with Section 66498.1(c) of the Act.

C. The rights conferred by the approval or conditional approval of the vesting map shall expire:

1. If a final map or parcel map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting map.

2. The subdivider has requested and the City has approved a change in the type, density, bulk or design of the development, unless an amendment to the vesting map has been approved.

3. One year after the recording of the final map or parcel map in accordance with Sections 66452.6 (g) and (h) of the Act.

D. Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, the amount of any fees which are required to be paid either as a condition of the map’s approval or by operation of any law shall be determined by application of the law or policy in effect at the time the fee is paid. The amounts of the fees are not vested upon approval of the vesting map.

Chapter 82.50
MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS – TENTATIVE MAP PROCEDURE
Sections:

82.50.010    Requirements.

82.50.020    Filing of tentative map.

82.50.030    Notice to school board.

82.50.040    Preparation of tentative map.

82.50.050    Contents of tentative map.

82.50.060    Additional information required with tentative map.

82.50.070    Grading plan.

82.50.080    Preliminary title report.

82.50.090    Department of Community Development processing of tentative map.

82.50.100    Report in writing, fee.

82.50.110    Planning Commission’s processing of a proposed tentative map.

82.50.120    Placing proposed tentative map on City Council agenda.

82.50.130    Expiration/extension of tentative map.

82.50.140    Revised tentative map.

82.50.150    Replacement of tentative map.

82.50.010 Requirements.
Every subdivider proposing to create a major subdivision shall comply with the procedures contained in this chapter. Prior to the filing of a tentative map, the subdivider or his authorized agent shall confer with the Director of Community Development Department and the City Engineer regarding the preparation of the map. (Gov. Code § 66452)

82.50.020 Filing of tentative map.
A. The subdivider shall submit to the Secretary of the Planning Commission, in as many copies as required by the City, the proposed tentative map.

B. A proposed tentative map shall not be deemed filed until:

1. All necessary zoning approvals have been secured;

2. An environmental impact report, if required, has been certified for the project covered by the application;

3. The map complies with the requirements of this title;

4. The filing fee has been paid in full.

82.50.030 Notice to school board.
Within 10 days of the filing of a tentative map, the Secretary of the Planning Commission shall send a notice in accordance with Section 66455.7 of the Act.

82.50.040 Preparation of tentative map.
The tentative map need not be based upon an accurate or detailed survey and shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions relating to final maps contained in CMC 82.54.040(A), (B), and (E).

82.50.050 Contents of tentative map.
Each tentative map shall contain the following information:

A. Name and address of the owner whose property is proposed to be subdivided and the name and address of the subdivider.

B. Name and address of registered civil engineer, or licensed surveyor, who prepared the map.

C. North arrow.

D. Scale.

E. Date of preparation.

F. The location, width and proposed names of all streets within the boundaries of the proposed subdivision and approximate grades thereof.

G. Locations and width of alleys.

H. Names, location and width of adjacent streets.

I. Lot lines and approximate dimensions and numerus of each lot.

J. Approximate location and width of watercourses or areas subject to inundation from floods, and location of structures, irrigation and ditches and other permanent features.

K. Approximate contours at two-feet intervals.

L. Approximate location of existing buildings and permanent structures.

M. Location of all major vegetation showing size and type.

N. Legal description of the exterior boundaries of the subdivisions.

O. Width and location of all existing or proposed public or private easements.

P. Classification of lots as to be intended residential, commercial, industrial or otherwise.

Q. Location of railroads and rights-of-way.

R. Approximate radii of curves.

S. Any proposed phasing by units.

T. Number of units to be constructed when a condominium or community apartment project is involved.

82.50.060 Additional information required with tentative map.
Shown either on the proposed tentative map or on accompanying documents shall be the information regarding the following matters:

A. Source of water supply.

B. Type of street improvement and utilities which the subdivider proposes to install.

C. Proposed method of sewage disposal including location of facilities.

D. Proposed stormwater sewer or other means of drainage, including the location of such facilities.

E. Protective covenants to be recorded.

F. Proposed tree plantings.

82.50.070 Grading plan.
There shall be filed with the tentative map a grading plan showing any grading proposed for the creation of building sites within the subdivision or for construction of improvements to serve the subdivision. The grading plan together with the original topographical contours may be shown on the tentative map. This plan shall indicate approximate earthwork volumes of proposed excavation and filling operations. In the event no such grading is proposed, a statement to that effect shall be filed with the tentative map.

82.50.080 Preliminary title report.
There shall be filed with the tentative map a current preliminary title report for the property being subdivided.

82.50.090 Department of Community Development processing of tentative map.
A. The Department of Community Development shall obtain recommendations from the City staff, concerned governmental agencies and other persons affected by or integrated in the proposed subdivision.

B. The Department of Community Development shall prepare a staff report to the Planning Commission containing recommendation regarding the proposed tentative map.

82.50.100 Report in writing, fee.
Any report or recommendation on a tentative map by the staff to the Planning Commission or City Council shall be in writing and a copy thereof served on the subdivider and on each tenant of the subject property, in the case of a proposed conversion of residential real property to a condominium project, community apartment project, or stock cooperative project, at least three days prior to any hearing or action on such map by the advisory agency. A fee in an amount set by resolution, from time to time, by the City Council shall be collected from the subdivider for expenses incurred under this section. (Gov. Code § 66452.3)

82.50.110 Planning Commission’s processing of a proposed tentative map.
A. The Planning Commission shall investigate each proposed tentative map filed pursuant to this chapter. The Commission shall consider the proposed design of the subdivision and the kind, nature and extent of proposed improvements.

B. Within 50 days of the filing of the tentative map with the Secretary of the Planning Commission, the Planning Commission shall file with the City Clerk its findings and its recommendations based on those findings. The Planning Commission will recommend to the City Council the approval, conditional approval or denial of the tentative map. As appropriate, the Planning Commission shall recommend the kind, nature and extent of improvements that should be constructed or installed. (Gov. Code § 66452.1(a))

82.50.120 Placing proposed tentative map on City Council agenda.
A. When a report on a tentative map is filed with the City Clerk, the Clerk is directed, unless otherwise directed by the City Council, to act prior to the next regular meeting of the City Council by setting the matter on the City Council agenda for public hearing at the next possible regular meeting. The City Council shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the tentative map within the 50-day period. (Gov. Code § 66452.2)

B. The City Council shall comply with the time periods set forth in Section 66452.2(c) of the Act.

82.50.130 Expiration/extension of tentative map.
A. In accordance with Gov. Code Section 66452.6, a tentative map shall expire 24 months after its approval or conditional approval.

B. Where a subdivider is subject to a requirement of $100,000 or more to construct or improve or finance the construction or improvement of public improvements outside the boundaries of the tentative map, the subdivider shall comply with the provisions set forth in Gov. Code Section 66452.6(a).

C. The City shall process tentative maps submitted prior to imposition of a development moratorium in compliance with Gov. Code Section 66452(f). (Ord. 1658)

82.50.140 Revised tentative map.
A. Where a subdivider desires to revise or alter a proposed subdivision for which a tentative map has been approved by the City Council, the subdivider may file with the Department of Community Development a revised tentative map on payment of the established fees.

B. A revised tentative map shall conform to the following requirements:

1. The proposed subdivision shown on such map shall generally conform to the street and lot pattern shown on the approved tentative map;

2. The proposed subdivision shown on such map shall include only one contiguous area consisting of all or a portion of the subdivision shown on the approved tentative map together with such additional land, if any, as the subdivider desires to include;

3. The revised tentative map shall contain all of the information required on tentative maps and shall be accompanied by such data as is required to be filed with proposed tentative maps.

C. A revised tentative map shall be filed within 12 months after the approval of the tentative map by the City Council or, if an extension of time is granted, within the period specified in such extension.

D. Upon the filing of a revised tentative map and payment of the prescribed fee, such revised tentative map shall be treated in all respects as an original tentative map and shall be reported on, approved, conditionally approved, or disapproved, in the same manner as a tentative map; provided, however, that the subdivider shall have 12 months from the approval or conditional approval of the original tentative map within which to obtain final map approval, unless such period is extended pursuant to this chapter, in which case, the subdivider shall obtain final map approval within the period of any such extension.

82.50.150 Replacement of tentative map.
At any time following the filing of a tentative map with the Secretary of the Planning Commission, the City Engineer may direct the subdivider to submit a replacement tentative map. Such direction shall be based upon the City Engineer’s finding that the number or nature of the changes necessary for approval are such that they cannot be shown clearly or simply on the original tentative map.

Chapter 82.54
MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS – FINAL MAP PROCEDURE
Sections:

82.54.010    Requirements.

82.54.020    Multiple final maps.

82.54.030    Preparation of final map.

82.54.040    Supplemental information on final map.

82.54.050    Record of easements.

82.54.060    Survey data.

82.54.070    Lot numbers.

82.54.080    Established lines.

82.54.090    Additional certificates on final map.

82.54.100    Certificates by separate instrument.

82.54.110    Title company subdivision guarantee.

82.54.120    Soils report certificate.

82.54.130    Processing of final map.

82.54.150    Transmittal of final map to County Recorder.

82.54.160    Correction and amendment of final map.

82.54.010 Requirements.
After the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map and prior to the expiration of such map, a subdivider may cause the real property included within the map, or any part thereof, to be subdivided by complying with the procedures contained in this chapter. (Gov. Code § 66456)

82.54.020 Multiple final maps.
The subdivider may file multiple final maps prior to the expiration of the tentative map in accordance with Section 66456.1 of the Act.

82.54.030 Preparation of final map.
The final map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, shall be based upon a field survey and shall conform to all of the requirements of Section 66434 of the Act.

82.54.040 Supplemental information on final map.
Every final map shall:

A. Contain a definite description of the land subdivided by references to recorded deeds, recorded maps and official United States surveys. Reference to tracts, recorded deeds and recorded maps shall be spelled out, worded identically with original records and show the book and page of records or map numbers.

B. Show the basis of bearings used, the relationship of said bearings to the true meridian, and the north arrow of said map shall appear on each street thereof.

C. Show the acreage of all parcels containing one acre or more to the nearest hundredth.

D. Clearly indicate, by description or a distinctive boundary line, any area subject to flooding at times of high tide or heavy rainfall, and state that such area is subject to flooding at times of high tide or heavy rainfall.

E. Show a solid line separating all private ways, easements and other rights-of-way not to be accepted as public streets and shown on said map from public streets and clearly designate their nature and the manner in which the right is reserved or granted.

82.54.050 Record of easements.
Every final map shall:

A. Indicate the centerline data, width and side lines of all easements to which the real property is subject or will be subjected by the approval of the final map.

B. Basements for storm drains, sewer and other purposes shall be denoted by broken lines.

C. The easement shall be clearly labeled and identified and, if already of record, proper reference to the records given.

D. Easements being dedicated shall be so indicated in the certificate of dedication.

E. Easements for public utility companies shall be designated on the final map as easements for public utilities.

82.54.060 Survey data.
A. The final map shall show the centerlines of all streets, length, tangents, radii and central angles or radial bearings of all curves, the total width of each street, the width of the portion being dedicated and the width of existing dedication and the width of each side of the centerline; also the width or rights-of-way of railroads, flood control or drainage channels and any other easements existing or being dedicated by the map.

B. Surveys in connection with maps prepared pursuant to this chapter shall be made in accordance with standard practices and principles for land surveying. A traverse of the boundaries of the subdivisions and all lots and blocks shall close. Sufficient data shall be shown to determine readily the bearing and length of each line. Dimensions of lots shall be net dimensions, and no ditto marks shall be used.

C. Traverse sheets and work sheets showing the closure of the exterior boundaries and of each irregular block and lot shall be provided.

D. The final map shall also have indicated thereon the following:

1. Suitable primary survey control points.

a. Section corners.

b. Monuments (existing outside of subdivision).

2. Location of all permanent monuments within the subdivisions.

3. Ties to any City or County boundary lines involved.

4. Ties to and identification of adjacent subdivisions.

5. Required certificates.

82.54.070 Lot numbers.
A. The lots shall be numbered consecutively, commencing with the number “1” with no omissions or duplications. In the case of successive subdivisions of the same basic name, the numbering may be successively extended from the previous subdivision bearing the same general name.

B. Each lot shall be shown entirely on one sheet.

82.54.080 Established lines.
A. Whenever the City Engineer has established the center line of a street or alley, such data shall be considered in making the surveys and in preparing the final map, and all monuments found shall be indicated and proper references made to field books or maps of public record, relating to the monuments. If the points were reset by ties, that fact shall be stated.

B. The final map shall show City boundaries crossing or adjoining the subdivision clearly designated and tied in.

82.54.090 Additional certificates on final map.
In addition to certificates and other material required by the Subdivision Map Act and this title, every final map shall bear the following certificates or endorsements:

A. A certificate by the City Treasurer and the County Director of Sanitation and Flood Control, where applicable, to the effect that there are no unpaid special assessments or bonds which may be paid in full shown by the records in their offices against the subdivision or any part thereof.

B. A certificate by the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors that the provisions of Division 2, Title 7 of the Government Code have been complied with regarding deposits for taxes on the property within the subdivision. (Gov. Code § 66492)

C. Certificate of the County Recorder as to the filing of the map.

D. A certificate signed and sealed by the Engineer-Surveyor in accordance with Section 66441 of the Subdivision Map Act.

E. A certificate signed by the City Engineer in accordance with Section 66442 of the Act.

F. A certificate signed by the Secretary of the Planning Commission that the final map has been submitted to the Planning Commission for report and recommendation. (Gov. Code § 66443)

G. A certificate for execution by the City Clerk, stating that the City Council approved the final map, and accepted, accepted subject to improvement or rejected, on behalf of the public, any real property offered for dedication for public use in conformity with the terms of the offer of dedication. (Gov. Code § 66440)

H. A certificate, signed and acknowledged before a notary, by all parties, and if a corporation, a certified copy of the appropriate resolution of such corporation, having any record title interest in the real property subdivided, consenting to the preparation and recordation of the final map is required, except as set forth in Section 66436 of the Act. (Gov. Code § 66430)

I. Where dedications are required, a certificate offering to dedicate interests in real property for specified public purposes in accordance with the Act. The certificate shall be properly signed and acknowledged before a notary public and shall be signed by all parties having any record title interest in the real property being subdivided subject to the provisions of Section 66436 of the Act. In case any dedication of consent shown on a subdivision map is signed by a corporation, a certified copy of the resolution passed by the board of directors must accompany the final map. (Gov. Code § 66439)

J. The certificate of a qualified title company that the parties who executed the owner’s certificate required by Section 66436 of the Act are all the parties having any record title interest in the land subdivided. Said certificates shall also set forth the names of the parties owning the interests set forth in Section 66436 of the Act together with a description of said interests and the reasons the parties did not execute the owner’s certificate. The title company shall, on the date the final map will be transmitted to the County Recorder, present to the County Recorder a letter stating that on said date the names of the parties and the other facts set forth in the title company’s certificate were the same as shown by the certificate. (Gov. Code § 66443)

K. In the event that a grant of an open space easement is to be made over any portion of the subdivision, the final map shall contain a certificate signed and acknowledged by those parties having any record title interest in the subdivided land granting such open space easement and stating the conditions of the grant. (Gov. Code § 66443)

L. A notice in accordance with Section 66434.1 of the Act relating to the development lien created under the Education Code.

82.54.100 Certificates by separate instrument.
A. The City may require that the certificates and acknowledgements required by this title be made by separate instrument to be recorded concurrently with the final map being filed for record.

B. Whenever a certificate or acknowledgement is made by separate instrument, there shall appear on the final map a reference to the separately recorded documents. This reference shall be completed by the San Diego County Recorder pursuant to Section 66468.1 of the Act.

82.54.110 Title company subdivision guarantee.
In lieu of the title company certificate required by CMC 82.54.090(J), there may be filed with the City Engineer a subdivision guarantee from a qualified title insurance company which guarantees that the parties names therein are the only parties having any record title interest in the land subdivided. The title company shall, on the date the final map will be transmitted to the County Recorder, present to the County Recorder pursuant to the requirements of Section 66465 of the Act, a letter stating that at the time of filing of the final or parcel map in the Office of the County Recorder, the parties consenting to such filing are all of the parties having a record title interest in the real property being subdivided whose signatures are required by Division 2 of Title 7 of the Act, as shown by the records in the Office of the Recorder.

82.54.120 Soils report certificate.
A. When a solid report, a geologic report, or soils and geologic reports have been prepared specifically for the subdivision, such fact shall be noted on the final map, together with the date of such report or reports, the name of the engineer making the soils report and geologist making the geologic report and the location where the reports are on file.

B. The soils report, geologic report, or soils and geologic reports specified in subsection A of this section shall be kept for public inspection by the City. (Gov. Code § 66434.5)

82.54.130 Processing of final map.
A. At least 60 days prior to the expiration of the tentative map, the subdivider shall submit the proposed final map to the Department of Community Development which shall set the matter as a consent calendar item on the agenda of the next available regular meeting of the City Council.

B. The Department of Community Development shall:

1. Submit the proposed final map to the Engineering Services Department for review and certification by the City Engineer in accordance with Section 66442 of the Subdivision Map Act;

2. Submit to the City Council recommendations regarding the form and content of the proposed final map obtained from all appropriate City staff and governmental agencies; and

3. Prepare and submit to the City Council a staff report which shall be made available to the subdivider no less than three days prior to the City Council consideration of the matter.

C. At the meeting at which it receives the proposed final map, or at its next regular meeting, the City Council shall approve the map if it conforms to all of the requirements of this title applicable at the time of approval or conditional approval of the tentative map and any rulings made thereunder; or, if it does not so conform, disapprove the map. If the City Council does not act within the prescribed time, or any authorized extension thereof, and the map conforms to all said requirements and rulings, it shall be deemed approved, and the City Clerk shall certify its approval thereon. (Gov. Code § 66458) (Ord. 1832; Ord. 1731)

82.54.150 Transmittal of final map to County Recorder.
After the approval by the City of a final map of a subdivision, the City Clerk or an agent shall transmit the map to the County Recorder. A final map subject to Section 66493 of the Act shall be processed in compliance with Gov. Code Section 66464(b). (Ord. 1832; Ord. 1658; Ord. 1601)

82.54.160 Correction and amendment of final map.
Corrections of and amendments to the final map shall be made pursuant to Section 66469 et seq. of the Act.

Chapter 82.60
MINOR SUBDIVISIONS – TENTATIVE PARCEL MAP PROCEDURE
Sections:

82.60.010    Requirement.

82.60.020    Tentative map contents and procedure.

82.60.010 Requirement.
Every subdivider proposing to create a minor subdivision shall comply with the procedure and requirements contained in this chapter. (Gov. Code § 66428)

82.60.020 Tentative map contents and procedure.
Unless otherwise provided in this title, tentative parcel maps shall be subject to the requirements and procedures applicable to tentative maps contained in Chapter 82.50 CMC.

Chapter 82.64
MINOR SUBDIVISIONS – PARCEL MAP PROCEDURE
Sections:

82.64.010    Requirement.

82.64.020    Preparation of parcel map.

82.64.030    Supplemental information of parcel map.

82.64.040    Processing of parcel map.

82.64.050    Transmittal of parcel map to County Recorder.

82.64.060    Correction and amendment of parcel map.

82.64.010 Requirement.
After the approval or conditional approval of a tentative parcel map and prior to the expiration of such map, a subdivider may cause the real property included within the tentative parcel map, or any part thereof, to be subdivided by complying with the procedures contained in this chapter. (Gov. Code § 66463)

82.64.020 Preparation of parcel map.
The parcel map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, shall show the location of streets and property lines bounding the property and shall conform to all of the following provisions:

A. The provisions of Section 66445 of the Act.

B. Shall be based upon a field survey made in conformity with the Land Surveyors Act. (Gov. Code § 66448)

82.64.030 Supplemental information of parcel map.
A. The parcel map shall contain the information required of a final map as set forth in Chapter 82.54 CMC, portions of which may be waived by the City Engineer when not required to achieve the purposes of this title.

B. A certificate of an engineer or land surveyor in accordance with Section 66449 of the Act.

C. A certificate in accordance with Section 66450 of the Act relating to unincorporated territory.

82.64.040 Processing of parcel map.
A. At least 60 days prior to the expiration of the tentative parcel map, the subdivider shall submit the proposed parcel map to the Department of Community Development.

B. The Department of Community Development shall:

1. Submit the proposed parcel map to the Engineering Services Department for review and certification by the City Engineer in accordance with Section 66450 of the Subdivision Map Act; and

2. Determine the adequacy of the form and content of the proposed parcel map after having obtained comments from all appropriate City staff and governmental agencies.

C. The City Council delegates to the Community Development Department the authority to approve or disapprove proposed parcel maps in accordance with the provisions of this title and the Act. (Gov. Code §§ 66474.7, 66458)

D. The Community Development Department shall approve the map if it conforms to all of the requirements of this title applicable at the time of approval or conditional approval of the tentative map and any rulings made thereunder; or, if it does not so conform, disapprove the map. If the Department does not act within the prescribed time, or any authorized extension thereof, and the map conforms to all said requirements and rulings, it shall be deemed approved, and the City Clerk shall certify its approval thereon. (Gov. Code § 66458)

E. The decision of the Community Development Department shall be final 10 days after the applicant is notified thereof setting forth the action; except, the decision shall be suspended if an appeal to the City Council is filed prior to the end of this 10-day period.

F. Upon the filing of a sufficient, timely appeal with the Director of Community Development, the matter shall be set for administrative hearing on the agenda of the next available regular meeting of the City Council. The City Council shall adopt a resolution setting forth the City’s final action on the proposed parcel map. (Ord. 1832)

82.64.050 Transmittal of parcel map to County Recorder.
After the approval by the City of a parcel map, the City Clerk or an agent shall transmit the map to the County Recorder. A parcel map subject to Section 66493 of the Act shall be processed in compliance with Gov. Code Section 66464(b). (Ord. 1832; Ord. 1658; Ord. 1601)

82.64.060 Correction and amendment of parcel map.
Corrections of and amendments to the parcel map shall be made pursuant to Section 66469 et seq. of the Act. (Ord. 1832)

Chapter 82.70
Lot Line Adjustments
Sections:

82.70.010    Requirements.

82.70.020    Filing of application.

82.70.030    The Director of the Department of Community Development action.

82.70.040    Disapproval of application.

82.70.050    Directed revision.

82.70.060    Failure to file revised record of survey map.

82.70.070    Appeal of Director of the Department of Community Development decision.

82.70.080    City Council action.

82.70.010 Requirements.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title to the contrary, every person desiring to adjust a legal lot line between two or more adjacent lots, where the land taken from one lot is added to an adjacent lot, without creating a greater number of lots, shall comply with the procedures set forth in this chapter for obtaining a record of survey map for lot line adjustments. (Ord. 1658)

82.70.020 Filing of application.
A. The applicant shall file with the Department of Community Development a proposed record of survey map depicting the adjustment. The record of survey map shall be recorded in the Office of the County Recorder.

B. No tentative map, parcel map, or final map shall be required.

C. The applicant shall pay the established fee before the application is accepted for filing. (Ord. 1658)

82.70.030 The Director of the Department of Community Development action.
A. The Director of Community Development shall set the application for a public hearing within 45 days of filing.

B. The Director of Community Development is authorized to approve, disapprove or direct the revision of the proposed record of survey map.

C. The decision of the Director of Community Development shall become final 10 calendar days after the decision unless an appeal is filed within that period. (Ord. 2025 § 11, 2011; Ord. 1658)

82.70.040 Disapproval of application.
The application to adjust a lot line by record of survey map shall be disapproved if the proposed adjustment:

A. Creates a greater number of lots than originally existed.

B. Creates a lot which does not conform to the design standards of this title.

C. Creates a condition which does not comply with the City zoning or building ordinances.

D. Does not facilitate the relocation of existing utilities, infrastructure or easements. (Ord. 1658)

82.70.050 Directed revision.
The Director of the Department of Community Development is authorized to withhold approval of the application and direct that the following revisions be made:

A. Relocation of lot lines to provide lots that comply with the zoning ordinance; and conform to the standards of lot design specified in this title.

B. Creation of lot lines that facilitate the relocation of existing utilities, infrastructure or easements.

C. Addition of further information on the proposed record of survey map as determined by the City Engineer. (Ord. 1658)

82.70.060 Failure to file revised record of survey map.
If the applicant fails to file a revised record of survey map within six months from the date of the decision of the Director of Community Development, the application shall be deemed denied and all proceedings shall terminate. (Ord. 1658)

82.70.070 Appeal of Director of the Department of Community Development decision.
Within 10 calendar days following the Director’s decision to approve, deny or direct revisions to the application, the applicant or other interested parties may appeal the decision to the City Council by filing an appeal with the City Clerk in accordance with Chapter 1.12 CMC. (Ord. 2025 § 13, 2011)

82.70.080 City Council action.
A. The City Council shall conduct a public hearing.

B. The City Council shall sustain, overrule or modify the Director of the Department of Community Development decision. With the concurrence of the applicant, the matter may be returned to the Director of the Department of Community Development for further action.

Chapter 82.74
Reversion to Acreage
Sections:

82.74.010    Requirement.

82.74.020    Petition.

82.74.030    Procedure.

82.74.040    Appeal of Planning Commission decision.

82.74.050    Repealed.

82.74.010 Requirement.
The City Council on its own motion or all of the owners of record of the real property by petition may revert the subdivided real property to acreage pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Gov. Code §§ 66499.11, 66499.12)

82.74.020 Petition.
The petition shall be in a form prescribed by the Director of the Department of Community Development and shall contain, without limitation, the following:

A. Adequate evidence of title to the real property within the subdivision.

B. Sufficient data to enable the City Council to make all of the required determinations and findings.

C. A final map which delineates dedications which will not be vacated and dedications which are a condition to reversion or a parcel map in accordance with Section 66499.20 1/4 of the Act for four or less contiguous parcels in the form prescribed by this title, there being no tentative map required.

D. Evidence of the consent of all of the owners of an interest in the property.

E. Evidence that none of the improvements required to be made have been made within two years from the date the final map or parcel map was filed for record or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is later.

F. Evidence that no lots shown on the final or parcel map have been sold within five years from the date such final or parcel map was filed for record. (Gov. Code § 66499.13)

82.74.030 Procedure.
A. Upon payment of the established fee and the filing of a sufficient petition and proposed map, the Director of Community Development shall prepare a report and submit the matter to the Planning Commission. (Gov. Code § 66499.14)

B. The petition shall be set on the agenda of the Planning Commission for noticed, public hearing. (Gov. Code § 66499.15)

C. The reversion to acreage will be approved only if the Planning Commission makes the findings set forth in Section 66499.16 of the Act.

D. The Planning Commission shall impose the required conditions set forth in Section 66499.17 of the Act. Upon approval of the reversion, the map shall be delivered to the County Recorder for filing.

82.74.040 Appeal of Planning Commission decision.
Within 10 calendar days after the adoption of a resolution approving, denying or conditionally approving the petition, any person affected may appeal the decision to the City Council by filing with the City Clerk a notice of appeal in accordance with Chapter 1.12 CMC. (Ord. 2025 § 15, 2011)

82.74.050 City Council action.
Repealed by Ord. 2025.

Chapter 82.80
Enforcement
Sections:

82.80.010    Requirement.

82.80.020    Lots created prior to March 4, 1972.

82.80.030    Withholding development permits and approvals.

82.80.040    Certificate of compliance.

82.80.050    Notice of violation.

82.80.060    Merger of parcels.

82.80.070    Unmerger of parcels.

82.80.010 Requirement.
The Director of the Department of Community Development shall investigate reported violations of this title and initiate enforcement proceedings as required.

82.80.020 Lots created prior to March 4, 1972.
Any parcel created prior to March 4, 1972, shall be dealt with in accordance with the Act. (Gov. Code § 6412.6)

82.80.030 Withholding development permits and approvals.
In accordance with the Act, the City may deny or conditionally approve the issuance of permits or other approvals necessary to develop real property divided in violation of the provisions of this title or the Act. (Gov. Code § 66499.34)

82.80.040 Certificate of compliance.
A. The City shall issue certificates of compliance in accordance with the Act. (Gov. Code § 66499.35)

B. Upon the payment of a fee established by resolution of the City Council, any person owning real property or a vendee of such owner pursuant to an existing contract of sale may apply to the Director of Engineering Services for determination as to whether such real property complies with the provisions of this title and the Act.

C. The Director of Engineering Services may issue a certificate of compliance and impose conditions in accordance with the Act.

D. A certificate of compliance shall identify the real property involved by reference to a previously recorded final map, parcel map or official map, or, if none, by the concurrent recording of a map.

E. The determination of the Director of Engineering Services shall become final 10 calendar days after the decision unless an appeal is filed.

F. Within 10 calendar days after the decision denying or conditioning an application, the applicant may appeal the decision to the City Council by filing with the City Clerk a notice of appeal in accordance with Chapter 1.12 CMC. (Ord. 2025 §§ 17, 18, 2011; Ord. 1673; Ord. 1658)

82.80.050 Notice of violation.
The City shall record notices of violations in accordance with the Act. (Gov. Code § 66499.36)

82.80.060 Merger of parcels.
The City shall process merger of parcels in accordance with the Act, utilizing the procedures applicable to lot line adjustments. (Gov. Code §§ 66451.10 through 66451.21) (Ord. 1601)

82.80.070 Unmerger of parcels.
The City shall proceed with the unmerger of parcels in accordance with the Act. (Gov. Code §§ 66451.25 through 66451.33) (Ord. 1601)

Title 84
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
Chapters:

84.10    Historic Resource Code

84.20    Historic Alteration and Demolition Permits

Chapter 84.10
HISTORIC RESOURCE CODE
Sections:

84.10.010    Purpose and intent.

84.10.020    Definitions.

84.10.030    Historic resource and Historic District designation criteria.

84.10.040    Historic resource and Historic District determination of historic significance procedures.

84.10.050    Historic resource alterations and demolition criteria.

84.10.060    Reserved.

84.10.070    Reserved.

84.10.080    Reserved.

84.10.090    Historic resource preservation benefits.

84.10.100    Historic Resource Preservation (Mills Act) Agreement procedures.

84.10.110    Ordinary maintenance and repair.

84.10.120    Duty to keep in good repair.

84.10.130    Enforcement.

84.10.010 Purpose and intent.
The City Council finds as a matter of public policy that the identification, designation, recognition, preservation, enhancement, perpetuation and use of improvements, buildings, structures, objects, monuments, sites, places and natural features within the City that reflect special elements of the City’s architectural, artistic, cultural, educational, economic, social, political, engineering, military history, or other heritage are required in the interest of the health, economic prosperity, cultural enrichment and general welfare of the people. The purpose of this chapter is to:

A. Safeguard the heritage of the City and enhance its visual character by providing for the preservation of historic resources representing significant elements of its history;

B. Encourage public knowledge, understanding and appreciation of the City’s past as reflected in such historic resources;

C. Foster civic and neighborhood pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of its past;

D. Preserve and enhance the City’s historical attractions to residents, tourists, and visitors and serve as a support and stimulus to business and industry;

E. Preserve diverse and harmonious architectural styles and design preferences reflecting phases of the City’s history;

F. Enhance property values and increase economic and financial benefits to the City and its residents and property owners through an active historic recognition and benefits program;

G. Identify as early as possible and resolve conflicts between the preservation of cultural resources and alternative land uses; and

H. Enable owners and lessees of such resources to apply for all financing, tax, land use, and code application benefits permitted by law for such designated historic resources. (Ord. 2088 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2029 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2018 § 4 (Att. C), 2010)

84.10.020 Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.

A. “Alteration” means an addition, relocation, demolition or any change affecting the exterior visual qualities of a historic resource including, but not limited to, architectural features, visual characteristics, design and materials, excluding routine maintenance.

B. “Commission” means the Coronado Historic Resource Commission.

C. “Contributing resource” means a historic resource that significantly contributes to the historical nature of a Historic District and satisfies the definition of a historic resource under this chapter.

D. “Demolition” means any act that destroys, in whole or in part, the exterior of a building, structure, or historic resource.

E. “Determination of Historic Significance” means an application submitted in association with a nomination for designation as a historic resource; or, in association with a project that includes demolition of original features visible from the street right-of-way on a structure that is 75 or more years old.

F. “Exterior architectural feature” means the architectural style, design, general arrangement, components, natural features and all the other surfaces of an improvement including, but not limited to, the kind and texture of the building material, colors and finishes, and the type and style of all windows, doors, lights, signs, walls, fences, and other fixtures appurtenant to such improvement.

G. “Facade” means the exterior face of a building which is the architectural front, sometimes distinguished from other faces by elaboration of architectural or ornamental details.

H. “Historic District” means a contiguous geographic area containing a multiple number of historic resources that collectively have a special character or special historical, cultural, architectural, archaeological, community or aesthetic value.

I. “Historic research report” means a report prepared for the City by a third-party historic research consultant providing a complete history of a property and a full analysis of the historic significance of a property per the City’s adopted historic designation criteria.

J. “Historic resource” means an object, building, structure, or site, which is significant in terms of architectural, engineering, scientific, economic, agricultural, educational, social, political, archaeological, military or cultural history and has been designated as such by the City.

K. “Historic resource alteration permit” means a permit approving a proposed alteration to a historic resource or Historic District.

L. “Historic resource inventory” means a list, maintained by the City, of the designated historic resources within Coronado.

M. “Historic Resource Preservation (Mills Act) Agreement” means an agreement executed between the City and a property owner of a historic resource for a minimum 10-year term providing for property tax savings in exchange for preservation of a designated historic resource.

N. “Noncontributing resource” means a historic resource within a Historic District that does not possess the qualifications or characteristics of a contributing resource, but which has been included within the Historic District because of its geographic location within the Historic District.

O. “Notable work” means an important or remarkable example from the body of work of a professional trained as a builder, designer, architect, artisan or landscape professional.

P. “Notice of designation” means the notice filed by the City Clerk of the City of Coronado with the County Recorder’s Office to record the designation of a historic resource or Historic District.

Q. “Preservation” means the identification, study, protection, restoration, rehabilitation or enhancement of a historic resource.

R. “Relocation” means the change of place of any historic resource.

S. “Restoration” means the act or process of accurately recovering the form and details of a property and its setting as it appeared at a particular period of time by means of the removal of later work or by the replacement of missing earlier work. (Ord. 2088 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2029 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2018 § 4 (Att. C), 2010)

84.10.030 Historic resource and Historic District designation criteria.
For the purposes of this chapter, a resource may be designated a historic resource by the Historic Resource Commission, and any area within the City may be designated a Historic District by the Historic Resource Commission, if it meets two or more of the criteria set forth in this section and, additionally, must be at least 75 years old or have achieved historic significance within the past 75 years:

A. It exemplifies or reflects special elements of the City’s military, cultural, social, economic, political, aesthetic, or engineering history;

B. It is identified with a person(s) or an event(s) significant in local, State or national history;

C. It possesses distinctive characteristics of an architectural style, and has not been substantially altered;

D. It is representative of the notable work of a builder, designer, architect, artisan or landscape professional;

E. It has been listed on or formally determined eligible for the California Register, as set forth in Section 5024.1 of the California Public Resources Code (as amended from time to time);

F. In the case of Historic Districts, at least 75 percent of the buildings within the proposed district (excluding accessory buildings) shall be contributing resources. (Ord. 2088 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2029 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2018 § 4 (Att. C), 2010)

84.10.040 Historic resource and Historic District determination of historic significance procedures.
A determination of historic significance application shall be filed with the Community Development Department in association with the nomination of a property as a historic resource; or in association with any project that includes demolition of original features visible from the street right-of-way of any structure that is 75 or more years old.

A. Application.

1. A determination of historic significance application involving private property must include the consent of the property owner.

2. A determination of historic significance application for designation of a Historic District must include the consent of 75 percent of the owners of contributing resources within the boundaries of the district.

3. A determination of historic significance application shall be submitted to the Community Development Department on forms provided by the City of Coronado Community Development Department.

4. A determination of historic significance application fee shall be paid at the time of application submittal in accordance with the Community Development Department Fee Schedule.

5. Upon the determination that a determination of historic significance application is complete, the Community Development Department shall forward the application to an unbiased third-party historic consultant for preparation of a historic research report to be considered by the Historic Resource Commission at a noticed public hearing.

6. Upon receipt of the historic research report from the historic research consultant, the Community Development Department shall set the application for public hearing at the next available Historic Resource Commission meeting.

B. Historic Resource Commission Hearing.

1. The Community Development Department shall provide notice of the date, place, time and purpose of the hearing at least 10 days prior to the date of the public hearing by posting at City Hall, publication once in a newspaper of general, local circulation, and mailing notice through first class mail to the applicant and private owners of the subject property and all property owners within 300 feet of the subject property.

2. The applicant/property owner(s) or applicant/property owner(s) representative shall attend the public hearing.

3. The Historic Resource Commission shall review the application in reference to the definitions and designation criteria set forth in this chapter.

4. Not later than 21 days following the close of a public hearing on any determination of historic significance application, the Historic Resource Commission shall, by resolution, make a determination on historic significance of the property. The resolution shall also recite the reasons and facts for said determination.

5. The decision of the Commission shall become final 10 calendar days after the adoption of the resolution unless a notice of appeal to the City Council is filed with the City Clerk in accordance with Chapter 1.12 CMC.

6. If the property is designated as a historic resource by the Historic Resource Commission or by the City Council upon appeal, the City Clerk shall cause a notice of designation to be recorded in the Office of the County Recorder. (Ord. 2088 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2029 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2025 § 20, 2011; Ord. 2018 § 4 (Att. C), 2010)

84.10.050 Historic resource alterations and demolition criteria.
For the purposes of this chapter, no person shall alter, relocate or demolish a historic resource or contributing resource within a Historic District without first having obtained a historic resource alteration permit in compliance with Chapter 84.20 CMC. (Ord. 2088 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2029 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2018 § 4 (Att. C), 2010)

84.10.060 Reserved.
(Ord. 2088 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2029 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2018 § 4 (Att. C), 2010)

84.10.070 Reserved.
(Ord. 2088 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2029 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2018 § 4 (Att. C), 2010)

84.10.080 Reserved.
(Ord. 2088 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2029 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2018 § 4 (Att. C), 2010)

84.10.090 Historic resource preservation benefits.
An owner of a historic resource is eligible to apply for the preservation benefits identified below:

A. Mills Act. An owner of a historic resource is eligible to apply to the City for a Historic Resource Preservation (Mills Act) Agreement in accordance with the resolution adopted by the City Council.

B. Flexibility in Land Uses and Adaptive Reuse.

1. In any Residential Zone, a historic resource may be used as a residential use, a combined residential and commercial use, solely as a commercial use, or any other use permitted by the City Council through a major special use permit.

2. Property owners of multiple-family dwelling apartment complexes containing three or more dwelling units may, upon successful designation as a historic resource, make application to subdivide said property to condominiums in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 82.40 CMC. Any such application for conversion of a designated historic resource will be exempt from the vacancy factor requirements of CMC 82.40.100(F)(2).

C. Parking Standards. An owner of a historic resource in a Residential Zone is eligible to apply for a historic resource alteration permit for a waiver or reduction in the number of required parking spaces, or modifications to size, location, access or setback requirements for parking.

D. Zoning Regulations. An owner of a historic resource in a Residential Zone is eligible to apply for a historic resource alteration permit to utilize existing building setbacks and building heights when an alteration is proposed to a designated historic resource, and when the proposed alteration would exceed floor area ratio and/or lot coverage standards. Any historic resource alteration permit seeking to utilize existing building setbacks and building heights or exceed floor area ratio or lot coverage standards requires City Council approval in accordance with CMC 84.20.090(G).

E. Building Permit Fees. An owner of a historic resource shall be exempt from building permit fees with the exception of direct costs the City incurs through the plan check process (i.e., consultant plan check fees) for resources identified on the historic resource inventory.

F. Planning Application Fees. An owner of a historic resource shall be exempt from planning application fees with the exception of environmental consultant fees for resources identified on the historic resource inventory.

G. Density Bonus. An owner of a historic resource in a Residential Zone is eligible to apply for a historic resource alteration permit for a density bonus. A density bonus would allow an increase in the number of dwelling units that would normally be permitted in the underlying zone. The density bonus is only allowed within an existing historic resource. Any historic resource alteration permit seeking to utilize a density bonus requires City Council approval in accordance with CMC 84.20.090(G).

H. Building Code Deviations. All repairs, alterations, restoration, or changes in use of historic resources in a Historic District may utilize and conform to the Standards of the California Historical Building Code as an alternative to complying with building standards set forth in Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.

I. Design Review Exemption. A property listed on the historic resource inventory that would normally be subject to the Design Review Commission process as specified in CMC Title 80 shall be exempt.

J. Official Recognition. An owner of a historic resource identified on the historic resource inventory shall receive a special designation plaque for the historic resource.

K. Financial Benefits. An owner of a historic resource is eligible to apply for local, State and national financial benefits. The Historic Resource Commission shall develop and recommend to the City Council from time to time certain economic and other benefits to support the preservation, maintenance and appropriate rehabilitation of historic resources. (Ord. 2088 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2029 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2018 § 4 (Att. C), 2010)

84.10.100 Historic Resource Preservation (Mills Act) Agreement procedures.
A. Prior to submitting an application for a Historic Resource Preservation (Mills Act) Agreement, the owner shall schedule a pre-application review conference with the City. The purpose of the pre-application review conference is to ensure that mandatory terms of the Agreement are understood and that the minimum submittal requirements are met.

B. Once an application has been determined to be complete, the City staff shall forward it to the Historic Resource Commission for review at a noticed public hearing. The Historic Resource Commission shall consider the proposed list of improvements, make recommendations for amendments to said list, and shall make a recommendation to the City Council regarding the proposed list of improvements, and on approval or denial of the Mills Act Agreement.

C. Following receipt of the Historic Resource Commission recommendation, the City Council shall consider the Historic Resource Preservation (Mills Act) Agreement, along with the list of recommended improvements, at a noticed public hearing. The City Council will be provided with information regarding the estimated fiscal impact on City funds with the Agreement request along with information identifying the estimated cumulative impact on City funds with the addition of a new Historic Resource Preservation Agreement.

D. After completion of the public hearing, the City Council shall either approve, conditionally approve, or deny the request.

E. Once the Historic Resource Preservation Agreement has been approved by the City Council, the Agreement shall be executed by the property owner(s) and the City. No later than 20 days after the Agreement is properly executed, the City Clerk shall forward the Agreement to the County Recorder’s Office for recording. In accordance with State law, no properly executed Mills Act Agreement may take effect until it has been recorded and submitted to the County Tax Assessor’s Office. All approved Agreements must be executed on or before December 31st of each year in order to take effect for the following property tax year.

F. The Mills Act Program Agreements shall be administered as set forth in Sections 50280 et seq. of the Government Code and Sections 439.2 et seq. of the Revenue and Taxation Code. (Ord. 2088 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2029 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2018 § 4 (Att. C), 2010)

84.10.110 Ordinary maintenance and repair.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior elements of a historic resource that does not involve a change in design, material or appearance unless specified in a historic designation resolution. (Ord. 2088 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2029 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2018 § 4 (Att. C), 2010)

84.10.120 Duty to keep in good repair.
The owner, occupant or other person in actual charge of a historic resource, or historic resource(s) located within a Historic District, shall keep in good repair the exterior portions of all such historic resource(s), and interior components thereof whose maintenance is necessary to prevent deterioration and decay of any exterior element of a historic resource(s). (Ord. 2088 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2029 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2018 § 4 (Att. C), 2010)

84.10.130 Enforcement.
Enforcement of this chapter shall be as set forth in Chapter 86.54 CMC. (Ord. 2088 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2029 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2018 § 4 (Att. C), 2010)

Chapter 84.20
HISTORIC ALTERATION AND DEMOLITION PERMITS
Sections:

84.20.010    Intent and purpose.

84.20.020    Definitions.

84.20.030    Reserved.

84.20.040    Reserved.

84.20.050    Reserved.

84.20.060    Reserved.

84.20.070    Reserved.

84.20.080    Historic resource alterations and demolition criteria.

84.20.090    Historic resource alteration permit procedures.

84.20.100    Exception to denial.

84.20.110    Emergency historic resource alteration permits.

84.20.120    Reserved.

84.20.130    Ordinary maintenance and repair.

84.20.140    Duty to keep in good repair.

84.20.150    Enforcement.

84.20.160    Violations – Public nuisances.

84.20.170    Penalty for violations.

84.20.180    Expiration of historic resource alteration permit approval.

84.20.010 Intent and purpose.
This chapter is adopted to assure the preservation and enhancement of the City of Coronado’s historical and cultural heritage by preserving, rehabilitating or restoring, whenever possible, buildings or structures which have distinctive architectural features or historical associations that contribute to the historic fabric of the City. (Ord. 2088 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2029 § 2, 2011; Ord. 2018 § 4 (Att. C), 2010)

84.20.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases have the following meanings:

A. “Alteration” means an addition, relocation, demolition or any change affecting the exterior visual qualities of a historic resource including, but not limited to, architectural features, visual characteristics, design and materials, excluding routine maintenance.

B. “Commission” means the Coronado Historic Resource Commission.

C. “Demolition” means any act that destroys, in whole or in part, the exterior of a building, structure, or designated historic resource.

D. “Demolition permit” means any permit issued by the Community Development Department which authorizes the total or partial demolition of a building or structure (excluding interior demolition).

E. “Emergency historic alteration permit” means a permit issued by the Building Official where such alteration is shown to be immediately necessary to protect the public safety or for preservation of a historic resource.

F. “Historic resource” means an object, building, structure, or site, which is significant in terms of architectural, engineering, scientific, economic, agricultural, educational, social, political, archaeological, military or cultural history and has been designated as such by the City.

G. “Secretary of the Interior’s Standards” means standards that provide guidance for preservation, rehabilitation, restoration and reconstruction of historic resources, established by the National Park Service and used by the City of Coronado as standards for approval of alterations to Historic Resources. (Ord. 2088 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2029 § 2, 2011; Ord. 2018 § 4 (Att. C), 2010)

84.20.030 Reserved.
(Ord. 2088 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2029 § 2, 2011; Ord. 2018 § 4 (Att. C), 2010)

84.20.040 Reserved.
(Ord. 2088 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2029 § 2, 2011; Ord. 2018 § 4 (Att. C), 2010)

84.20.050 Reserved.
(Ord. 2088 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2029 § 2, 2011; Ord. 2025 § 22, 2011; Ord. 2018 § 4 (Att. C), 2010)

84.20.060 Reserved.
(Ord. 2088 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2029 § 2, 2011; Ord. 2018 § 4 (Att. C), 2010)

84.20.070 Reserved.
(Ord. 2088 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2029 § 2, 2011; Ord. 2018 § 4 (Att. C), 2010)

84.20.080 Historic resource alterations and demolition criteria.
For the purposes of this chapter, no person shall alter, relocate or demolish a historic resource or contributing resource within a Historic District without first having obtained a historic resource alteration permit; unless where such alteration is shown to be immediately necessary to protect the public safety or the preservation of a historic resource, the Building Official may issue an emergency historic resource alteration permit as specified in this chapter. The Historic Resource Commission, or the City Council, may issue a historic resource alteration permit when the findings required herein are made.

A. Any proposed alteration shall require the following findings:

1. The proposed alteration is consistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter, the Historic Preservation Element and the General Plan.

2. The proposed alteration will not adversely affect the historical, architectural or aesthetic value of the historic resource.

3. The proposed alteration will retain the essential elements that make the historic resource significant.

4. The proposed alteration will not adversely affect the historic resource’s relationship to its surroundings and neighboring historic resources.

5. The proposed alteration will comply with the Secretary of the Interior’s standards as set forth in Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966. In the case of a proposed alteration on property located within a Historic District, the alteration does not adversely affect the character of the Historic District.

B. Any proposed relocation or demolition shall require one or more of the following findings:

1. The proposed action is necessary to provide a public use which will be of more benefit to the public than the historic resource, and there is no feasible alternative location for the public use; or

2. The proposed relocation is necessary to protect the historic resource and can be accomplished without significant damage to its physical integrity or historical value; or

3. The proposed demolition is necessary to protect the public health and safety, and repair or stabilization will not correct the hazardous condition; or

4. The property owner has demonstrated that a thorough analysis has been undertaken for viable options for the preservation of the structure including, but not limited to, relocation, alternative land uses, increased densities within the existing building, restoration, facade easements, and potential buyers through advertisement in historic journals and magazines but there does not appear to be a solution and has resulted in considerable financial hardship to the property owner; or

5. The proposed action will not detract from or adversely affect the character of the Historic District. (Ord. 2088 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2029 § 2, 2011; Ord. 2018 § 4 (Att. C), 2010)

84.20.090 Historic resource alteration permit procedures.
A. An application for a historic resource alteration permit shall be filed with the Community Development Department on forms provided by the City of Coronado Community Development Department. Upon determination of the application’s completeness, the request shall be set for public hearing before the Historic Resource Commission at the next available meeting.

B. The Community Development Department shall provide notice of the historic resource alteration permit request by providing notice of the date, place, time and purpose of the hearing at least 10 days prior to the date of the public hearing by posting at City Hall, publication once in a newspaper of general, local circulation, and mailing notice through first class mail to the applicant and private owner(s) of the historic resource(s) and property owners within 300 feet.

C. The applicant/property owner(s) or applicant/property owner(s)’s representative shall attend the public hearing.

D. The Historic Resource Commission shall review the application in reference to the definitions and alteration, relocation, or demolition criteria set forth in this chapter.

E. Not later than 21 days following the close of a public hearing on any historic resource alteration permit request, the Historic Resource Commission shall, by resolution, approve, conditionally approve or deny the request. The resolution shall also recite the reasons and facts for said determination.

F. Except as otherwise provided in subsection G of this section, the decision of the Commission shall become final 10 calendar days after the adoption of the resolution unless a notice of appeal to the City Council is filed with the City Clerk in accordance with Chapter 1.12 CMC.

G. Any historic resource alteration permit application submitted to the City for historic resource preservation benefits as outlined in either CMC 84.10.090(D) or (G) shall follow the procedures set forth in subsections A through E of this section; provided, however, that the decision of the Historic Resource Commission to grant the permit shall only be a recommendation to the City Council. The City Council shall review the Commission’s recommendation at a noticed public hearing as described in subsection B of this section. The City Council shall approve the historic resource alteration permit if it conforms to all the requirements of this title. (Ord. 2088 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2029 § 2, 2011; Ord. 2025 § 24, 2011; Ord. 2018 § 4 (Att. C), 2010)

84.20.100 Exception to denial.
Notwithstanding the failure to satisfy the criteria for the issuance of a historic resource alteration permit, the Commission, or City Council on appeal, may issue a permit with written findings that demonstrates that denial of the permit will result in an immediate and substantial hardship on the applicant because of conditions peculiar to the applicant, the owner of the property, attendant or resident, or because of conditions peculiar to the historic resource. (Ord. 2088 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2029 § 2, 2011; Ord. 2018 § 4 (Att. C), 2010)

84.20.110 Emergency historic resource alteration permits.
The Building Official may issue an emergency historic resource alteration permit when a condition or proposed alteration is shown to be immediately necessary to protect the public safety (due to an unsafe or dangerous condition) or the preservation of a historic resource as determined by the Building Official and Fire Marshal. The emergency permit shall be documented by a written report and photographs describing the emergency condition necessitating the permit. The emergency historic resource alteration permit and supporting documentation shall be forwarded to the Historic Resource Commission for review at a noticed public hearing within two weeks of the permit issuance or as soon thereafter as possible. (Ord. 2088 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2029 § 2, 2011; Ord. 2018 § 4 (Att. C), 2010)

84.20.120 Reserved.
(Ord. 2088 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2029 § 2, 2011; Ord. 2018 § 4 (Att. C), 2010)

84.20.130 Ordinary maintenance and repair.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior elements of a resource that does not involve a change in design, material or appearance unless specified in a historic designation resolution. (Ord. 2088 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2029 § 2, 2011; Ord. 2018 § 4 (Att. C), 2010)

84.20.140 Duty to keep in good repair.
The owner, occupant or other person in actual charge of a historic resource, or historic resource(s) located within a Historic District, shall keep in good repair the exterior portions of all such historic resource(s), and interior components thereof whose maintenance is necessary to prevent deterioration and decay of any exterior element of the historic resource(s). (Ord. 2088 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2029 § 2, 2011; Ord. 2018 § 4 (Att. C), 2010)

84.20.150 Enforcement.
All department heads, officials or other employees of the City vested with the duty or authority to issue any permit, license or certificate shall conform to the provisions of this chapter, and shall issue no permit, license or certificate for demolition or alteration of residential historic resources or potential historic resources in conflict with the provisions contained in this chapter, and any such permit, license or certificate so issued, intentionally or otherwise, shall be null and void. It shall be the duty of the Director of Community Development to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2088 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2029 § 2, 2011; Ord. 2018 § 4 (Att. C), 2010)

84.20.160 Violations – Public nuisances.
Any building or structure altered or demolished contrary to the provisions of this chapter and any use of any land, building or premises established, conducted, operated or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be, and same are hereby declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance; and the City Attorney shall immediately take actions or proceedings for the abatement and removal and enjoinment therein in the manner provided by law, and shall take such steps and shall apply to such courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate and remove such alteration, structure or use, and restrain and enjoin any person, firm or corporation from altering, demolishing, or using such building, structure or property contrary to the provisions of this chapter including, but not limited to, the requirement that the owner return the building, structure or property to the same condition that it was in prior to demolition or alteration. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. (Ord. 2088 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2029 § 2, 2011; Ord. 2018 § 4 (Att. C), 2010)

84.20.170 Penalty for violations.
Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee, contractor, employer or otherwise, who violates or causes the violation of any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, except that, notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, any such violation constituting a misdemeanor under this chapter may, in the discretion of the attorney having prosecutorial functions, be charged and prosecuted as an infraction. (Ord. 2088 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2029 § 2, 2011; Ord. 2018 § 4 (Att. C), 2010)

84.20.180 Expiration of historic resource alteration permit approval.
Approval of a historic alteration permit shall expire within three years of the date of final City approval if substantial work on the project has not commenced, unless the permit has been extended pursuant to this section. Upon written request from the applicant, the Director of Community Development may grant or extend an approval up to an additional year. Upon written request from the applicant, the Historic Resource Commission may grant or extend an approval for more than one additional year, if the Commission’s motion or resolution incorporates a finding regarding the ongoing nature of the project, and specifically states the duration of the approval. (Ord. 2088 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2030 § 1, 2012)

Title 86
ZONING
Chapters:

86.02    General Provisions

86.04    Definitions

86.06    Zone Classifications

86.08    R-1A – Single-Family Residential Zone

86.09    R-1A(BF) – Single-Family Residential Bay Front Subzone

86.10    R-1B – Single-Family Residential Zone

86.14    R-3 – Multiple-Family Residential Zone

86.16    R-4 – Multiple-Family Residential Zone

86.18    R-5 – Multiple-Family Residential Zone

86.20    R-SCD – Residential-Special Care Development Zone

86.22    C – Commercial Zone

86.24    P – Parking Overlay Zone

86.26    Repealed

86.28    C-R – Commercial Recreation Zone

86.32    H-M – Hotel-Motel Zone

86.36    C-U – Civic Use Zone

86.37    Civic Use Overlay Zone

86.38    OS – Open Space Zone

86.39    TOZ – Tidelands Overlay Zone

86.42    R-PCD – Residential, Planned Community Development Zone

86.44    S-H – Scenic Highway Overlay Zone

86.46    PCD – Planned Community Development Overlay Zone

86.48    MZ – Military Zone

86.50    Nonconforming Uses and Structural Nonconformities

86.52    Variances

86.53    Density Bonus for Affordable Housing Developments

86.54    Administration and Enforcement

86.55    Special Use Permits

86.56    Special Provisions

86.58    Off-Street Parking

86.60    Signs

86.64    WP – Wildlife Preserve Zone (Modifying Overlay Zone)

86.70    Coastal Permits

86.72    Diking, Dredging, Filling and Dredge Spoils Disposal

86.74    Waterfront Development

86.76    Protection of Natural Ocean and Bay Processes

86.78    Transient Occupancy

86.80    Prohibition of Commercial Marijuana Activity Uses

Chapter 86.02
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

86.02.010    Citation.

86.02.020    Purpose.

86.02.030    To implement General Plan.

86.02.040    Application and interpretation.

86.02.050    Permitted uses only.

86.02.060    Height limits.

86.02.070    Open space – Encroachment.

86.02.080    Open space – Other building.

86.02.090    Yards – Obstructions.

86.02.100    School, church, institution.

86.02.110    Manufacturing or Commercial Zones – Allowing nonprincipal or nonaccessory uses.

86.02.115    Zoning walls.

86.02.120    Determination of use.

86.02.124    Determination of development.

86.02.128    Interpretation.

86.02.130    Lot size reduction.

86.02.140    Repealed.

86.02.150    Repealed.

86.02.160    Coastal permit.

86.02.180    Fees and deposits.

86.02.010 Citation.
This title shall be known as the “zoning regulations of the City of Coronado” and may be cited as such, or as the “zoning ordinances” and will be referred to hereinafter as “this title,” and sections or portions hereinafter referred to shall refer to sections, chapters, or portions of this title unless otherwise specifically identified. (Ord. 1791)

86.02.020 Purpose.
This title is hereby adopted to regulate the use of buildings, structures and land as between industry, business, residents and open space; to regulate the location, height, bulk, number of stories and size of buildings and structures; the size and use of lots, yards, courts and other open spaces; the percentage of a lot which may be occupied by a building or structure; the intensity of land use; and to establish requirements for off-street parking and loading; to establish and maintain building setback lines; to provide for the request and disposition of zone boundaries; and further, to otherwise implement the adopted General Plan of the City to serve and protect the public health, welfare and general safety of the citizens of Coronado pursuant to applicable provisions of laws of the State of California. (Gov. Code § 65000 et seq.; Gov. Code § 65850 et seq.)

86.02.030 To implement General Plan.
It is also intended that the adoption of this title will implement a substantial portion of the adopted General Plan of the City of Coronado; that the adoption of this title is deemed to be one of several formal actions necessary to preserve and improve Coronado as a beautiful, pleasant, residential community in which to live, work, shop, and pursue leisure time activities; that the adoption of this title is deemed to be necessary in carrying out the total community growth objectives, residential development objectives, commercial development objectives, service development objectives, community facilities objective and the circulation system objectives of the adopted General Plan; that the adoption of this title does not restrict the desirability or necessity of amending the General Plan and the provisions of this title related to the General Plan amendments, from time to time and as the situation may warrant, to ensure consistency between the General Plan and the provisions of this title. (Gov. Code § 65300)

86.02.040 Application and interpretation.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this title, the Department and the Commission shall construe the provisions to be minimum requirements. Where this title imposes greater restrictions than are imposed or required by other rules, regulations or ordinances, the provisions of this title shall control.

86.02.050 Permitted uses only.
Except as otherwise expressly provided pursuant to other provisions of this title, no building or part thereof or other structure shall be erected, altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any land, building, structure or premises be used, designated or intended to be used for any purpose or in any manner other than is included among the uses hereinafter listed as permitted in the zoning district in which such building, land or premises is located.

86.02.060 Height limits.
Except as otherwise expressly provided pursuant to other provisions of this title, no building or part thereof or structure shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed in height the limit hereinafter designated for the district in which such building is located.

86.02.070 Open space – Encroachment.
Except as otherwise expressly provided pursuant to other provisions of this title, no building or part thereof or structure shall be erected, nor shall any existing building be altered, enlarged or rebuilt or moved into any district, nor shall any open space be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in conformity to the yard, building site area, and building location regulations hereinafter designated for the district in which such building or open space is located.

86.02.080 Open space – Other building.
Except as otherwise expressly provided pursuant to other provisions of this title, no yard or other open space provided about any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this title shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building, and no yard or other open space on one building site shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for a building on any other building site.

86.02.090 Yards – Obstructions.
Except as otherwise expressly provided pursuant to other provisions of this title, every required front, side or rear yard shall be open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky.

86.02.100 School, church, institution.
Except as otherwise expressly provided pursuant to provisions of this title, in any R Zone, no building shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered or used for a school, church, institution or other regulations of this title, unless such buildings are removed at least 15 feet from every boundary line of a property included in any R Zone; and provided, that no front yard, as required in the zone, nor any side yard as required above, shall be used for recreation or parking purposes.

86.02.110 Manufacturing or Commercial Zones – Allowing nonprincipal or nonaccessory uses.
Except as otherwise expressly provided pursuant to other provisions of this title, where a use is not specifically contained in the list of principal or accessory uses allowed in any Commercial or Manufacturing Zone, but is of the same character and intensity as other uses listed, the Planning Commission may allow the establishment of that use, upon request, provided the Commission makes the following determinations:

A. That the establishment of the use will be in accordance with the purposes of the zone in which it is proposed.

B. That the use will be an appropriate addition to the zone because the use possesses the same basic characteristics as the permitted uses in the zone.

C. That the use will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare.

D. That the use will not create more traffic, odor, dust, dirt, smoke, noise, vibration, glare, illumination, unsightliness, or any other objectionable influence than the amount normally created by any of the uses permitted in the zone.

86.02.115 Zoning walls.
A. “Zoning wall” means a required wall providing a relatively substantial separation of one land use from another more intensive or noxious land use.

B. A 10-foot high (or less) solid masonry zoning wall (or fence) may be required to be erected to separate any Commercial Zone or use from an adjoining Residential Zone or use as a condition precedent to granting of a special use permit, variance, coastal permit, or subdivision map. (Ord. 1717)

86.02.120 Determination of use.
A. A determination of whether a particular use is within the scope of permitted uses and allowable accessory uses in a particular zone shall constitute a “determination of use.”

B. A person with an interest in real property located within a particular zone who intends to develop such real property with a use not expressly allowed in such zone shall be entitled to apply to the Planning Commission for a determination of use.

C. Upon the making of the application and the payment of fees set by resolution of the City Council, the Planning Commission shall set a public hearing and publish notice at least 10 days prior to such hearing indicating the property, zone and particular use designated in the application.

D. The determination of use by the Planning Commission shall become final and thereafter control development within the particular zone unless the determination of use is appealed to the City Council in accordance with Chapter 1.12 CMC. (Ord. 2025 § 26, 2011; Ord. 1525; Ord. 1408)

86.02.124 Determination of development.
A. A determination of whether a particular project complies with the development standards applicable to the particular project shall constitute a “determination of development standards.”

B. A determination of development standards rendered by the Director of Community Development or authorized representative may be appealed to the Planning Commission for determination. The appeal must be filed within 10 calendar days of such determination.

C. Upon application, the Planning Commission shall make a determination of development standards which shall become final and thereafter govern the particular project unless the determination is appealed to the City Council in accordance with Chapter 1.12 CMC.

D. A determination of development standards shall not substitute for an application to the board of appeals for relief from applicable minimum construction standards prescribed by the Uniform Building Code. (Ord. 2025 § 28, 2011; Ord. 1525)

86.02.128 Interpretation.
A. When, in the opinion of the Director of Community Development, it becomes necessary for the City of Coronado to render an administrative interpretation of the provisions or terms of this title, the Director of Community Development may cause a noticed, public hearing to be conducted by the Planning Commission.

B. After hearing, the Planning Commission may render an interpretation which shall thereafter control development with the City unless an appeal is filed to the City Council with the City Clerk in accordance with Chapter 1.12 CMC. (Ord. 2025 § 30, 2011; Ord. 1525)

86.02.130 Lot size reduction.
Except as otherwise expressly provided pursuant to other provisions of this title, no lot shall be reduced in size where the area of such lot is no greater than the minimum area required for a lot in the zone in which it is located except when such reduction results from partial acquisition for public use.

86.02.140 Repealed.
Repealed by Ord. 1809.

86.02.150 Repealed.
Repealed by Ord. 1809.

86.02.160 Coastal permit.
Except as otherwise expressly provided pursuant to other provisions of this title, no activity requiring a coastal permit (as explained in Chapter 86.70 CMC) shall be allowed to occur prior to coastal permit approval (including the expiration of all permit appeal deadlines) unless the City Manager (or his duly appointed agent) rules that an emergency situation exists that is an immediate significant threat to life, health or property, and that such preventive or ameliorative activities are necessary to adequately address the emergency situation. (Ord. 1534)

86.02.180 Fees and deposits.
Prior to the processing of any planning-related application, permit, plan check or other related service, the applicant shall pay to the City a fee/deposit equal to the estimated cost of processing said service. The City Council shall adopt by resolution a “planning fee schedule” to recover the cost for providing said planning-related services. The “planning fee schedule” shall list the “standard fee” (as provided for in Chapter 8.02 CMC) or the deposit amount in the amount that is estimated to be the reasonable cost borne by the City or its designated contractors for each service. The “planning fee schedule” may be revised from time to time by Council resolution. The “planning fee schedule” is on file in the Office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 1808)

Chapter 86.04
DEFINITIONS
Sections:

86.04.010    General.

86.04.015    Officials, departments and commissions.

86.04.020    Definitions.

86.04.025    Abatement.

86.04.030    Abatement period.

86.04.035    Abut.

86.04.040    Access.

86.04.045    Accessory building or structure.

86.04.050    Accessory dwelling unit or ADU.

86.04.055    Accessory use.

86.04.060    Act of God.

86.04.065    Addition.

86.04.070    Adjacent.

86.04.075    Adjoining.

86.04.077    Adult video cassette activities.

86.04.080    Alley.

86.04.085    Alteration.

86.04.087    Amusement device.

86.04.088    Amusement device center.

86.04.090    Apartment complex.

86.04.093    Aquaculture.

86.04.094    Architectural projection.

86.04.095    Attic.

86.04.110    Automobile service station.

86.04.112    Bay, bow, or garden window.

86.04.115    Bench.

86.04.120    Block.

86.04.125    Block face.

86.04.128    Boarding house.

86.04.130    Boat trailer.

86.04.135    Building.

86.04.140    Building bulk or building volume.

86.04.150    Building, enclosed.

86.04.153    Building envelope.

86.04.155    Building height.

86.04.160    Building, main.

86.04.165    Building Official.

86.04.170    Building or structure, permanent.

86.04.175    Building separation, space between buildings.

86.04.180    Building valuation.

86.04.185    Business or commerce.

86.04.190    Camp car.

86.04.195    Camper.

86.04.197    Carriage house.

86.04.200    Church.

86.04.205    City.

86.04.210    City Council or Council.

86.04.213    Clubs and lodges.

86.04.215    Cluster house.

86.04.216    Combined use development.

86.04.217    Commercial condominium complex.

86.04.218    Commercial vehicle.

86.04.220    Commission.

86.04.225    Community Development Department.

86.04.230    Contiguous.

86.04.235    Convalescent hospital.

86.04.240    Court.

86.04.245    Daylight plane.

86.04.250    Day nursery.

86.04.255    Department.

86.04.257    Dormer.

86.04.260    Driveway.

86.04.265    Duplex.

86.04.270    Dwelling, multiple-family.

86.04.280    Dwelling, single-family.

86.04.285    Dwelling unit.

86.04.286    Facade.

86.04.287    Facade plane offset.

86.04.288    False mansard.

86.04.290    Family.

86.04.295    Repealed.

86.04.300    Fire escape.

86.04.305    Fixed seat.

86.04.307    Floor area equivalent.

86.04.308    Floor area ratio or FAR.

86.04.309    Formula business.

86.04.310    Frontage.

86.04.315    General Plan.

86.04.318    Grade.

86.04.320    Gross floor area.

86.04.325    Gross lot area.

86.04.330    Guest.

86.04.335    Habitable room.

86.04.337    Habitable unit.

86.04.340    Hearing.

86.04.345    Home for the aged.

86.04.350    Home occupation.

86.04.355    Hospital.

86.04.360    Hotel.

86.04.365    Improved land.

86.04.370    Industry.

86.04.375    Inoperable motor vehicle.

86.04.380    Inoperable vehicle.

86.04.385    Junkyard.

86.04.390    Kennel.

86.04.395    Kitchen or kitchenette.

86.04.400    Landscape accessory structures, height of.

86.04.403    Landscaping.

86.04.406    Legal nonconforming.

86.04.410    Loading space.

86.04.412    Lodging house.

86.04.415    Lot.

86.04.420    Lot, corner.

86.04.425    Lot coverage.

86.04.430    Lot, depth of.

86.04.435    Lot, interior.

86.04.440    Lot line, front.

86.04.445    Lot line, interior.

86.04.447    Lot line, northerly side.

86.04.450    Lot line, rear.

86.04.455    Lot line, reversed corner.

86.04.460    Lot lines.

86.04.465    Lot line, side.

86.04.467    Lot line, southerly side.

86.04.470    Lot line, street or alley.

86.04.473    Lot, panhandle.

86.04.475    Lot, through.

86.04.480    Lot width.

86.04.482    Manufactured housing.

86.04.485    Massage.

86.04.490    Massage establishment.

86.04.491    Medical clinic.

86.04.492    Mezzanine or mezzanine floor.

86.04.493    Mixed use development.

86.04.495    Mobile home.

86.04.500    Modifying or overlay zone.

86.04.505    Motel.

86.04.510    Reserved.

86.04.515    Net floor area.

86.04.520    Reserved.

86.04.530    Nonconforming use.

86.04.535    Nursery school.

86.04.540    Nursing home.

86.04.543    Nursing unit.

86.04.545    Office.

86.04.550    Open space.

86.04.553    Parapet.

86.04.555    Parcel.

86.04.557    Parking allocation credit.

86.04.560    Parking, covered and enclosed.

86.04.563    Parking, open and unenclosed.

86.04.565    Parking, off-street.

86.04.570    Parking, on-street.

86.04.575    Parking space.

86.04.580    Parking space, confined.

86.04.585    Parking stall depth or length.

86.04.590    Parking, tandem.

86.04.595    Parking, valet.

86.04.600    Patio.

86.04.615    Plant nursery.

86.04.617    Porch.

86.04.618    Porte-cochere.

86.04.620    Premises.

86.04.625    Preschool.

86.04.630    Prezoning.

86.04.635    Profession or professional.

86.04.645    Public hearing.

86.04.650    Quasi-public.

86.04.655    Rear side property line.

86.04.660    Resident.

86.04.661    Residential care facility.

86.04.662    Residential care facility, large.

86.04.663    Residential condominium complex.

86.04.665    Residential density.

86.04.670    Restaurant.

86.04.672    Restaurant, drive-thru.

86.04.673    Restaurant, fast food.

86.04.674    Restaurant, formula fast food.

86.04.675    Restaurant, full service.

86.04.680    Rest home.

86.04.685    Roof.

86.04.687    Roof pitch or slope.

86.04.690    Sanatorium.

86.04.695    Schools, elementary, junior high and high.

86.04.700    Semi-public.

86.04.705    Setback.

86.04.710    Reserved.

86.04.713    Skilled nursing facility.

86.04.717    Shelter, emergency.

86.04.720    Single-room occupancy unit.

86.04.725    Specialty shop.

86.04.730    State.

86.04.735    Store.

86.04.740    Story.

86.04.750    Street.

86.04.755    Structural alteration.

86.04.760    Structural coverage.

86.04.763    Structural nonconformity.

86.04.765    Structure.

86.04.767    Structure height.

86.04.768    Supportive housing.

86.04.770    Tourist.

86.04.780    Trailers.

86.04.785    Transient.

86.04.790    Transient occupant.

86.04.793    Transitional housing.

86.04.795    Traveler.

86.04.800    Travel trailer.

86.04.802    Uncovered.

86.04.803    Unenclosed.

86.04.805    Unimproved land.

86.04.810    Vacant premises.

86.04.815    Variance.

86.04.820    Wall.

86.04.830    Zone.

86.04.835    Zoning map.

86.04.010 General.
Unless the context requires otherwise, the following definitions shall be used in the interpretation and construction of this title, and words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular; the word “building” shall include the word “structure” and the word “shall” is mandatory and not discretionary. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.015 Officials, departments and commissions.
Whenever the following terms are used, it shall mean the corresponding officer, department, council or commission of the City of Coronado, herein referred to as the City, Building Official, City Council or Council, Planning Commission or Commission, Community Development Department or Department, Planning Director, City Attorney, City Engineer, Police Department, Public Services. In each case, the term shall be deemed to include an employee of any such officer or department of the City who is lawfully authorized to perform any duty or exercise any power as his or its representative or agent. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.020 Definitions.
In this title, the definitions set forth in this chapter shall apply. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.025 Abatement.
“Abatement” means the modification or removal of any building, structure or use that causes it to conform with the requirements of this title. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.030 Abatement period.
“Abatement period” means that time span between the official notification to a property owner of the requirement to cease, alter, modify, decrease or remove any building, structure or use that is nonconforming or illegal, and the final date given by which the property owner shall make such change. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.035 Abut.
“Abut” means the same as “adjoining.” (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.040 Access.
“Access” means an opening in a fence, wall or structure, or a walkway or driveway permitting pedestrian or vehicular approach to or within any structure or use. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.045 Accessory building or structure.
“Accessory building or structure” means a structure or building subordinate to the main building on the same lot. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.050 Accessory dwelling unit or ADU.
“Accessory dwelling unit” or “ADU” means an attached or a detached residential dwelling unit which provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons. It shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel as the single-family dwelling is situated. (Ord. 2067 § 5 (Exh. A), 2017)

86.04.055 Accessory use.
“Accessory use” means a use subordinate to the principal use of a building on the same lot, and serving a purpose customarily incidental to the permitted use of the main building. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.060 Act of God.
“Act of God” means a destructive natural event that cannot reasonably be foreseen or prevented. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.065 Addition.
“Addition” means the result of any work that increases the volume of an existing structure or replaces a demolished portion. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.070 Adjacent.
“Adjacent” means two or more lots or parcels of land, buildings or structures that are not in contact with each other but share a common separation composed of another lot, a parcel of land, a building, a structure or a right-of-way. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.075 Adjoining.
“Adjoining” means two or more lots or parcels of land sharing a common boundary line, or two or more structures, buildings or objects in contact with each other. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.077 Adult video cassette activities.
A. “Adult video cassette activity” is a place of business where video cassettes are offered for sale, lease, loan or rent whose dominant theme is the depiction of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.

B. “Specified anatomical areas” means:

1. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitalia, pubic region, anus, mature buttocks, or mature female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or

2. Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.

C. “Specified sexual activities” means:

1. The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitalia, pubic region, anus or female breasts; or

2. Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, sodomy, bestiality, or necrophilia; or

3. Masturbation, actual or simulated; or

4. Erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating, masochism, mutilation, flagellation or the infliction of pain; or

5. Excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (C)(1) through (4) of this section. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.080 Alley.
“Alley” means a public or private way not more than 30 feet wide, which serves only as secondary access to abutting property. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.085 Alteration.
“Alteration” means any work on a structure that does not result in any addition to the structure. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.087 Amusement device.
An “amusement device” is defined as any machine, device or apparatus, the operation or use of which is permitted, controlled, allowed or made possible by the deposit or placing of any coin, plate, disc, slug or key into any slot, crevice or other opening or by the payment of any fee or fees, for use as a game, contest, or amusement of any description, or which may be used for any such game, contest or amusement, and the use or possession of which is not prohibited by any law of the State of California. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.088 Amusement device center.
An “amusement device center” is a commercial establishment that contains five or more “amusement devices.” (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.090 Apartment complex.
“Apartment complex” means a building or a group of buildings on one lot under single ownership, with at least one building containing three or more dwelling units. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.093 Aquaculture.
For the purpose of this title, “aquaculture” is defined as the culture and husbandry of aquatic organisms, including, but not limited to, fish, shellfish, mollusks, crustaceans, kelp, algae, and eel grass. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.094 Architectural projection.
An “architectural projection” is a “bay, bow, or garden window”; a fireplace, chimney, cornice, roof eave, roof gutter and down spout; a sill, window and door awning; and architectural features projecting a maximum of four inches into a required side, front, or rear yard. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.095 Attic.
An “attic” is that part of the interior of a building immediately below a roof, above the ceiling of a story, and within the roof framing. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.110 Automobile service station.
“Automobile service station” means a place where gasoline, or any other motor fuel, lubricating oil or grease for the operation of a motor vehicle is offered for sale to the public and delivered and/or minor repairs are made directly into motor vehicles. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.112 Bay, bow, or garden window.
A “bay, bow, or garden window” is a window which is glazed on at least 60 percent of the total area of the exterior vertical faces and the bottom of the exterior vertical face area is at least 12 inches above the adjacent finished floor level. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.115 Bench.
“Bench” means a fixed seat accommodating two or more persons. One seat is equal to 18 inches of clear bench space. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.120 Block.
“Block” means a tract of land bounded by streets, dead ends of streets, watercourses, large tracts of land in uses such as dedicated parks and golf courses, or a City boundary. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.125 Block face.
“Block face” means all property facing upon one side of a street in a block. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.128 Boarding house.
“Boarding house” means a building containing two or more habitable units with common kitchen and dining facilities. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.130 Boat trailer.
“Boat trailer” means a vehicle designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle for the purpose of transporting a boat, ship or other watercraft. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.135 Building.
“Building” means a permanently located structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or property. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.140 Building bulk or building volume.
“Building bulk” or “building volume” means the total amount of three-dimensional space occupied by a building. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.150 Building, enclosed.
“Enclosed building” means a building whose occupants, animals or property cannot be visually or otherwise exposed to any person off the premises except by the incidental or customary use of doors, windows, or balconies. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.153 Building envelope.
“Building envelope” means the three-dimensional spatial configuration of a building’s volume and mass. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.155 Building height.
“Building height” is the vertical distance above “grade” to one of the following:

A. For all buildings in the R-1A, R-1A(BF), R-1B, R-3 and R-4 Zones: the highest point of the roof, top of parapet wall, guardrail, mechanical equipment or similar feature of a building with a flat, false mansard or sloped roof with a pitch of less than 3:12 and the highest point of a roof’s ridge for roofs with a pitch equal to or greater than 3:12;

B. For all buildings located in zones other than R 1A, R-1A(BF), R-1B, R-3 and R-4 Zones: the average midpoint between the ridge and eave of a sloped roof with a pitch equal to or greater than 3:12 and to the highest point of the roof, top of parapet wall, guardrail, mechanical equipment or similar feature of a building with a flat, false mansard or sloped roof with a pitch less than 3:12. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.160 Building, main.
“Main building” means a building where the principal use of the property occurs. In any residential zone, any dwelling, other than an “accessory dwelling unit,” shall be deemed to be a main building on the property. (Ord. 2067 § 5 (Exh. A), 2017; Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.165 Building Official.
“Building Official” means the Director of Department of Community Development of the City of Coronado. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.170 Building or structure, permanent.
“Permanent building or structure” means a building or structure that conforms to all of the following requirements:

A. Requires a building permit;

B. By construction or design has not been intended to be moved once located;

C. The exterior walls of the building are in continuous contact with the ground or foundation, except where structural supports are required due to special site conditions. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.175 Building separation, space between buildings.
“Building separation, space between buildings” means the horizontal distance between buildings measured from the nearest point of one building wall to the nearest point of another building wall. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.180 Building valuation.
“Building valuation” means the estimated cost to replace the building in kind, based on current replacement costs, as determined by the Building Official. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.185 Business or commerce.
“Business or commerce” means the purchase, sale or other transaction involving the handling or disposition of any article, service, substance or commodity for livelihood or profit; or the management of office buildings, offices, recreational or amusement enterprises; or the maintenance and use of offices, structures and premises by professions and trades rendering services. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.190 Camp car.
“Camp car” means a vehicle with its own motive power and is designed for human habitation. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.195 Camper.
“Camper” means a portable dwelling unit designed to be transported on a motor vehicle. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.197 Carriage house.
“Carriage house” means a two-story “accessory building or structure” containing an enclosed garage on the first story and a “habitable unit” on the second story and is detached from the “main building.” (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.200 Church.
“Church” means a nonprofit organization, as determined by the Internal Revenue Service, which uses buildings, structures, or land for the teaching or practice of religious doctrine or related social functions. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.205 City.
“City” means the City of Coronado. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.210 City Council or Council.
“City Council” or “Council” means the City Council of the City of Coronado. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.213 Clubs and lodges.
“Clubs and lodges” means institutions promoting good will and support services for its members and one that distributes or is supported by donated funds or member fees and has received a determination letter from the Internal Revenue Service stating that the organization’s income is exempt from taxation. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.215 Cluster house.
“Cluster house” means three or more detached buildings used for dwelling purposes located on a parcel of land and having any yard or court in common. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.216 Combined use development.
“Combined use development” means development of a site in the R-4 Zone in an integrated, compatible and comprehensively planned manner with two or more uses, each of which are permitted in the underlying zone by right or with a special use permit. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.217 Commercial condominium complex.
“Commercial condominium complex” means a building or a group of buildings containing two or more commercial or professional office units, each unit being separately owned, or held by a stock cooperative. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.218 Commercial vehicle.
“Commercial vehicle” means any mode of transportation displaying identification or advertising for the purpose of “business or commerce” as defined by CMC 86.04.185, or that is primarily utilized in the conduct of “business or commerce.” (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.220 Commission.
“Commission” means the Planning Commission of the City of Coronado. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.225 Community Development Department.
“Community Development Department” means the Department of Community Development of the City of Coronado. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.230 Contiguous.
“Contiguous” means the same as “adjoining.” (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.235 Convalescent hospital.
“Convalescent hospital” means any premises with sleeping rooms where persons are lodged and furnished with meals, dietary or nursing care, and may include persons suffering from contagious diseases, mental disease, alcoholism, drug addiction or nonambulatory conditions. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.240 Court.
“Court” means a yard on the same lot with a building which is bounded on two or more sides by the exterior walls of buildings on the same lot. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.245 Daylight plane.
“Daylight plane” means a height limitation that, when combined with the maximum height limit, defines the “building envelope” within which all new structures or additions must be contained. The daylight plane is an inclined plane, beginning at 18 feet above grade at the side property line, and extending into the site at 45 degrees from the vertical up to the maximum height limit. The daylight plane may further limit the height or horizontal extent of the building at any specific point where the daylight plane is more restrictive than the height limit applicable at such point on the site. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.250 Day nursery.
“Day nursery” means the same as “nursery school.” (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.255 Department.
“Department” means the Community Development Department of the City of Coronado. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.257 Dormer.
“Dormer” means a projecting structure built out from a sloping roof. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.260 Driveway.
“Driveway” means a private road, the use of which is limited to persons residing, employed or otherwise using or visiting the parcel on which located. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.265 Duplex.
“Duplex” means any development with two dwelling units on one lot. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.270 Dwelling, multiple-family.
“Multiple-family dwelling” means an “apartment complex” or a “residential condominium complex” containing three or more dwelling units, or a dwelling unit in one of these types of housing complexes or a development of three or more dwelling units on one lot. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.280 Dwelling, single-family.
“Single-family dwelling” means any building designed for use exclusively as a dwelling unit for one family, except for accessory dwelling units. (Ord. 2067 § 5 (Exh. A), 2017; Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.285 Dwelling unit.
“Dwelling unit” means a habitable unit with a kitchen or kitchenette or cooking facility within the unit. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.286 Facade.
“Facade” means the exterior wall of a building exposed to view from sites not on the same property. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.287 Facade plane offset.
“Facade plane offset” is the intersections of two approximately parallel vertical exterior surfaces of a building with a third (usually short) vertical exterior surface. A facade plane offset forms a stepped building wall, or an indentation in, or a protrusion from, the building wall or veneer. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.288 False mansard.
“False mansard” means a decorative structure at the edge of a building which has a flat roof. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.290 Family.
“Family” means one or more persons, whether or not related by blood, marriage or adoption, sharing a dwelling unit in a living arrangement usually characterized by sharing living expenses, such as rent or mortgage payments, food costs and utilities, as well as maintaining a single lease or rental agreement for all members of the family and other similar characteristics. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.295 Fences, walls and hedges, height of.
Repealed by Ord. 2068. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.300 Fire escape.
“Fire escape” means a ladder or other device designed and intended to furnish an emergency means of escape from a burning building. Fire escapes shall not be considered as a required exit under the Uniform Building Code, and shall be designed so that the lower section would normally be raised aboveground preventing casual use as other than an emergency exit. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.305 Fixed seat.
“Fixed seat” means a chair, stool or other device intended to be sat in or on by not more than one person as part of the principal allowed use of the premises. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.307 Floor area equivalent.
“Floor area equivalent” includes:

A. “Phantom floors,” defined as the area of any portion of a building or enclosed space above an interior height of 14 feet as measured from the floor of the enclosed space.

B. The area of uncovered patios, courtyards, balconies, decks, and other similar areas bounded by walls on three or more sides where more than two of said walls exceed 14 feet above “grade” of which only one story is counted. Such areas are excluded from “floor area equivalent” if the cumulative lot total of such areas is 100 square feet or less, or they face a public street.

C. The area of covered patios, porches, courtyards, balconies, decks and other similar areas unless either:

1. The roof is 65 percent or more permanently open to the passage of light and air to the sky; or

2. At least 50 percent of the perimeter between the floor and the underside of the roof of said area is 65 percent or more permanently open to the passage of light and air.

D.  Attics if any portion of the attic is accessible by permanent stairs and contains an exterior door or roof dormer open to the attic or other opening in the roof surface that admits light into the attic or provides exterior access to or from the attic. If an attic meets these qualifications, 50 percent of the “gross floor area” of the story immediately below the attic shall be considered as “floor area equivalent.”

E. The area of mezzanines and interior balconies.

F. The floor area of second and third story covered balconies or decks which project greater than eight feet from the exterior facade and are enclosed or covered with any material that is less than 100 percent permanently open on the three exterior sides and to the sky. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.308 Floor area ratio or FAR.
“Floor area ratio” or “FAR” is the total of the “gross floor area” plus the “floor area equivalent” of all buildings on a lot divided by the “gross lot area” excluding:

A. A cumulative total of one and one-half percent of lot area with a maximum of 100 square feet within the surrounding exterior walls of fireplaces, chimneys, and “bay, bow, and garden windows” of which 50 percent shall be limited to each “story”;

B. The floor area of underground parking and basements where the finished floor level directly above said area is 30 inches or less above “grade”;

C. For multiple-family or commercial development: the floor area of underground parking, building maintenance facilities or incidental storage designed as an integral part of these two uses where the finished floor level directly above said area is six feet or less above “grade”; and

D. For residential development in all multiple-family residential zones: up to 200 square feet of floor area for a one-car garage and 400 square feet of floor area for a two-car garage, per dwelling, utilized for parking purposes, building maintenance facilities, or incidental storage designed as an integral part of said parking or maintenance facilities. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.309 Formula business.
“Formula business” means any type of commercial business establishment that uses a trademark, logo, service mark or other mutually identifying name or symbol that is shared by 15 or more commercial businesses (other than a “formula fast food restaurant”) and which maintains any standardized (“formula”) array of service and/or merchandise, decor, business method, architecture, layout, uniform, or similar, standardized feature. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.310 Frontage.
“Frontage” means that portion of a lotline adjoining and running parallel to a street or alley. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.315 General Plan.
“General Plan” means the comprehensive declaration of purposes, policies and programs for the development of the City including, where applicable, diagrams, maps, and texts setting forth objectives, principles, standards, and other features, which has been adopted by the City Council and known as the “Coronado General Plan.” (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.318 Grade.
“Grade” is the preexisting or proposed finished ground level, whichever is lower, excluding under-ground basements or underground parking garages and driveways to said garages, in-ground swimming pools, or other unusual topographical features which are not consistent with the natural topography of the site. For portions of the site covered by a structure, “grade” underlying the structure shall be an assumed plane connecting “grade” at each point on the structure’s perimeter. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.320 Gross floor area.
“Gross floor area” is the sum of the area included within the outside of the surrounding exterior walls of a building, fireplace, chimney, bay, bow, and garden window at each floor level. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.325 Gross lot area.
“Gross lot area” means the square footage within the boundary lines of a lot exclusive of: (A) the area of any street right-of-way or vehicle access easement; (B) any flood control easement or walkway which must be fenced; and (C) any portion of the lot which is less than 12 feet wide for a distance of 50 feet or more and which is designated or used to provide vehicular or pedestrian access to the part of such lot that is designed for use as a building site. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.330 Guest.
“Guest” means any person who occupies a dwelling unit or habitable unit with the permission of the owner and/or resident of the property, and who does not provide consideration for such permission. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.335 Habitable room.
“Habitable room” means any structure containing at least 90 square feet of clear floor space (exclusive of fixed or built-in cabinets or appliances) with at least 45 square feet having a minimum ceiling height of seven feet, six inches. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.337 Habitable unit.
“Habitable unit” means one or more connected habitable rooms, not containing kitchen, kitchenette or cooking facilities, but designed for use by a single family as a separate accommodation for living or sleeping purposes. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.340 Hearing.
“Hearing” means any recognition of public appeal, comment, testimony or similar procedure by an authorized commission, committee, council or staff of the City and public notice is not required under the provisions of this title and/or the California Government Code. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.345 Home for the aged.
“Home for the aged” means the same as “nursing home.” (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.350 Home occupation.
“Home occupation” means any conduct for pecuniary gain by an art or profession, the offering of a service or conduct of a business, or handicraft manufacture of products within or from a dwelling in a Residential Zone, which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the structure for a dwelling purpose, and which use does not change the character of the residential use. It is permitted under the regulations of Chapter 20.08 CMC. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.355 Hospital.
“Hospital” means an institution in which patients are given medical or surgical care and which is licensed by the State to use the title “hospital” without qualifying descriptive word. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.360 Hotel.
“Hotel” or “motel” means a building or group of buildings on one site containing two or more habitable or dwelling units available for “transient rental,” which is neither a “boarding house” nor a “lodging house,” and may include such integrated amenities as meeting halls, and dining, retail and recreation facilities. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.365 Improved land.
“Improved land” means a parcel, lot or other land description assessed with an improvement by the San Diego County Assessor and/or which contains structures. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.370 Industry.
“Industry” means the production, processing or servicing of goods by hand or by machinery. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.375 Inoperable motor vehicle.
“Inoperable motor vehicle” means any motor vehicle that is incapable of being transported by its own motive power. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.380 Inoperable vehicle.
“Inoperable vehicle” means any vehicle that is incapable of being transported or carried as designed. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.385 Junkyard.
“Junkyard” means a place where waste, discarded, or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, baled, packed, disassembled, handled, stored or abandoned, including auto wrecking yards, house wrecking yards, used lumberyards and places or yards for storage of salvaged house wrecking materials and equipment, but not including such places where such uses are conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building, and not including pawnshops and establishments for the sale, purchase or storage of used furniture and household equipment when conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building, and not including the sale of used cars in operable condition, or salvaged materials incidental to manufacturing operations. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.390 Kennel.
“Kennel” means any use which involves the temporary or permanent keeping of: four or more dogs, four months in age or older; four or more cats, four months in age or older; or any combination of dogs and cats totaling four or more, four months in age or older. The term “kennel” does not include an animal shelter operated or established by the Department or a veterinary hospital operated by a veterinarian licensed by the State of California. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.395 Kitchen or kitchenette.
“Kitchen” or “kitchenette” means any room or part of a room which is designed, built, used or intended to be used for the preparation of food and contains one or more of the following within said room or part of room:

A. Oven, range top, stove, microwave or other appliance designed to warm or cook food;

B. Dishwasher;

C. Sink greater than two and one-half square feet; or

D. Refrigerator greater than six cubic feet. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.400 Landscape accessory structures, height of.
The “height of landscape accessory structures” and entries such as decks, planters, fountains, arbors, trellises, arches, and similar structures means the vertical distance from the ground level of public property closest to the property line on which such structure is to be built to the highest point on said structure. The height of such structures not adjoining public property shall be measured from the ground level immediately below the structure at any one point – following the contours. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.403 Landscaping.
“Landscaping” means planting (including trees, shrubs, lawn areas (including artificial turf), ground covers, etc., provided either in the ground or in containers) and water features suitably designed, selected, installed and maintained so as to be permanently attractive. Decorative screens, fences, ornamental post lamps, decorative rock or other paved surfaces, decks, fixed seating, fire pits and similar garden hard surface features are considered as elements of landscape development. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.406 Legal nonconforming.
“Legal nonconforming” means that a use or some aspect of a use, lot or building does not conform to the development standards presently in the Municipal Code, but was legally established in accordance with the Municipal Code standards then in effect. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.410 Loading space.
“Loading space” means an off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building, or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of vehicles while loading or unloading merchandise or materials. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.412 Lodging house.
“Lodging house” means a dwelling unit containing common kitchen and dining facilities and two to six habitable units utilized for transient rental. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.415 Lot.
“Lot” means a piece, plot or parcel of land, or assemblage of contiguous parcels of land, as established by survey, plat or deed and occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings, or utilized for a principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with such open space as required by this title, and having frontage on a public or an approved private street or alley. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.420 Lot, corner.
“Corner lot” means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection or upon two parts of the same street, such streets or parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. The point of intersection of the street right-of-way lines is the “corner.” (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.425 Lot coverage.
“Lot coverage” means the total area or percentage of a lot occupied by buildings and/or structures that diminishes the yard and/or court area. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.430 Lot, depth of.
“Depth of lot” means the maximum distance between the center of the front and rear lot lines, or between the center of the front lot line and the center of the calculated rear lot line in accordance with CMC 86.04.450 if there should be no rear lot line. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.435 Lot, interior.
“Interior lot” means a lot other than a corner lot. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.440 Lot line, front.
“Front lot line” means the line separating the lot from the street (or alley if the lot does not front on a street). In the case of a corner lot, the front lot line is the shorter of any two adjoining street lot lines, providing the line is a minimum of 20 feet. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.445 Lot line, interior.
“Interior lot line” means any lot line other than a front or rear lot line which intersects a front or rear lot line. An interior lot line separating a lot from a street is called a side street lot line. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.447 Lot line, northerly side.
“Northerly side lot line” means a “side lot line” which has a compass bearing between north 60 degrees east and south 60 degrees east and is located on the northerly side of the lot. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.450 Lot line, rear.
“Rear lot line” means a lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. For the purpose of establishing the rear lot line of a triangular or trapezoidal lot, or of a lot the rear line of which is formed by two or more lines, the following shall apply:

A. For a triangular, gore-shaped, or irregular-shaped lot, the rear lot line shall be a straight line drawn parallel to the front lot line or parallel to the chord of a curved front lot line, and farthest removed from the front lot line which is 10 feet in length within the lot and intersects two side property lines; or

B. In the case of a trapezoidal or quadrilateral lot, the lot line of which is not parallel to the front lot line, the rear lot line shall be deemed to be the line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line, providing the line is a minimum length, the rear line shall be a line 10 feet in length drawn parallel to but farthest removed from the front lot line; or

C. In the case of a pentagonal lot, the rear boundary of which includes an angle formed by two lines, such angle shall be employed for determining the rear lot line in the same manner as prescribed for triangular lots. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.455 Lot line, reversed corner.
“Reversed corner lot line” means a corner lot the side street line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the lot upon which it rears. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.460 Lot lines.
“Lot lines” mean the property lines bounding the lot. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.465 Lot line, side.
“Side lot line” means the same as “interior lot line.” (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.467 Lot line, southerly side.
“Southerly side lot line” means a “side lot line” which has a compass bearing between north 60 degrees east and south 60 degrees east and is located on the southerly side of the lot. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.470 Lot line, street or alley.
“Street or alley lot line” means a lot line separating the lot from a street or alley. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.473 Lot, panhandle.
“Panhandle lot” means a lot where a portion of the lot is 12 feet or less in width for a distance of 50 feet or more. (Ord. 2068 § 2 (Exh. A), 2017)

86.04.475 Lot, through.
“Through lot” means a lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.480 Lot width.
“Lot width” means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth. For irregular or triangular-shaped lots, the lot width will vary depending upon the point of measurement along the lot depth line. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.482 Manufactured housing.
“Manufactured housing” is a type of housing unit that is largely assembled in factories and then transported to sites of use and installed on a foundation system, pursuant to Section 18551 of the Health and Safety Code, and certified under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5401 et seq.). (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.485 Massage.
“Massage” means any method of treating the external parts of the body by means of pressure on or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, or stimulating the external parts of the body with the hand or other parts of the body, with or without the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliances; or with or without supplementary aids such as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.490 Massage establishment.
“Massage establishment” means any establishment having a fixed place of business where any person, firm, association, partnership or corporation engages in, conducts, or carries on, or permits to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, any business of giving massages. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.491 Medical clinic.
“Medical clinic” is a small-scale facility for diagnosis and treatment of outpatients and does not include overnight stay of patients or ambulance services. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.492 Mezzanine or mezzanine floor.
“Mezzanine” or “mezzanine floor” is an intermediate floor placed within a room as defined and regulated by the California Building Code. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.493 Mixed use development.
“Mixed use development” means the development of a site in an integrated, compatible and comprehensively planned manner with two or more different land uses, only one of which would normally not be permitted in the underlying zone whether by right or with a special use permit. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.495 Mobile home.
“Mobile home” means a vehicle, other than a motor vehicle, designed for human habitation. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.500 Modifying or overlay zone.
“Modifying or overlay zone” means a designation to permit special regulations to be invoked where appropriate or necessary in lieu of or in addition to the regulations of the basic zone with which the modifying or overlay zone is combined. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.505 Motel.
“Motel” or “hotel” means a building or group of buildings on one site containing two or more habitable or dwelling units available for “transient rental,” which neither is a “boarding house” nor a “lodging house,” and may include such integrated amenities as meeting halls, and dining, retail and recreation facilities. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.510 Reserved.
(Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.515 Net floor area.
“Net floor area” means the clear floor space, exclusive of fixed or built-in cabinets or appliances, included with the surrounding exterior walls or a building or portion thereof. The net floor area of a building, or portion thereof, not provided with surrounding exterior walls shall be the clear floor space under the horizontal projection of the roof or floor above. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.520 Reserved.
(Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.530 Nonconforming use.
“Nonconforming use” is defined in CMC 86.50.020. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.535 Nursery school.
“Nursery school” means the supervisory care and educational development of children under the age of 16 for profit or nonprofit and required to be licensed by the State of California Department of Social Services for such purpose. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.540 Nursing home.
“Nursing home” means any premises with sleeping rooms where persons are lodged and furnished with meals, dietary or nursing care, and may include nonambulatory persons but not include persons suffering from contagious disease, mental disease, alcoholism or drug addiction. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.543 Nursing unit.
“Nursing unit” means a habitable room in a skilled nursing facility, not containing a kitchen, kitchenette or cooking facilities, and designed to accommodate three beds or less. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.545 Office.
“Office” means a building, room, or department, wherein a business or service is transacted, but not including the storage or sale of merchandise on the premises as a primary function. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.550 Open space.
“Open space” means any portion of a lot unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.553 Parapet.
“Parapet” means a low wall or railing system at the edge of a roof, porch, or terrace. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.555 Parcel.
“Parcel” means a quantity of land recognized by the San Diego County Assessor as constituting a parcel. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.557 Parking allocation credit.
“Parking allocation credit” means that when a use is proposed to replace an existing use that is legal nonconforming in regard to the number of parking spaces provided, the proposed use need not provide additional parking if it has the same or less parking requirement as the existing use. The parking not actually provided for the use replacing the legal nonconforming use to otherwise comply with the parking standard for the new use is the parking allocation credit. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.560 Parking, covered and enclosed.
“Covered and enclosed parking” means any parking space completely concealed, within walls or doors and a roof, or capable of being concealed within a building or structure such as a totally enclosed garage with operable doors. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.563 Parking, open and unenclosed.
“Open and unenclosed parking” means any parking space which is open on two or more sides with no fence, wall or gate separating the access to the parking space from the alley or street. Group open parking and below grade parking shall qualify as open and unenclosed, and gates or doors on common driveways are permitted. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.565 Parking, off-street.
“Off-street parking” means any parking facility meeting the requirements of this title and not located on a street or alley. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.570 Parking, on-street.
“On-street parking” means any legally authorized parking space located on a street or alley. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.575 Parking space.
“Parking space” means a permanently surfaced area meeting the requirements of this title and located within a structure or in the open, excluding area necessary for access and designed or used for the parking of a motor vehicle. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.580 Parking space, confined.
“Confined parking space” means a parking space abutting a wall or structure on at least one stall side or as determined by the Community Development Department to have special site conditions so as to make parking modifications applicable. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.585 Parking stall depth or length.1
“Parking stall depth or length” means the longest side of a parking space. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.590 Parking, tandem.
“Tandem parking” means two or more parking spaces aligned so that both parking stall length stripes are substantially a continuation of contiguous parking stall length stripes and designed so as to accommodate front to back parking of vehicles. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.595 Parking, valet.
“Valet parking” means a parking procedure whereby the operator of a motor vehicle submits the parking of the vehicle to a person employed for that purpose. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.600 Patio.
“Patio” means a one-story roofed structure having not more than 500 square feet of floor area and completely open on at least 25 percent of the total amount of wall surface and designed or intended for recreational or outdoor living use. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.615 Plant nursery.
“Plant nursery” means an area where plants (as trees, vines, shrubs, or herbs) are grown, kept or maintained for transplanting, for use as stocks for budding and grafts, or for sale. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.617 Porch.
“Porch” means a one-story covered but “unenclosed” structure abutting an enclosed structure. Portions of the perimeter of said porch that do not abut an enclosed structure shall have vertical support columns that extend from the porch roof to the floor of the porch. There shall be a minimum of two such vertical support columns with a minimum of one column on each corner or each end of the porch. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.618 Porte-cochere.
“Porte-cochere” means a roofed structure extending from a building over an adjacent driveway, intended to shelter those getting in or out of vehicles. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.620 Premises.
“Premises” means a lot including all buildings or structures thereon. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.625 Preschool.
“Preschool” means the same as “nursery school.” (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.630 Prezoning.
“Prezoning” means a City of Coronado zone classification assigned to any territory lying outside the City limits. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.635 Profession or professional.
“Profession” or “professional” means the following categories of occupations: architect, attorney, dentist, engineer, judge, natural scientist, optometrist, physician, psychiatrist, social scientist, surgeon or other occupation the Commission deems as constituting a profession and meets the following requirements:

A. Serves clients rather than customers. The client cannot diagnose his specific needs or discriminate among the range of possibilities for meeting them due to his lack of theoretical background and professional training;

B. The professional has been conferred a title and/or license by an accredited professional school or board;

C. The professional is bound to the profession’s written code of ethics. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.645 Public hearing.
“Public hearing” means an authorized meeting of any commission, committee, council or staff of the City during which a period of time is allowed for public comment or discussion and public notice has been given as required under the provisions of this title and/or the California Government Code. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.650 Quasi-public.
“Quasi-public” means public use, in some sense or degree, of land, buildings or structures under private ownership or control. For the purposes of this title, electrical substations shall be considered quasi-public uses of a public service type. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.655 Rear side property line.
“Rear side property line” means that portion of the side property line extending into the required rear yard. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.660 Resident.
“Resident” means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of 26 consecutive calendar days or more, counting portions of a calendar day as full days. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.661 Residential care facility.
“Residential care facility” means a State-authorized, certified, or licensed family care home, foster home, or group home serving six or fewer mentally disordered or otherwise handicapped persons or dependent and neglected children where care is provided on a 24-hour-a-day basis. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.662 Residential care facility, large.
“Residential care facility, large” means a State-authorized, certified, or licensed family care home, foster home, or group home serving seven or more mentally disordered or otherwise handicapped persons or dependent and neglected children where care is provided on a 24-hour-a-day basis. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.663 Residential condominium complex.
“Residential condominium complex” means a building or a group of buildings containing two or more dwelling units, each unit being separately owned, or held by a stock cooperative. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.665 Residential density.
“Residential density” means the total number of dwelling units on one acre of land in a given area. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.670 Restaurant.
“Restaurant” means any establishment whose principal business is the sale of food to the public in a ready-to-consume state for consumption on or off the premises. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.672 Restaurant, drive-thru.
“Drive-thru restaurant” means any food establishment that provides service directly from a building or structure to persons in motor vehicles. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.673 Restaurant, fast food.
“Fast food restaurant” means any establishment whose principal business is the sale of food prepared on site in a ready-to-consume state for consumption on or off the premises and whose design or operation includes three or more of the following characteristics:

A. Food is usually served with disposable utensils.

B. Food is usually packaged or served in disposable containers.

C. Facilities, such as tables, seats and benches, for on-premises consumption of food are insufficient for volume of food sold.

D. Food is usually ordered and paid for at a walk-up counter.

E. Food is usually paid for prior to consumption. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.674 Restaurant, formula fast food.
“Formula fast food restaurant” means any “fast food restaurant” having both of the following characteristics:

A. Uses a trademark, logo, service mark or other mutually identifying name or symbol that is shared by 15 or more restaurants; and

B. Serves a prescribed (“formula”) menu that is substantially the same as 15 or more restaurants that shares its trademark, logo, service mark or other mutually identifying name or symbol. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.675 Restaurant, full service.
“Full service restaurant” means any establishment wherein food is regularly prepared for and served to customers primarily for consumption on the premises and whose design or operation includes three or more of the following characteristics:

A. The establishment is not specifically designed to accommodate high customer volume.

B. Facilities, such as tables, seats and benches, for on-premises consumption of food are provided and are sufficient for the volume of food sold and customers serviced.

C. Customers predominately order and receive food while seated at tables on the premises.

D. Food is paid for after consumption on site.

E. Food is not typically packaged for transport off site. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.680 Rest home.
“Rest home” means the same as “nursing home,” which is defined in CMC 86.04.540. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.685 Roof.
“Roof” means the completely covered top of a building or structure, except patios, which may have 50 percent of the roof area uncovered. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.687 Roof pitch or slope.
“Roof pitch or slope” means the angle that a roof surface makes with the horizontal. Expressed in units of vertical rise to 12 units of horizontal run. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.690 Sanatorium.
“Sanatorium” means the same as “convalescent hospital,” which is defined in CMC 86.04.235. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.695 Schools, elementary, junior high and high.
“Elementary, junior high and high schools” shall mean an institution of learning which offers instruction in the several branches of learning and study required to be taught in the public schools by the Education Code of the State of California. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.700 Semi-public.
“Semi-public” means the same as “quasi-public” as defined in CMC 86.04.650. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.705 Setback.
“Setback” means that area back from and parallel to the property line on which no building, structure or portion thereof shall be permitted, erected, constructed or placed unless specifically permitted by this title. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.710 Reserved.
(Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.713 Skilled nursing facility.
“Skilled nursing facility” means the same as “convalescent hospital” as defined in CMC 86.04.235. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.717 Shelter, emergency.
“Emergency shelter” means housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.720 Single-room occupancy unit.
“Single-room occupancy unit” means living or efficiency quarters, as defined by California Health and Safety Code Section 17958.1, intended or designed to be used as a residence by not more than two persons and having either individual or shared bathroom and kitchen facilities. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.725 Specialty shop.
“Specialty shop” means a retail business offering a line of specialty goods and having less than 1,000 square feet of retail floor area. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.730 State.
“State” means the State of California. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.735 Store.
“Store” means a building, room or department wherein the sale of merchandise is transacted. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.740 Story.
“Story” is that portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. For a portion of a building to be considered a “story,” there must be a vertical clear space between the referenced surfaces of at least four feet. The following shall be excluded from the definition of “story”:

A. Attics, so long as:

1. The roof above has a 3:12 or greater pitch;

2. The roof rafters or roof trusses are adjacent to or attached to the ceiling joists of the floor below and to the double top plate; and

3. No walls are placed between the double top plate or the ceiling joists of the floor below and the roof rafters or roof trusses;

B. Mezzanines and interior balconies;

C. Underground parking garages or basements where the finished floor level directly above a usable or unused underfloor space is not greater than 30 inches above “grade”; and

D. For development in all zones, except the single-family zones and single-family subzones: underground parking, building maintenance facilities or incidental storage designed as an integral part of these two uses where the finished floor level directly above a usable or unused underfloor space is not greater than six feet above “grade.” (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.750 Street.
“Street” means a public right-of-way more than 30 feet in width, which provides a public principal means of access to abutting property. The term “street” shall include avenue, drive, circle, road, parkway, boulevard, highway, or any other similar term. The term shall include the total width of the dedicated right-of-way. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.755 Structural alteration.
“Structural alteration” means any change or modification in construction of exterior walls or other exterior portions of a building. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.760 Structural coverage.
“Structural coverage” means the ratio (expressed as a percentage) of the grade level coverage of a lot by “structures” including architectural features projecting outward from the building facade whether they extend to grade level or not to the gross lot area. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.763 Structural nonconformity.
“Structural nonconformity” is defined in CMC 86.50.030. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.765 Structure.
“Structure” means anything over two feet in height above “grade” constructed or erected, which requires location on the ground or attached to something having a location on the ground, but not including signs, fences or walls used as fences eight feet or less in height above “grade,” ornamental post lights eight feet or less in height above “grade,” and aboveground facilities, including, but not limited to, transformers and meter boxes, associated with and appurtenant to underground utility distribution facilities. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.767 Structure height.
For all structures, other than a “building,” “structure height” is the vertical distance above “grade” to the top of the highest element of the structure. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.768 Supportive housing.
“Supportive housing” means housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by low income adults with disabilities, and that is linked to on-site services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.770 Tourist.
“Tourist” means any person travelling for pleasure and not a resident of the City of Coronado. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.780 Trailers.
See “Boat trailer” in CMC 86.04.130, “Camp car” in CMC 86.04.190, “Camper” in CMC 86.04.195 and “Travel trailer” in CMC 86.04.800. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.785 Transient.
“Transient” means any tourist or traveler. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.790 Transient occupant.
“Transient occupant” for purpose of this chapter means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of 25 consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of a calendar day as full days. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.793 Transitional housing.
“Transitional housing” means temporary housing, generally provided for a few months to two years, with supportive services that prepare individuals or families to transition from emergency or homeless shelters to permanent housing. Such housing may be configured for specialized needs groups such as people with substance abuse problems, mental illness, domestic violence victims, veterans, or people with illnesses such as AIDS/HIV. Such housing could be provided in apartment complexes, boarding house complexes, or in single-family homes. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.795 Traveler.
“Traveler” means any person traveling for commercial, industrial or professional dealings and not a resident of the City of Coronado. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.800 Travel trailer.
“Travel trailer” means a vehicle designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle for the propose of transporting cargo or for habitation. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.802 Uncovered.
“Uncovered” means a roof where at least 65 percent or more of the roof area is permanently open to the passage of light and air. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.803 Unenclosed.
“Unenclosed” means an area where at least 50 percent of the perimeter is 65 percent or more permanently open to the passage of light and air. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.805 Unimproved land.
“Unimproved land” means a parcel, lot or other land description containing no structures. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.810 Vacant premises.
“Vacant premises” shall mean a lot, plot, or parcel of land including any structures thereon, which has not been occupied for more than 90 consecutive days, whether made vacant by voluntary action, fire or other accident, or as a result of enforcement action by the City. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.815 Variance.
“Variance” means a modification of the specific regulations of this title granted by resolution of the Planning Commission or City Council in accordance with the terms of this title for the purpose of assuring that no property, because of special circumstances applicable to it, shall be deprived of privileges that may be enjoyed by other properties in the same vicinity and zone. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.820 Wall.
“Wall” means a solid vertical barrier attached to or part of a building, or a solid fence. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.825 Yard.
“Yard” means any portion of a lot unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.830 Zone.
“Zone” means a portion of the territory of the City of Coronado within which certain uniform regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this title. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.04.835 Zoning map.
“Zoning map” means the official zoning map or maps of the City of Coronado together with all amendments subsequently adopted. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

1
Code reviser’s note: Ord. 2062 defined this term as the “shortest side of a parking space.” It has been corrected at the direction of the city to reflect the city’s intent.


Chapter 86.06
ZONE CLASSIFICATIONS
Sections:

86.06.010    Names of zones.

86.06.020    Modifying or overlay zones.

86.06.030    Establishment of zones by map.

86.06.040    Division of zoning map.

86.06.050    Changes in zone boundaries.

86.06.060    Location of boundaries, uncertain boundaries.

86.06.070    Unclassified property as R-1A – Annexed property as R-1A.

86.06.080    Annexed territory – Prezoning.

86.06.010 Names of zones.
In order to classify, regulate, restrict and segregate the uses of land and buildings, to regulate and restrict the height and bulk of buildings and to regulate the area of yards and other open spaces about buildings, and to regulate the density of population, several classes of zones are established to be known as follows:

R-1A; R-1A(E);
R-1A(CC); R-1A(CC1); R-1A(CC2);
R-1A(CC3); R-1A(BF)

Single-Family Residential Zone (six to eight dwelling units per acre)

R-1B

Single-Family Residential Zone (12 dwelling units per acre)

R-3

Multiple-Family Residential Zone (31 dwelling units per acre)

R-4

Multiple-Family Residential Zone (40 dwelling units per acre)

R-5

Multiple-Family Residential Zone (47 dwelling units per acre)

C

Commercial Zone

SP

The Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan contains the C, R-4, C-U and OS Zones as depicted on the zoning map

C-R

Commercial Recreation Zone

H-M

Hotel-Motel Zone

C-U

Civic Use Zone

OS

Open Space Zone

R-PCD

Residential-Planned Community Development Zone

R-SCD

Residential-Special Care Development Zone

MZ

Military Prezone

(Ord. 1954 § 6, 2003; Ord. 1742; Ord. 1675; Ord. 1666; Ord. 1560)

86.06.020 Modifying or overlay zones.
The zones set forth below are termed modifying or overlay zones. The regulations of each such zone shall apply in addition to the regulations of the basic zone listed in CMC 86.06.010 with which the modifying or overlay zone is combined.

P

Parking Overlay Zone

SH

Scenic Highway Modifying Zone

TOZ

Tidelands Overlay Zone

WP

Wildlife Preserve Zone

PCD

Planned Community Development Zone

(Ord. 1869; Ord. 1675; Ord. 1560)

86.06.030 Establishment of zones by map.
The location and boundaries of the various zones are hereby established and shown and delineated on the “Official Zoning Map of the City of Coronado,” which is adopted hereby and made a part hereof, on file in the Community Development Department.

86.06.040 Division of zoning map.
The zoning map may, for convenience, be divided into parts and each such part may, for purposes of more readily identifying areas within such zoning map, be subdivided into units and each such part and units may be separately employed for purposes of amending the zoning map or for any official reference to the zoning map.

86.06.050 Changes in zone boundaries.
Changes in the boundaries of the zones shall be made by ordinance adopting an amended zoning map, or part thereof, or unit of a part thereof, which ordinance, when so adopted, shall be published in the manner prescribed by law and become a part of this chapter by reference.

86.06.060 Location of boundaries, uncertain boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundary of any zone shown upon the zoning map, the following rules shall apply:

A. Whenever the zone boundary is indicated as being approximately following street, alley, block or property lines, then, unless otherwise definitely indicated on the map, the center line of such street, alley, block or property line shall be construed to be the boundary of such zone.

B. Where the application of the above rules do not clarify the zone boundary location, the Commission shall interpret the zoning map as to the location of the zone boundary.

86.06.070 Unclassified property as R-1A – Annexed property as R-1A.
Any property which, for any reason, is not designated on the zoning map as being classified in any of the several zones established by this chapter, or any property hereafter annexed or consolidated to the City subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title shall be deemed to be classified R-1A (Single-Family Residential Zone) until such classification shall have been changed pursuant to CMC 86.54.020 through 86.54.060.

86.06.080 Annexed territory – Prezoning.
Any territory lying outside the City limits, but being adjacent to or within its sphere of influence, may be “prezoned” with any one of the several zoning classifications adopted by this chapter in accordance with the provisions of CMC 86.54.020 through 86.54.060 and in compliance with applicable provisions of the planning and zoning laws of the State of California. If any territory has been “prezoned” in such manner, the assigned zoning shall become effective at the time the annexation of the property becomes effective.

Chapter 86.08
R-1A – SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE
Sections:

86.08.010    Purpose and intent.

86.08.020    Permitted and accessory uses.

86.08.030    Daylight plane and height regulations.

86.08.035    Floor area ratio.

86.08.037    Lot frontage required for CC-1 Subzone.

86.08.040    Front yard required.

86.08.050    Rear yard required.

86.08.060    Side yards – Interior or corner lots.

86.08.070    Reversed corner lots – Side and rear yards.

86.08.080    Dormers.

86.08.090    Roof decks and balconies above 14 feet.

86.08.100    Lot area.

86.08.110    Maximum structural coverage allowed.

86.08.120    Off-street parking required.

86.08.130    Development landscaping required.

86.08.140    Facade treatment required.

86.08.150    Courtesy notice.

86.08.160    Nonconforming uses and structural nonconformities.

86.08.170    Special provisions.

86.08.180    Lot and building certification required.

86.08.190    Undergrounding of utilities.

86.08.200    Mechanical equipment.

86.08.010 Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide regulations that preserve and enhance the residential characteristics for those areas so designated on the zoning map of the City. The R-1A Zone is intended to provide for communities consisting of single-family dwelling buildings with a minimum gross lot size of 7,500, 6,600, 6,000 or 5,500 square feet of lot area per dwelling unit (six to eight dwelling units per acre), except that single-family dwelling buildings or duplexes may be placed on a minimum lot size of 5,250 square feet of lot area per dwelling unit in those areas more specifically described in this chapter. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.08.020 Permitted and accessory uses.
The following principal uses shall be allowed in the R-1A Zone:

A. One single-family dwelling building (to include manufactured housing), on one lot, which conforms to minimum lot area requirements.

B. One duplex or two single-family dwelling buildings are allowed in areas zoned R-1A(E), but only on a lot of no less than 10,500 square feet. Condominiums, stock cooperatives, common interest subdivisions, or any similar form of multiple ownership of more than one unit on one lot are prohibited within this zone.

C. The following accessory uses are allowed in conjunction with the single-family dwelling building or duplex:

1. Incidental home occupations subject to the provisions of Chapter 20.08 CMC.

2. Accessory buildings subject to the provisions of Chapter 86.56 CMC.

3. Off-street parking in conformance with Chapter 86.58 CMC.

D. Residential care facility, supportive housing, and transitional housing. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.08.030 Daylight plane and height regulations.
A. No building shall have a finished first-story floor or a finished floor directly above an underground parking garage or basement greater than 30 inches above “grade.”

B. Main Buildings. “Daylight plane” is intended to provide for light and air, and to limit the impacts of bulk and mass on adjacent properties. The daylight plane restriction, when combined with the maximum height limit, defines the “building envelope” within which all new structures or additions must be contained. The daylight plane is an inclined plane, beginning at 18 feet above grade at the side property line, and extending into the site at 45 degrees from the vertical up to the maximum height limit. Main buildings shall not contain more than two stories and shall comply with the height limits and daylight plane restrictions depicted in the following table and graphic illustration:

Lot Width

Height limit for roof pitch less than 3:12 including the top of any wall surrounding a roof with a pitch of less than 3:12

Height limit for roof pitch 3:12 and greater

< 27 feet

25 feet

26 feet

27 – 27.9 feet

25 feet

27 feet

28 – 28.9 feet

25 feet

28 feet

29 – 29.9 feet

25 feet

29 feet

30 feet & greater

25 feet

30 feet

Daylight Plane

1. The following are exempt from the daylight plane requirements:

a. The 45-degree offset shall not be required along a side property line which is adjoining and parallel to a public street, public alley or public open space.

b. The following features may extend beyond the daylight plane provided they are below the height limit:

i. Dormers, gables, cupolas, domes, skylights, parapet walls or similar architectural features; provided, that such features shall not exceed the height limit and the sum of the actual or implied volume of such features which project beyond the daylight plane shall not exceed a maximum of 100 cubic feet when both sides are combined. Furthermore, no one side shall exceed 50 cubic feet except when along a “southerly side lot line” which shall be allowed a maximum of 100 cubic feet. The area of parapet walls, roof decks behind parapet walls and similar design features shall include the volume bounded by the daylight plane, the vertical face of the parapet wall and a level plane at the top of the parapet;

ii. Cornices, eaves, and similar architectural features, provided such features do not extend past the daylight plane more than two feet (flat roofs, flat eaves, continuous walls or enclosures of usable interior space are prohibited to extend past the daylight plane except as permitted above).

c. Chimneys and flues that do not exceed five feet in width; provided, that chimneys do not extend past the required daylight plane a distance exceeding the minimum required by building codes.

d. Architectural features permitted by CMC 86.56.050(C)(1)(a) through (d).

e. Antennas.

C. Accessory Buildings. Accessory buildings shall not contain more than one story (except for a “carriage house” in accordance with CMC 86.56.110) and shall comply with the following height restrictions:

Accessory Building Maximum Height Limit

< 3:12 Roof Pitch

3:12 – < 6:12 Roof Pitch

= 6:12 Roof Pitch

11 feet.

14 feet, 4 inches.

14 feet, 4 inches.

Parapet walls may extend to 14 feet.

15% of the roof plan area may extend to 15 feet, 7 inches.

Carriage House Maximum Height Limit

< 3:12 Roof Pitch

= 3:12 Roof Pitch

20 feet.

22 feet.

Parapet walls may extend to 21 feet.

That portion of a “carriage house” which does not contain a second story “habitable room” shall be limited to the above height restrictions for one-story accessory buildings and no roof dormers or other roof projections (except eaves) shall be permitted.

(Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.08.035 Floor area ratio.
Development shall not exceed a base and maximum “floor area ratio” (FAR) in accordance with the following chart and table:



Allowable Base “Floor Area Ratio” (FAR) and Maximum FAR vs. “Gross Lot Area” (GLA)

GLA

(sq. ft.)

Base FAR

Max FAR

GLA

(sq. ft.)

Base FAR

Max FAR

GLA

(sq. ft.)

Base FAR

Max FAR

GLA

(sq. ft.)

Base FAR

Max FAR

600

0.641

0.740

3100

0.606

0.697

5600

0.525

0.633

8100

0.436

0.565

700

0.640

0.738

3200

0.604

0.695

5700

0.521

0.630

8200

0.432

0.562

800

0.639

0.736

3300

0.603

0.693

5800

0.518

0.628

8300

0.429

0.560

900

0.637

0.735

3400

0.601

0.692

5900

0.514

0.625

8400

0.425

0.557

1000

0.636

0.733

3500

0.600

0.690

6000

0.511

0.622

8500

0.421

0.554

1100

0.634

0.731

3600

0.596

0.687

6100

0.507

0.619

8600

0.418

0.552

1200

0.633

0.729

3700

0.593

0.685

6200

0.504

0.617

8700

0.414

0.549

1300

0.631

0.728

3800

0.589

0.682

6300

0.500

0.614

8800

0.411

0.546

1400

0.630

0.726

3900

0.586

0.679

6400

0.496

0.611

8900

0.407

0.543

1500

0.629

0.724

4000

0.582

0.676

6500

0.493

0.609

9000

0.404

0.541

1600

0.627

0.723

4100

0.579

0.674

6600

0.489

0.606

9100

0.400

0.538

1700

0.626

0.721

4200

0.575

0.671

6700

0.486

0.603

9200

0.396

0.535

1800

0.624

0.719

4300

0.571

0.668

6800

0.482

0.600

9300

0.393

0.533

1900

0.623

0.717

4400

0.568

0.666

6900

0.479

0.598

9400

0.389

0.530

2000

0.621

0.716

4500

0.564

0.663

7000

0.475

0.595

9500

0.386

0.527

2100

0.620

0.714

4600

0.561

0.660

7100

0.471

0.592

9600

0.382

0.524

2200

0.619

0.712

4700

0.557

0.657

7200

0.468

0.590

9700

0.379

0.522

2300

0.617

0.711

4800

0.554

0.655

7300

0.464

0.587

9800

0.375

0.519

2400

0.616

0.709

4900

0.550

0.652

7400

0.461

0.584

9900

0.371

0.516

2500

0.614

0.707

5000

0.546

0.649

7500

0.457

0.581

10000

0.368

0.514

2600

0.613

0.705

5100

0.543

0.647

7600

0.454

0.579

10100

0.364

0.511

2700

0.611

0.704

5200

0.539

0.644

7700

0.450

0.576

10200

0.361

0.508

2800

0.610

0.702

5300

0.536

0.641

7800

0.446

0.573

10300

0.357

0.505

2900

0.609

0.700

5400

0.532

0.638

7900

0.443

0.571

10400

0.354

0.503

3000

0.607

0.699

5500

0.529

0.636

8000

0.439

0.568

=10500

0.350

0.500

The base FAR may be cumulatively increased to the maximum FAR shown in the above chart and table if the development is designed:

A. With a different front elevation compared to all other development on both the subject block face and the block face immediately across the street from the front of the subject property if new construction, replacement, or 50 percent or more reconstructed or restored; and

B. With one or more of the following additional design features incorporated into the project. Each additional design feature has a corresponding FAR bonus, which is cumulatively added to the base FAR up to the maximum FAR permitted above. In addition, the following list is succeeded by a list of FAR deductions, which cumulatively reduce the allowable FAR, but in no case shall the allowable FAR be reduced below the above base FAR:

ADDITIONAL DESIGN FEATURES 

FAR BONUS

LANDSCAPE

(A maximum of 0.03 FAR bonus points permitted.)

 

1.    Preserve an existing tree (with a minimum diameter of eight inches for a shade tree or 16 inches for a palm tree, measured four feet, six inches above the root crown, and a height of no less than 20 feet) and its root system in the required front yard, and install an automatic irrigation system for all landscaping in the front yard, including the adjoining public property.

.02

2.    Preserve an existing shade tree (with a minimum diameter of eight inches, measured four feet, six inches above the root crown, and a height of no less than 20 feet) and its root system on the subject property, other than within the required front yard, and install an automatic irrigation system for all landscaping in the rear yard.

.01

FRONT PORCH

 

3.    An unenclosed front porch with a minimum of 50 percent of the perimeter walls of said porch at least 65 percent or more permanently open to the passage of light and air (porches on corner lots may wrap a maximum of 60 percent of the required length around the corner of the dwelling from the front to the street side yard so long as required setbacks are satisfied):

 

 

A.    Raised a minimum of 12 inches above the ground, has a length of at least 65 percent of the width of the dwelling, projects out a minimum of eight feet from the dwelling (eaves may project an additional 12 inches) and a minimum of 50 percent is covered with a permanent, solid, waterproof roof and the remaining portion covered by a minimum 10 percent solid trellis; or

.02

 

B.    Has a length of at least 50 percent of the width of the dwelling, projects out a minimum of six feet from the dwelling (eaves may project an additional 12 inches) and is 100 percent covered with a permanent, solid, waterproof roof.

.01

ROOFS

(A maximum of 0.02 FAR bonus points permitted.)

 

4.    A roof on the main building having a slope of at least 4:12 but less than 6:12 for at least 80 percent of the total building area with eaves projecting a minimum of 12 inches for the entire sloped roof perimeter.

.01

5.    A roof on the main building with a pitch of 6:12 or greater for at least 80 percent of the total building area with eaves projecting a minimum of 12 inches for the entire sloped roof perimeter and the 6:12 portion of the roof’s ridge axis perpendicular to the street.

.02

6.    On lots which are 40 feet or less in width: a main building with a variation of roof lines visible from all adjoining street rights-of-way.

.01

7.    A roof on the main building having a slope of 4:12 or greater for at least 80 percent of the total building area with eaves equivalent to at least five percent of the width of the front facade for the entire sloped roof perimeter with a minimum of 24 inches.

.01

WINDOWS

 

8.    All windows along both side facades of the main building, at the second story, offset horizontally at least 12 inches (edge to edge) from windows of immediately adjoining main buildings. Windows with a sill height of 66 inches or more above the floor or separated by 20 feet or more horizontally are not required to be offset.

.01

STRUCTURAL COVERAGE

 

9.    A maximum total structural coverage of 40 percent with exceptions otherwise permitted:

 

 

A.    For lots with a gross lot area of 5,650 square feet or less; or

.02

 

B.    For lots with a gross lot area greater than 5,650 square feet.

.01

10.    A main building where the second-story gross floor area and floor area equivalent is 50 percent or less of the gross floor area and floor area equivalent of the first story.

.02

GARAGES AND DRIVEWAYS

(A maximum of 0.02 FAR bonus points permitted.)

 

11.    An on-grade detached garage adjacent to the rear property line with the following garage and site restrictions: (a) limited to a depth of 26 feet from the rear property line; (b) a maximum of 11 feet in height for flat roofs or 13 feet in height for sloped roofs of 4:12 or greater; and (c) a minimum rear yard setback of 66 feet to any main building (the separation between the garage and main building shall be open from the ground to the sky except for projections or landscape accessory structures otherwise permitted).

.02

12.    A garage with the following garage and site restrictions: (a) on a lot that does not abut an alley, or due to the location of the lot or physical attributes of the land the garage may only be accessed by vehicles through the front yard; (b) the garage provides the required covered parking; and (c) the lot is not a corner lot:

 

 

A.    All on-grade garages located in the rear 50 percent of the lot depth with a driveway maximum width of 10 feet in the first 30 percent of the lot depth.

.02

 

B.    All on-grade attached garages with parking garage doors which are visible from the street with a maximum cumulative door width of 18 feet, set back four feet or more from the dominant adjoining building facade and which are wood and contain architectural details.

.01

 

C.    All parking garages with vehicle access doors turned 90 degrees or more from the street or which are otherwise not visible from the street, provided the garage door(s) are facing the adjacent side yard setback and the garage wall facing toward the street does not extend beyond the adjacent front facade of the building.

.01

SETBACKS AND HEIGHT

 

13.    A main building limited to one story with a maximum height of 14 feet to top of a flat roof and 20 feet to the ridge or peak of sloped roofs (otherwise permitted exceptions allowed).

.03

14.    A main building with a maximum flat or ridge roof height of 150 percent of the flat or sloped roof ridge height of the shortest of the immediately adjoining next door main building, provided at least one of the neighboring main buildings does not exceed one story or 14 feet in height (may not be combined with other height features).

.02

15.    A main building with a roof height limited to 90 percent of otherwise allowable height (may not be combined with other height features).

.01

16.    A second-story front facade set back a minimum of eight feet from the dominant first-story facade for a minimum of 70 percent of the width of the first story.

.01

17.    A courtyard on the side facade of the main building which is along a “northerly side lot line,” open to the side yard, of at least 15 feet in width (parallel to the side property line), and a minimum depth of 30 percent of the lot width from the side property line. Said courtyard shall be open to the sky, except for architectural features which may project into the courtyard up to a maximum of 10 percent of the lot width. Said courtyard shall be an integral part of the main building and not open to the front or rear yards.

.01

18.    A main building with one increased side yard setback above 16 feet in height which slopes away from the vertical plane of the required side yard setback line by at least 45 degrees:

 

 

A.    With the increased side yard provided along a “northerly side lot line”; or

.02

 

B.    With the increased side yard located other than along the “northerly side lot line.”

.01

 

Dormers shall be permitted to encroach into the 45-degree setback; provided, that they comply with CMC 86.56.130, Roof dormers.

 

19.    A main building with increased side yard setbacks on both sides above 16 feet in height which slope away from the vertical plane of the required side yard setback lines by at least 45 degrees. Dormers shall be permitted to encroach into the 45-degree setbacks; provided, that they comply with CMC 86.56.130, Roof dormers (may not be combined with number 18).

.02

20.    One side yard setback above the first story which is at least 33 percent greater than the minimum required side yard setback.

.01

21.    Both side yard setbacks above the first story which are at least 33 percent greater than the minimum required side yard setback (may not be combined with number 20).

.02

22.    On lots which are 30 feet or less in width: two or more attached dwellings and covered parking constructed with a common zero side yard setback on two or more lots having contiguous interior lot lines. The remaining side yards shall not be less than 20 percent of the width of each respective lot. All side street lot lines and interior lot lines adjoining property not part of the development shall not be permitted to have such a reduced side yard.

.02

ARCHITECT AND DESIGN REVIEW

 

23.    Plans drawn, stamped and signed by a California licensed architect with the architect-of-record’s title block on all sheets of the plans and an affidavit signed by the architect stating that the plans were drawn by or under the direct supervision and approval of him or her.

.01

24.    Approval from the Design Review Commission of the exterior design of all proposed structures on the property.

.04

HISTORIC DESIGNATION

 

25.    Approval of a historic alteration permit by the City of Coronado.

.02

FAR DEDUCTIONS

 

26.    FAR Deductions.

 

 

A.    More than 18 lineal feet (cumulative) of garage door(s) or garage doors over 8 feet in height on the front facade of the main building;

-.01

 

B.    For existing dwellings, a deck or balcony on any building adjoining a building facade or on or above the roof which is above the finished floor of the second story or 14 feet above grade, which does not have all of the following minimum setbacks:

-.01

 

 

1.    A front and street side setback of five feet from the adjoining front or street side facade;

 

 

 

2.    An interior side setback from the side facade of the structure as follows:

 

 

 



 

 

 

3.    A rear setback of 50 percent of the lot depth;

 

 

C.    A main building whose front and side elevations have architectural elements such as, but not limited to, windows, doors and columns that are higher than 14 feet;

-.01

 

D.    For existing dwellings, a finished first-story floor or a finished floor directly above an underground parking garage or basement greater than 30 inches above grade;

-.01

 

E.    For existing dwellings, landscaping with plant material or water features between the front of the main building and the front property line which is less than 40 percent of said area for lots with a frontage less than 50 feet in width, and less than 60 percent for lots with a frontage of 50 feet or greater;

-.01

 

F.    A main building with facades of the same color, style, and texture as the main building of either adjoining property;

-.01

 

G.    Construction of a new main building with the same roof pitch as the main building of either adjoining property as viewed from the street (a minimum roof pitch of 1:12 difference is required). The following roofs are excluded:

-.01

 

 

1.    Roofs with the main ridge line oriented 90 degrees to the ridge line of both adjoining roofs; and

 

 

 

2.    Roofs with the main ridge line having an eight-foot or greater vertical height difference as compared to the ridge line of both adjoining roofs (e.g., one story vs. two story).

 

(Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.08.037 Lot frontage required for CC-1 Subzone.
The lot frontage of CC-1 Subzone lots shall be at least 65 feet in length, on at least one public street. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.08.040 Front yard required.
There shall be a front yard of not less than 25 feet.

The following are exceptions to this requirement:

A. Lots having a depth of 60 feet or less shall have a front yard of not less than 15 percent of the depth of the lot.

B. Lots with a “front lot line” solely along an alley shall provide a first-story front yard of no less than five feet and a second-story front yard of no less than 10 feet. No portion of a structure within 10 feet of the alley front lot line shall exceed the height limit for accessory buildings.

C. Where the average front yard setback of a block face is less than 25 feet, the required setback may be computed based on said average in accordance with CMC 86.56.630. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.08.050 Rear yard required.
A. There shall be a first-story rear yard of not less than 20 percent of the depth of the lot; provided, however, such rear yard need not exceed 15 feet (the handle portion of a panhandle lot shall be excluded from lot depth calculations).

B. 1. There shall be a setback of five feet from any rear property line for accessory structures and for covered parking which is attached to the main building, except that for lots without vehicle access from an alley or that front solely on an alley, a maximum of three feet shall be required for rear yards of single-story detached garages limited to 24 feet in width and located in the rear 26 feet of the lot depth.

2. That portion of the covered parking which is in the required rear yard and is attached to the main building shall comply with the allowable height for accessory buildings.

C. For all lots except those with a rear property line adjoining a public park or bay, there shall be a second-story rear yard of not less than 40 percent of the depth of the lot, except for lots that are 110 feet or less in depth, for which there shall be a second-story rear yard of not less than 30 percent of the lot depth. However, in no case would the lot area of the required second-story rear yard be required to exceed 40 percent or 30 percent of the gross lot area, respectively (the handle portion of a panhandle lot shall be excluded from lot depth calculations).

1. The height of a single story within the required second-story rear yard shall comply with the allowable height for accessory buildings.

2. Roof decks and second-story balconies are prohibited in the second-story rear yard except as otherwise permitted to project from said increased second-story setback line.

D. For lots 110 feet or less in depth without alley access, single-story additions to existing single-family dwelling buildings or duplexes may extend into the required rear yard a distance of five feet provided the area of such extension does not exceed 25 percent of the required rear yard. In no case shall the rear yard be less than 10 feet at any point and the height of said addition shall comply with the allowable height for accessory buildings.

E. Rear yards for reversed corner lots shall be as provided in CMC 86.08.070.

F. Rear yards for a carriage house shall be as provided in CMC 86.56.110. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.08.060 Side yards – Interior or corner lots.
A. There shall be a minimum side yard on each side of a building in accordance with the following table; provided, however, that such side yard shall not be less than three feet in width:

Lot Size (Square Feet)

Side Yard (Percent of Lot Width)

<8,000

10%

8,000 – 8,999

11%

9,000 – 9,999

12%

10,000 – 10,999

13%

11,000 – 11,999

14%

>11,999

15%

The following are exceptions to this requirement:

1. For side yards adjoining an alley a maximum of five feet shall be required;

2. For single-story detached accessory structures located in the rear 26 feet of the lot depth, side yards of not less than 10 percent of the width of the lot shall be provided; however, such side yards shall not be less than three feet and need not exceed five feet;

3. For lots without vehicle access from an alley or that front solely on an alley, a single-story detached garage limited to 24 feet in width and located in the rear 26 feet of the lot depth shall be required to provide a maximum three-foot side yard; and

4. For lots 50 feet or less in width, regardless of lot size, side yards of not less than 10 percent of the width of the lot shall be provided; however, such side yards shall not be less than three feet and need not exceed five feet.

B. Where two single-family dwelling buildings, duplex development, or detached garages are proposed for two or more lots having contiguous interior lot lines, one side yard of each lot may be reduced to a zero setback upon site approval. The remaining side yard shall not be less than 20 percent of the width of the lot; provided, however, that such side yard shall not be less than six feet. All side street lot lines and interior lot lines adjoining property not part of the development shall not be permitted to have a reduced side yard. In the case of duplex units, no more than two such units may be attached where allowed in the R-1A Zone. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.08.070 Reversed corner lots – Side and rear yards.
A. There shall be a side yard on the side street lot line of a reversed corner lot of not less than 50 percent of the average of the front yards required on the first five building sites on the block face that are adjoining or adjacent to the rear lot line of the reversed corner lot or as required in CMC 86.08.060(A), whichever is greater. The remaining side yard and the first-story rear yard shall not be less than 10 percent of the width or depth of the lot respectively; provided, however, that such side yard width or first-story rear yard depth shall not be less than three feet and need not exceed five feet. The front yard shall be as provided in CMC 86.08.040.

B. There shall be a second-story rear yard for a reversed corner lot of not less than 20 percent of the depth of the lot. However, in no case shall the lot area of the required second-story rear yard exceed 20 percent of the total lot size, respectively.

1. The height of a single story within the required second-story rear yard shall comply with the allowable height for accessory buildings.

2. Roof decks and second-story balconies are prohibited in the second-story rear yard except as otherwise permitted to project from said increased second-story setback line.

C. Where a single-family dwelling building or duplex development is proposed for two or more lots having contiguous interior lot lines, the reduced side yard as provided under CMC 86.08.060(B) shall apply only to the interior lot line of a reversed corner lot. The side yard on the side street lot line shall be increased by the width of the setback required for the interior lot line prior to reduction.

D. Reversed corner lots having one side lot line on a street and the remaining side lot line on a street or alley shall maintain a setback on the side street lot line of not less than 10 percent of the width of the lot and no less than 25 feet. CMC 86.56.630 (Exceptions – Average front yard setback rule) may be applied to the setback on this side street lot line. The remaining side yard shall be no less than 10 percent of the width (for the front and rear yards) of the lot, respectively; provided, however, that such side yard width or front, or rear yard depth, shall not be less than three feet and need not exceed five feet. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.08.080 Dormers.
Dormers shall be in accordance with CMC 86.56.130. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.08.090 Roof decks and balconies above 14 feet.
Roof decks and balconies above 14 feet shall be in accordance with CMC 86.56.140. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.08.100 Lot area.
Lots in the R-1A Zone shall have a lot size of no less than 5,500 square feet, except lots designated as R-1A(E) on the zoning map shall have a lot size of no less than 5,250 feet, lots designated as R-1A(CC-1) on the zoning map shall have a lot size of no less than 7,500 square feet, lots designated as R-1A(CC-2) on the zoning map shall have a lot size of no less than 6,600 square feet, and lots designated as R-1A(CC-3) on the zoning map shall have a lot size of no less than 6,000 square feet. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.08.110 Maximum structural coverage allowed.
The total structural coverage shall not exceed 50 percent of the gross lot or building site area and the gross floor area of the second story shall not exceed the gross floor area of the first story (attached enclosed garages shall be considered as part of the first-story gross floor area).

The following are exceptions to this requirement:

A. The total structural coverage may be increased to 60 percent of the gross lot or building site area so long as the main building is limited to one story with a maximum height of 14 feet to the top of a flat roof with a pitch less than 3:12 and 20 feet to the ridge of a sloped roof with a pitch of 3:12 or greater. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.08.120 Off-street parking required.
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 86.58 CMC. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.08.130 Development landscaping required.
A. A minimum of 35 percent of the total site area of new residential developments and 15 percent of the total site area of new commercial developments (in both cases excluding waterways and required streets and sidewalks) shall be landscaped. Required parking spaces shall not be considered as a portion of the required landscaping;

B. A maximum of 50 percent of the landscaping required by this title may be provided by the use of either water features or by the use of water features and decorative rock, decorative paved surfaces, fixed seating, planter walls, open decks, barbecues, fire pits, arbors or gazebos limited to 50 square feet, and similar garden hard surface features;

C. For lots with a “frontage” less than 50 feet, a minimum of 40 percent of the area between the front of the main building and the front property line shall be landscaped with plant material or water features;

D. For lots with a “frontage” of 50 feet or greater, a minimum of 60 percent of the area between the front of the main building and the front property line shall be landscaped with plant material or water features;

E. When new construction or additions over 500 square feet in size are constructed, the property owner shall plant street trees in all public rights-of-way adjacent to said property, if space is available. It shall be the responsibility of the adjoining property owner to provide an automatic irrigation system for said trees. All shade trees shall have a minimum two-inch diameter trunk (measured four feet, six inches above the root crown) and palm trees shall have a minimum six-foot brown trunk. The tree species, spacing, planting, and/or removal of existing trees shall be at the direction of the City of Coronado in accordance with City specifications and the City’s approved street tree list. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.08.140 Facade treatment required.
A. The side facades of all stories of main buildings and carriage houses shall incorporate design components to provide relief and visual and architectural interest and variety. Such components may consist of facade plane offsets, vertical and/or horizontal articulation of the facade, architectural projections, recessed windows, varied texture and materials, and similar design features. Long, uninterrupted exterior walls shall be avoided.

B. The facade treatment shall not encroach into the required side yards except as permitted elsewhere in this title. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.08.150 Courtesy notice.
Courtesy notice shall be in accordance with CMC 86.56.632. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.08.160 Nonconforming uses and structural nonconformities.
Nonconforming uses and structural nonconformities shall be in accordance with Chapter 86.50 CMC. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.08.170 Special provisions.
Special provisions (additional regulations, exceptions and lot and building certification requirements) shall be in accordance with Chapter 86.56 CMC. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.08.180 Lot and building certification required.
Property corners, lot dimensions, gross lot area, grade, building height, front, side and rear yard setback certification shall be in accordance with CMC 86.56.635. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.08.190 Undergrounding of utilities.
Undergrounding of utilities shall be in accordance with CMC 86.56.840. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.08.200 Mechanical equipment.
Mechanical equipment shall be in accordance with CMC 86.56.120. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

Chapter 86.09
R-1A(BF) – SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL BAY FRONT SUBZONE
Sections:

86.09.010    Purpose and intent.

86.09.020    Permitted and accessory uses.

86.09.030    Measurement standards for “building height,” “grade,” “structural coverage,” “floor area ratio (FAR),” and “depth of lot.”

86.09.040    Height regulations.

86.09.050    Floor area ratio.

86.09.060    Lot width required.

86.09.070    Front yard required.

86.09.080    Rear yard required.

86.09.090    Side yards.

86.09.100    Height restrictions within side yards.

86.09.110    Dormers.

86.09.120    Roof decks and balconies above 14 feet.

86.09.130    Lot area.

86.09.140    Maximum structural coverage allowed.

86.09.150    Off-street parking required.

86.09.160    Development landscaping required.

86.09.170    Facade treatment required.

86.09.180    Undergrounding of utilities.

86.09.190    Noticing requirements.

86.09.200    Nonconforming uses and structural nonconformities.

86.09.210    Special provisions.

86.09.220    Lot and building certification required.

86.09.230    Mechanical equipment.

86.09.010 Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide regulations that preserve and enhance the residential characteristics for those areas so designated on the zoning map of the City. The R-1A(BF) Subzone is a subzone of the R-1A Zone with unique development standards due to the subzone’s unusual location relative to the San Diego Bay and public rights-of-way; topography; lot configurations; and unbuildable portions of the lots. The R-1A(BF) Subzone is intended to provide for neighborhoods consisting of single-family dwelling buildings with a minimum gross lot size of 7,500 square feet of lot area per dwelling unit. Density is six dwelling units per acre. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.09.020 Permitted and accessory uses.
The following principal uses shall be allowed in the R-1A(BF) Subzone:

A. One single-family dwelling building (to include manufactured housing), on one lot, which conforms to minimum lot area requirements.

B. The following accessory uses are allowed in conjunction with the single-family dwelling building:

1. Incidental home occupations subject to the provisions of Chapter 20.08 CMC.

2. Accessory buildings subject to the provisions of Chapter 86.56 CMC.

3. Off-street parking in conformance with Chapter 86.58 CMC.

C. Residential care facility, supportive housing, and transitional housing. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.09.030 Measurement standards for “building height,” “grade,” “structural coverage,” “floor area ratio (FAR),” and “depth of lot.”
A. Lots Adjoining the Bay. The property owner of a lot adjoining the bay shall have the option of selecting either the “gross lot area” (as defined in CMC 86.04.325) or the “adjusted lot area,” for the combined purposes of “grade” determination, “structural coverage,” “floor area ratio” (or “FAR”), and “depth of lot” calculation. The “adjusted lot area” of a lot abutting the bay shall be the computed area contained within the lot lines less any panhandle area and less the area bayward from a line across the lot which is established at the discretion of the property owner on natural grade not created by landfill. If the property owner selects the “gross lot area” option, “grade” shall be the average ground level of the center line of First Street and the rear property line. If the property owner of a lot without street frontage selects the “gross lot area” option, “grade” shall be the average ground level of the front and rear property lines. If the property owner selects the “adjusted lot area” option, “grade” shall be the average ground level of the front and rear boundary lines of the “adjusted lot area,” and the “adjusted lot area” shall be used as “gross lot area” for FAR calculation (CMC 86.04.308 and 86.09.050) and structural coverage calculation (CMC 86.04.760 and 86.09.120).

B. Lots Not Adjoining the Bay but Adjoining the Frontage Road. For lots not adjoining the bay but adjoining the frontage road which runs parallel to and north of First Street, the “adjusted lot area” shall be used as “gross lot area” in the calculation of FAR (CMC 86.04.308 and 86.09.050) and structural coverage calculation (CMC 86.04.760 and 86.09.120). The “adjusted lot area” of said frontage road lots shall be the area bounded by the northerly curb of the said frontage road and the side and rear lot lines. However, if the entire lot area is 7,500 square feet or less and the calculated “adjusted lot area” is less than 70 percent of the entire lot area, then 70 percent of the entire lot area shall be used as the “adjusted lot area” for the calculation of FAR and “structural coverage.” “Grade” for said frontage road lots shall be the average ground level of the center line of First Street and the rear property line.

C. Lots Not Adjoining the Bay or the Frontage Road but Adjoining First Street. For lots not adjoining the bay or the frontage road but adjoining First Street, “grade,” “structural coverage” and FAR shall be determined as prescribed by CMC 86.04.308, 86.04.318, 86.04.760, 86.09.050 and 86.09.120. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.09.040 Height regulations.
A. No building shall have a finished first-story floor or a finished floor directly above an underground parking garage or basement greater than 30 inches above “grade” as defined in CMC 86.04.318.

B. Main Buildings. Main buildings shall not contain more than two stories and shall comply with the following height restrictions:

Main Building Maximum Height Limit

< 3:12 Roof Pitch

3:12 – < 6:12 Roof Pitch

= 6:12 Roof Pitch

23 feet.

27.5 feet.

27.5 feet.

Parapet walls may extend to 23.5 feet with 30% of the roof perimeter parapet walls up to 25 feet.

15% of the roof plan area may extend to 30 feet.

A maximum of 60% of the front parapet wall may extend to 25 feet.

 

C.  Accessory Buildings. Accessory buildings shall not contain more than one story and shall comply with the following height restrictions:

Accessory Building Maximum Height Limit

< 3:12 Roof Pitch

3:12 – < 6:12 Roof Pitch

= 6:12 Roof Pitch

11 feet.

14 feet, 4 inches.

14 feet, 4 inches.

Parapet walls may extend to 14 feet.

15% of the roof plan area may extend to 15 feet 7 inches.

(Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.09.050 Floor area ratio.
Development shall not exceed a base and maximum “floor area ratio” (FAR) in accordance with the following chart and table:

 

Allowable Base “Floor Area Ratio” (FAR) and Maximum FAR vs.

“Gross Lot Area” (GLA) or “Adjusted Lot Area” (ALA) per CMC 86.09.030 

GLA or ALA
(sq. ft.)

Base FAR

Max FAR

GLA or ALA
(sq. ft.)

Base FAR

Max FAR

GLA or ALA
(sq. ft.)

Base FAR

Max FAR

GLA or ALA
(sq. ft.)

Base FAR

Max FAR

600

0.641

0.740

3100

0.606

0.697

5600

0.525

0.633

8100

0.436

0.565

700

0.640

0.738

3200

0.604

0.695

5700

0.521

0.630

8200

0.432

0.562

800

0.639

0.736

3300

0.603

0.693

5800

0.518

0.628

8300

0.429

0.560

900

0.637

0.735

3400

0.601

0.692

5900

0.514

0.625

8400

0.425

0.557

1000

0.636

0.733

3500

0.600

0.690

6000

0.511

0.622

8500

0.421

0.554

1100

0.634

0.731

3600

0.596

0.687

6100

0.507

0.619

8600

0.418

0.552

1200

0.633

0.729

3700

0.593

0.685

6200

0.504

0.617

8700

0.414

0.549

1300

0.631

0.728

3800

0.589

0.682

6300

0.500

0.614

8800

0.411

0.546

1400

0.630

0.726

3900

0.586

0.679

6400

0.496

0.611

8900

0.407

0.543

1500

0.629

0.724

4000

0.582

0.676

6500

0.493

0.609

9000

0.404

0.541

1600

0.627

0.723

4100

0.579

0.674

6600

0.489

0.606

9100

0.400

0.538

1700

0.626

0.721

4200

0.575

0.671

6700

0.486

0.603

9200

0.396

0.535

1800

0.624

0.719

4300

0.571

0.668

6800

0.482

0.600

9300

0.393

0.533

1900

0.623

0.717

4400

0.568

0.666

6900

0.479

0.598

9400

0.389

0.530

2000

0.621

0.716

4500

0.564

0.663

7000

0.475

0.595

9500

0.386

0.527

2100

0.620

0.714

4600

0.561

0.660

7100

0.471

0.592

9600

0.382

0.524

2200

0.619

0.712

4700

0.557

0.657

7200

0.468

0.590

9700

0.379

0.522

2300

0.617

0.711

4800

0.554

0.655

7300

0.464

0.587

9800

0.375

0.519

2400

0.616

0.709

4900

0.550

0.652

7400

0.461

0.584

9900

0.371

0.516

2500

0.614

0.707

5000

0.546

0.649

7500

0.457

0.581

10000

0.368

0.514

2600

0.613

0.705

5100

0.543

0.647

7600

0.454

0.579

10100

0.364

0.511

2700

0.611

0.704

5200

0.539

0.644

7700

0.450

0.576

10200

0.361

0.508

2800

0.610

0.702

5300

0.536

0.641

7800

0.446

0.573

10300

0.357

0.505

2900

0.609

0.700

5400

0.532

0.638

7900

0.443

0.571

10400

0.354

0.503

3000

0.607

0.699

5500

0.529

0.636

8000

0.439

0.568

=10500

0.350

0.500

The base FAR may be cumulatively increased to the maximum FAR shown in the above chart and table if the development is designed:

A. With a different front elevation compared to all other development on both the subject block face and the block face immediately across the street from the front of the subject property if new construction, replacement or 50 percent or more reconstructed or restored; and

B. With one or more of the following additional design features incorporated into the project. Each additional design feature has a corresponding FAR bonus, which is cumulatively added to the base FAR up to the maximum FAR permitted above. In addition, the following list is succeeded by a list of FAR deductions, which cumulatively reduce the allowable FAR, but in no case shall the allowable FAR be reduced below the above base FAR:

ADDITIONAL DESIGN FEATURES 

FAR BONUS

FRONT PORCH

 

1.    For lots with a front property line of 40 feet or more in width, a covered and unenclosed front porch with a minimum of 50 percent of the perimeter walls of said porch at least 65 percent or more permanently open to the passage of light and air:

 

 

A.    Raised a minimum of 12 inches above the ground, has a length of at least 65 percent of the width of the dwelling and projects out a minimum of eight feet from the dwelling (eaves may project an additional 12 inches) and a minimum of 50 percent is covered with a permanent, solid, waterproof roof and the remaining portion covered by a minimum 10 percent solid trellis; or

.02

 

B.    Has a length of at least 50 percent of the width of the dwelling and projects out a minimum of six feet from the dwelling (eaves may project an additional 12 inches) and is 100 percent covered with a permanent, solid, waterproof roof.

.01

GARAGES AND DRIVEWAYS

(A maximum of 0.02 FAR bonus points permitted.)

 

2.    All on-grade attached garages with parking garage doors which are visible from the street with a maximum cumulative door width of 18 feet, set back four feet or more from the dominant adjoining building facade, and which are wood and contain architectural details.

.01

3.    All parking garages that have doors turned 90 degrees or more from First Street or are otherwise not visible from First Street.

.02

ROOFS

 

4.    A roof on the main building with a ridge axis perpendicular to the street and having a slope or pitch of at least 4:12 but less than 6:12 for at least 80 percent of the total building area with eaves projecting a minimum of six inches for the entire sloped roof perimeter, but a maximum of six inches into required side yards.

.02

5.    Roofs with a ridge axis perpendicular to the street and having a slope or pitch between 4:12 and 12:12 for at least 80 percent of the total building area which projects into the structure of the building a minimum of five feet and with a top plate no higher than six feet above the finished floor elevation for the entire length of the roof along one side yard (permitted for one- or two-story buildings).

.01

STRUCTURAL COVERAGE

 

6.    A maximum total structural coverage of 40 percent of the gross lot area or the adjusted lot area, as applicable in accordance with CMC 86.09.030 (exceptions otherwise permitted).

.02

7.    A main building where the second-story gross floor area and floor area equivalent is 50 percent or less of the gross floor area and floor area equivalent of the first story.

.03

EXTERIOR RAILINGS AND GUARDRAILS

 

8.    All exterior railings and guardrails over eight feet above grade which do not exceed the minimum height standard contained in the Uniform Building Code at decks, balconies, and stairs, are 70 percent transparent above the lower six inches (i.e., 70 percent total railing area each 10-foot increment is air, 30 percent is solid, meaning support posts, vertical and horizontal members, etc.). Clear glass meeting Uniform Building Code standards, but not plastic-related materials, can be used to meet this transparency criterion.

.01

SETBACKS AND HEIGHT

 

9.    A main building limited to one story with a maximum height of 14 feet to top of a flat roof and 20 feet to the ridge or peak of sloped roofs (otherwise permitted exceptions allowed).

.03

10.    A main building with a maximum flat or ridge roof height of 150 percent of the flat or sloped roof ridge height of the shortest of the immediately adjoining next door main building, provided at least one of the neighboring main buildings does not exceed one story or 14 feet in height (may not be combined with other height features).

.02

11.    A main building with a roof height limited to 90 percent of otherwise allowable height (may not be combined with other height features).

.01

12.    Increase view corridor side yard (CMC 86.09.090) setback by five feet for the entire length of both stories (normal exceptions permitted):

 

 

A.    Lots adjoining the bay; or

.01

 

B.    Lots not adjoining the bay.

.02

13.    Increase nonview corridor side yard setback by five percent or more of lot width for the entire length of both stories (e.g., 50 feet lot width x 0.05 percent = two and one-half feet additional) (normal exceptions permitted).

.01

14.    Both of numbers 12 and 13 above (bonus points are cumulative).

.01

15.    Second-story front set back from the first-story facade by six feet or more (normal exceptions permitted) for 50 percent or more of front facade width, provided the roofline of the first-story facade (below said setback) or 70 percent transparent railings (see number 8) do not exceed the second-story finished floor height by three feet.

.01

16.

 

 

A.    Second-story side yard setback from the first-story facade, for its entire length on the view corridor side yard, for each of up to three increments equal to five percent of lot width (e.g., 50 feet lot width x 0.05 percent = two and one-half feet additional per increment) (normal exceptions permitted); or

.01

(.01 x 3 = 0.03 max)

 

B.    All buildings with one increased side yard setback above 16 feet in height which slopes away from the vertical plane of the required side yard setback line by at least 45 degrees. Dormers shall be permitted to encroach into the 45-degree setback; provided, that they shall be set back from the side property line a minimum of 150 percent of the required side yard, shall not exceed eight feet in width and a cumulative width of 25 percent of the length of the roof abutting the side yard and shall maintain a minimum of eight-foot separation between dormers. The highest point of each such dormer shall be a minimum of 12 inches lower than the ridge of the abutting main roof.

.01

 

(16A and B may not be combined on one side but are permitted on opposite sides for additional bonus points.)

 

17.    A courtyard along the side facade of the main building, open to the side yard, of at least 15 feet in width (parallel to the side property line), and a minimum depth of 30 percent of the lot width from the normal setback line. Said courtyard shall be open to the sky, except for architectural features which may project into the courtyard up to a maximum of 10 percent of the lot width. Said courtyard shall be an integral part of the main building and not open to the front or rear yards.

.01

ARCHITECT AND DESIGN REVIEW

 

18.    Plans drawn, stamped and signed by a California licensed architect with the architect-of-record’s title block on all sheets of the plans and an affidavit signed by the architect stating that the plans were drawn by or under the direct supervision and approval of him or her.

.01

19.    Approval from the Design Review Commission of the exterior design of all proposed structures on the property.

.04

HISTORIC DESIGNATION

 

20.    Approval of a historic alteration permit by the City of Coronado.

.02

FAR DEDUCTIONS

 

21.    FAR Deductions:

 

 

A.    More than 18 lineal feet (cumulative) of garage door(s) or garage doors over 8 feet in height on the front facade of the main building;

-.01

 

B.    For existing dwellings, a deck or balcony on any building adjoining a building facade or on or above the roof which is above the finished floor of the second story or 14 feet above grade, which does not have all of the following minimum setbacks:

-.01

 

 

1.    A front setback of five feet from the adjoining front facade;

 

 

 

2.    An interior side setback from the side facade of the structure as follows:

 

 

 



 

 

C.    A main building whose front and side elevations have architectural elements such as, but not limited to, windows, doors and columns that are higher than 14 feet;

-.01

 

D.    For existing dwellings, a finished first-story floor or a finished floor directly above an underground parking garage or basement greater than 30 inches above grade;

-.01

 

E.    For existing dwellings, landscaping with plant material or water features between the front of the main building and the front property line which is less than 40 percent of said area for lots with a frontage less than 50 feet in width and less than 60 percent for lots with a frontage of 50 feet or greater;

-.01

 

F.    A main building with facades of the same color, style, and texture as the main building of either adjoining property;

-.01

 

G.    Construction of a new main building with the same roof pitch as the main building of either adjoining property as viewed from the street (a minimum roof pitch of 1:12 difference is required). The following roofs are excluded:

-.01

 

 

1.    Roofs with the main ridge line oriented 90 degrees to the ridge line of both adjoining roofs; and

 

 

 

2.    Roofs with the main ridge line having an eight-foot or greater vertical height difference as compared to the ridge line of both adjoining roofs (e.g., one story vs. two story).

 

(Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.09.060 Lot width required.
There shall be a lot width of not less than 50 feet, except for panhandle portions of lots which shall be permitted in accordance with the Coronado Municipal Code Subdivision Ordinance. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.09.070 Front yard required.
There shall be a front yard of not less than 25 feet or as may be otherwise specified on a recorded subdivision, record of survey or parcel map recorded prior to the effective date of this title.

The following are exceptions to this requirement:

A. Lots having a depth of 60 feet or less shall have a front yard of not less than 15 percent of the depth of the lot.

B. Where the average front yard setback of a block face is less than 25 feet, the required setback may be computed based on said average in accordance with CMC 86.56.630. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.09.080 Rear yard required.
A. There shall be a rear yard of not less than 20 percent of the depth of the lot; provided, however, such rear yard need not exceed 15 feet. In addition thereto, there shall be a setback of five feet from any rear property line for accessory buildings and for covered parking which is attached to the main building. That portion of the covered parking which is in the required rear yard and is attached to the main building shall comply with the allowable height for accessory buildings.

B. For lots 110 feet or less in depth and not adjoining the bay, single-family dwelling buildings may extend into the required rear yard a distance of five feet provided the area of such extension does not exceed 25 percent of the required rear yard. In no case shall the rear yard be less than 10 feet at any point. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.09.090 Side yards.
The following minimum side yards and restrictions shall apply:

A. Lots Adjoining the Bay. There shall be a side yard on one side of a building of not less than 10 percent of the width of the lot; provided, however, that such side yard shall not be less than three feet wide and need not exceed five feet. The opposite side yard shall be designated as a view corridor side yard and shall be not less than 12 feet in width. The view corridor side yard shall, when possible, be on the same side as the adjoining lot’s view corridor or wider side yard and continuous with the view corridor of the adjoining lot located between the subject lot and First Street (if one exists). If the subject lot is of a panhandle shape, said view corridor side yard shall be provided on the panhandle side of the lot. The goal of said view corridor shall be to provide a minimum 20- to 24-foot-wide (depending on lot location) view corridor from First Street to the bay between every two adjacent dwellings. Where an interior side property line is also the rear property line of a lot adjoining the frontage road, a minimum 15-foot side yard shall be provided from said common lot line except for single-story garages limited to 14 feet in height which shall maintain a minimum five-foot side yard from the common lot line.

B. Lots Not Adjoining the Bay. There shall be a side yard on one side of a building of not less than 10 percent of the width of the lot; provided, however, that such side yard shall not be less than three feet wide and need not exceed five feet. The opposite side yard shall be designated as a view corridor side yard. If the subject lot adjoins one or more panhandle-shaped lots which extend to the bay, said view corridor side yard shall be provided on the side of the lot adjoining said panhandle lot and shall be no less than 10 feet in width measured from the midpoint of the combined (one or more) adjoining panhandles with a minimum side yard (from the subject lot’s side property line to the building) of no less than 10 percent of the width of the lot and no less than three to five feet wide (depending on lot width). If not adjoining a panhandle-shaped lot, the view corridor side yard shall be on the same side as the adjoining lot’s view corridor or wider side yard and continuous with the view corridor of the adjoining lot located between the subject lot and the bay and shall be not less than 10 feet in width. The goal of said view corridor shall be to provide a minimum 20- to 24-foot-wide (depending on lot location) view corridor from First Street to the bay between every two adjacent dwellings.

C. Lots Adjoining a Public Park or Perpetual Public Access Easement. There shall be a side yard on each side of a building of not less than 10 percent of the width of the lot; provided, however, that such side yard shall not be less than three feet wide and need not exceed five feet so long as when the side yard adjoining a public park or perpetual public access easement is combined with the open space of said park or easement that the total width is at least 24 feet for lots adjoining the bay and 20 feet for lots not adjoining the bay. To qualify, said park or easement must extend from First Street to the bay, and must run parallel to and for the entire length of the subject property’s side property line. The side yard adjoining said park or easement shall be designated as a view corridor side yard. If the total minimum combined view corridor side yard and open space is not achieved, both side yard requirements shall be as prescribed in the relevant subsection A or B of this section. The goal of said view corridor shall be to provide a minimum 20- to 24-foot-wide (depending on lot location) view corridor from First Street to the bay between every two adjacent dwellings.

D. Lots Less Than 50 Feet in Width, Excluding Any Panhandle Portion. There shall be a side yard on each side of a building of not less than 10 percent of the width of the lot; provided, however, that such side yard shall not be less than three feet wide and need not exceed five feet. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.09.100 Height restrictions within side yards.
View corridor side yards required above shall be open to the sky and maintained free of all visual obstructions (e.g., fences/walls, plants or vegetation, accessory buildings, etc.) above six feet in height above natural ground level. Said view corridor side yards shall be open from the street frontage, or property line closest to the street, through to the bay except for architectural projections from the building permitted elsewhere in this title. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.09.110 Dormers.
A. A dormer with its lowest point of the vertical face above the ceiling joists of a second story or greater than 18 feet in height above “grade,” as determined by CMC 86.09.030, or a dormer with window openings into an attic above a second story, and which faces a side, front, or rear yard, shall be subject to the following requirements:

1. Each dormer facing a side property line shall be set back from the exterior side facade of the wall below a minimum of 50 percent of the required side yard setback and need not exceed three feet;

2. Each dormer facing a front or rear property line shall be set back from the exterior front or rear facade of the wall below a minimum of three feet;

3. Each dormer shall not exceed a width of eight feet, and there shall be a minimum separation between each dormer of no less than one and one-half times the width of the narrowest dormer along each respective front, side or rear of a building;

4. The total cumulative width of all dormers on any one front, side or rear of a building shall not exceed 35 percent of the length of the roof abutting the given front, side or rear yard, with a minimum cumulative width of eight feet permitted;

5. The highest point of any dormer shall be no higher than one foot lower than the ridge of the abutting main roof for roofs of less than 6:12 slope, or one foot, six inches lower than the ridge for roofs of 6:12 or greater slope;

6. Gable dormers shall be exempt from subsection A of this section if said dormers have a minimum roof pitch equal to or greater than the main roof, the exterior vertical face is continuous with the exterior facade of the story below and if the dormer contains windows they must open to the first or second story.

B. Each dormer shall contain vertical windows or vents of at least four square feet in cumulative size facing the adjoining front, side or rear yard (excluding gable dormers with a minimum roof pitch equal to or greater than the main roof and where the exterior vertical face is continuous with the exterior facade of the story below). (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.09.120 Roof decks and balconies above 14 feet.
Roof decks and balconies above 14 feet shall be in accordance with CMC 86.56.140. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.09.130 Lot area.
Lots in the R-1A(BF) Subzone shall have a lot size of no less than 7,500 square feet. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.09.140 Maximum structural coverage allowed.
The total structural coverage shall not exceed 50 percent of the “gross lot area” or of the “adjusted lot area” required per CMC 86.09.030(A) and (B) and the gross floor area of the second story shall not exceed the gross floor area of the first story (attached enclosed garages shall be considered as part of the first-story gross floor area).

The following are exceptions to this requirement:

A. The total structural coverage may be increased to 60 percent of the “gross lot area” or of the “adjusted lot area” required per CMC 86.09.030(A) and (B), so long as the main building is limited to one story with a maximum height of 14 feet to the top of a flat roof with a pitch less than 3:12 and 20 feet to the ridge of a sloped roof with a pitch of 3:12 or greater. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.09.150 Off-street parking required.
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 86.58 CMC. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.09.160 Development landscaping required.
A. A minimum of 35 percent of the total site area of new residential developments and 15 percent of the total site area of new commercial developments (in both cases excluding waterways and required streets and sidewalks) shall be landscaped. Required parking spaces shall not be considered as a portion of the required landscaping;

B. A maximum of 50 percent of the landscaping required by this title may be provided by the use of either water features or by the use of water features and decorative rock, decorative paved surfaces, fixed seating, planter walls, open decks, barbecues, fire pits, arbors or gazebos limited to 50 square feet, and similar garden hard surface features;

C. For lots with a “frontage” less than 50 feet, a minimum of 40 percent of the required front yard shall be landscaped with plant material or water features;

D. For lots with a “frontage” of 50 feet or greater, a minimum of 60 percent of the required front yard shall be landscaped with plant material or water features;

E. When new construction or additions over 500 square feet in size are constructed, the property owner shall plant street trees in all public rights-of-way adjacent to said property, if space is available. It shall be the responsibility of the adjoining property owner to provide an automatic irrigation system for said trees. All shade trees shall have a minimum two-inch diameter trunk (measured four feet, six inches above the root crown) and palm trees shall have a minimum six-foot brown trunk. The tree species, spacing, planting and/or removal of existing trees shall be at the direction of the City of Coronado in accordance with City specifications and the City’s approved street tree list. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.09.170 Facade treatment required.
A. The side facades of main buildings shall incorporate design components to provide relief, to assure visual and architectural interest and variety. Such components may consist of facade plane offsets, vertical and/or horizontal articulation of the facade, architectural projections, recessed windows, varied texture and materials, and similar design features. Long, uninterrupted exterior walls shall be avoided.

B. The facade treatment shall not encroach into the required side yards except as permitted elsewhere in this title. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.09.180 Undergrounding of utilities.
Undergrounding of utilities shall be in accordance with CMC 86.56.840. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.09.190 Noticing requirements.
A. A courtesy notice shall be provided in accordance with CMC 86.56.632.

B. In addition to applicable City, State, or Federal requirements, all property owners within the R-1A(BF) Subzone and within 300 feet of a subject property shall receive written notification of all public hearings regarding discretionary permits requested from the City of Coronado for property within said subzone. The property owner of said requested permit shall provide the list of said owners and the addressed and stamped envelopes to the City of Coronado, if available, or compensate the City for providing this service. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.09.200 Nonconforming uses and structural nonconformities.
Nonconforming uses and structural nonconformities shall be in accordance with Chapter 86.50 CMC. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.09.210 Special provisions.
Special provisions (additional regulations, exceptions and lot and building certification requirements) shall be in accordance with Chapter 86.56 CMC. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.09.220 Lot and building certification required.
Property corners, lot dimensions, gross lot area, grade, building height, front, side and rear yard setback certification shall be in accordance with CMC 86.56.635. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.09.230 Mechanical equipment.
Mechanical equipment shall be in accordance with CMC 86.56.120. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

Chapter 86.10
R-1B – SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE
Sections:

86.10.010    Purpose and intent.

86.10.020    Permitted uses.

86.10.030    Daylight plane and height regulations.

86.10.035    Floor area ratio.

86.10.040    Front yard required.

86.10.050    Rear yard required.

86.10.060    Side yards required – Interior or corner lots.

86.10.070    Reversed corner lots – Side and rear yards.

86.10.080    Dormers.

86.10.085    Roof decks and balconies above 14 feet.

86.10.090    Lot area per dwelling.

86.10.100    Maximum structural coverage allowed.

86.10.110    Off-street parking required.

86.10.120    Development landscaping required.

86.10.130    Facade treatment required.

86.10.140    Courtesy notice.

86.10.150    Nonconforming uses and structural nonconformities.

86.10.160    Special provisions.

86.10.170    Lot and building certification required.

86.10.180    Undergrounding of utilities.

86.10.190    Mechanical equipment.

86.10.010 Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide regulations that preserve and enhance the residential characteristics for those areas so designated on the official zoning map of the City. The R-1B Zone is intended to provide for communities consisting of single-family dwelling buildings and duplexes with a minimum gross lot size of 3,500 square feet per dwelling such as townhouses, patio houses, and cluster houses. Density is 12 dwelling units per acre. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.10.020 Permitted uses.
The following principal uses shall be allowed in the R-1B Zone:

A. One single-family dwelling building (to include manufactured housing), on one lot, which conforms to minimum lot area requirements.

B. One duplex or two single-family dwelling buildings under common ownership are allowed on a lot of no less than 7,000 square feet. Condominiums, stock cooperatives, common interest subdivisions, or any similar form of multiple ownership of more than one unit on one lot are prohibited within this zone.

C. The following accessory uses are allowed in conjunction with the single-family dwelling building or duplex:

1. Incidental home occupations subject to the provisions of Chapter 20.08 CMC.

2. Accessory buildings subject to the provisions of Chapter 86.56 CMC.

D. Residential care facility, supportive housing, and transitional housing. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.10.030 Daylight plane and height regulations.
A. No building shall have a finished first-story floor or a finished floor directly above an underground parking garage or basement greater than 30 inches above “grade.”

B. Main Buildings. “Daylight plane” is intended to provide for light and air, and to limit the impacts of bulk and mass on adjacent properties. The daylight plane restriction, when combined with the maximum height limit, defines the “building envelope” within which all new structures or additions must be contained. The daylight plane is an inclined plane, beginning at 18 feet above grade at the side property line, and extending into the site at 45 degrees from the vertical up to the maximum height limit. Main buildings shall not contain more than two stories and shall comply with the height limits and daylight plane restrictions depicted in the following table and graphic illustration:

Lot Width

Height limit for roof pitch less than 3:12 including the top of any wall surrounding a roof with a pitch of less than 3:12

Height limit for roof pitch 3:12 and greater

< 27 feet

25 feet

26 feet

27 – 27.9 feet

25 feet

27 feet

28 – 28.9 feet

25 feet

28 feet

29 – 29.9 feet

25 feet

29 feet

30 feet & greater

25 feet

30 feet

Daylight Plane

The following are exempt from the daylight plane requirements:

1. The 45-degree offset shall not be required along a side property line which is adjoining and parallel to a public street, public alley or public open space.

2. The following features may extend beyond the daylight plane provided they are below the height limit:

a. Dormers, gables, cupolas, domes, skylights, parapet walls or similar architectural features; provided, that such features shall not exceed the height limit and the sum of the actual or implied volume of such features which project beyond the daylight plane shall not exceed a maximum of 100 cubic feet when both sides are combined. Furthermore, no one side shall exceed 50 cubic feet except when along a “southerly side lot line” which shall be allowed a maximum of 100 cubic feet. The area of parapet walls, roof decks behind parapet walls and similar design features, shall include the volume bounded by the daylight plane, the vertical face of the parapet wall and a level plane at the top of the parapet;

b. Cornices, eaves, and similar architectural features provided such features do not extend past the daylight plane more than two feet (flat roofs, flat eaves, continuous walls or enclosures of usable interior space are prohibited to extend past the daylight plane except as permitted above).

3. Chimneys and flues that do not exceed five feet in width; provided, that chimneys do not extend past the required daylight plane a distance exceeding the minimum required by building codes.

4. Architectural features permitted by CMC 86.56.050(C)(1)(a) through (d).

5. Antennas.

C. Accessory Buildings. Accessory buildings shall not contain more than one story (except for a “carriage house” in accordance with CMC 86.56.110) and shall comply with the following height restrictions:

Accessory Building Maximum Height Limit

< 3:12 Roof Pitch

3:12 – < 6:12 Roof Pitch

= 6:12 Roof Pitch

11 feet.

14 feet, 4 inches.

14 feet, 4 inches.

Parapet walls may extend to 14 feet.

15% of the roof plan area may extend to 15 feet, 7 inches.

Carriage House Maximum Height Limit

< 3:12 Roof Pitch

= 3:12 Roof Pitch

20 feet.

22 feet.

Parapet walls may extend to 21 feet.

That portion of a “carriage house” which does not contain a second-story “habitable room” shall be limited to the above height restrictions for one-story accessory buildings and no roof dormers or other roof projections (except eaves) shall be permitted.

(Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.10.035 Floor area ratio.
Development shall not exceed a base and maximum “floor area ratio” (FAR) in accordance with the following chart and table:



Allowable Base “Floor Area Ratio” (FAR) and Maximum FAR vs. “Gross Lot Area” (GLA) 

GLA

(sq. ft.)

Base FAR

Max FAR

GLA

(sq. ft.)

Base FAR

Max FAR

GLA

(sq. ft.)

Base FAR

Max FAR

GLA

(sq. ft.)

Base FAR

Max FAR

600

0.641

0.740

3100

0.606

0.697

5600

0.525

0.633

8100

0.436

0.565

700

0.640

0.738

3200

0.604

0.695

5700

0.521

0.630

8200

0.432

0.562

800

0.639

0.736

3300

0.603

0.693

5800

0.518

0.628

8300

0.429

0.560

900

0.637

0.735

3400

0.601

0.692

5900

0.514

0.625

8400

0.425

0.557

1000

0.636

0.733

3500

0.600

0.690

6000

0.511

0.622

8500

0.421

0.554

1100

0.634

0.731

3600

0.596

0.687

6100

0.507

0.619

8600

0.418

0.552

1200

0.633

0.729

3700

0.593

0.685

6200

0.504

0.617

8700

0.414

0.549

1300

0.631

0.728

3800

0.589

0.682

6300

0.500

0.614

8800

0.411

0.546

1400

0.630

0.726

3900

0.586

0.679

6400

0.496

0.611

8900

0.407

0.543

1500

0.629

0.724

4000

0.582

0.676

6500

0.493

0.609

9000

0.404

0.541

1600

0.627

0.723

4100

0.579

0.674

6600

0.489

0.606

9100

0.400

0.538

1700

0.626

0.721

4200

0.575

0.671

6700

0.486

0.603

9200

0.396

0.535

1800

0.624

0.719

4300

0.571

0.668

6800

0.482

0.600

9300

0.393

0.533

1900

0.623

0.717

4400

0.568

0.666

6900

0.479

0.598

9400

0.389

0.530

2000

0.621

0.716

4500

0.564

0.663

7000

0.475

0.595

9500

0.386

0.527

2100

0.620

0.714

4600

0.561

0.660

7100

0.471

0.592

9600

0.382

0.524

2200

0.619

0.712

4700

0.557

0.657

7200

0.468

0.590

9700

0.379

0.522

2300

0.617

0.711

4800

0.554

0.655

7300

0.464

0.587

9800

0.375

0.519

2400

0.616

0.709

4900

0.550

0.652

7400

0.461

0.584

9900

0.371

0.516

2500

0.614

0.707

5000

0.546

0.649

7500

0.457

0.581

10000

0.368

0.514

2600

0.613

0.705

5100

0.543

0.647

7600

0.454

0.579

10100

0.364

0.511

2700

0.611

0.704

5200

0.539

0.644

7700

0.450

0.576

10200

0.361

0.508

2800

0.610

0.702

5300

0.536

0.641

7800

0.446

0.573

10300

0.357

0.505

2900

0.609

0.700

5400

0.532

0.638

7900

0.443

0.571

10400

0.354

0.503

3000

0.607

0.699

5500

0.529

0.636

8000

0.439

0.568

=10500

0.350

0.500

The base FAR may be cumulatively increased to the maximum FAR shown in the above chart and table if the development is designed:

A. With a different front elevation compared to all other development on both the subject block face and the block face immediately across the street from the front of the subject property if new construction, replacement or 50 percent or more reconstructed or restored; and

B. With one or more of the following additional design features incorporated into the project. Each additional design feature has a corresponding FAR bonus, which is cumulatively added to the base FAR up to the maximum FAR permitted above. In addition, the following list is succeeded by a list of FAR deductions which cumulatively reduce the allowable FAR, but in no case shall the allowable FAR be reduced below the above base FAR:

ADDITIONAL DESIGN FEATURES 

FAR BONUS

LANDSCAPE

(A maximum of 0.03 FAR bonus points permitted.)

 

1.    Preserve an existing tree (with a minimum diameter of eight inches for a shade tree or 16 inches for a palm tree, measured four feet, six inches above the root crown, and a height of no less than 20 feet) and its root system in the required front yard, and install an automatic irrigation system for all landscaping in the front yard, including the adjoining public property.

.02

2.    Preserve an existing shade tree (with a minimum diameter of eight inches, measured four feet, six inches above the root crown, and a height of no less than 20 feet) and its root system on the subject property, other than within the required front yard, and install an automatic irrigation system for all landscaping in the rear yard.

.01

FRONT PORCH

 

3.    An unenclosed front porch with a minimum of 50 percent of the perimeter walls of said porch at least 65 percent or more permanently open to the passage of light and air (porches on corner lots may wrap a maximum of 60 percent of the required length around the corner of the dwelling from the front to the street side yard so long as required setbacks are satisfied):

 

 

A.    Raised a minimum of 12 inches above the ground, has a length of at least 65 percent of the width of the dwelling, projects out a minimum of eight feet from the dwelling (eaves may project an additional 12 inches) and a minimum of 50 percent is covered with a permanent, solid, waterproof roof and the remaining portion covered by a minimum 10 percent solid trellis; or

.02

 

B.    Has a length of at least 50 percent of the width of the dwelling, projects out a minimum of six feet from the dwelling (eaves may project an additional 12 inches) and is 100 percent covered with a permanent, solid, waterproof roof.

.01

ROOFS

(A maximum of 0.02 FAR bonus points permitted.)

 

4.    A roof on the main building having a slope of at least 4:12 but less than 6:12 for at least 80 percent of the total building area with eaves projecting a minimum of 12 inches for the entire sloped roof perimeter.

.01

5.    A roof on the main building with a pitch of 6:12 or greater for at least 80 percent of the total building area with eaves projecting a minimum of 12 inches for the entire sloped roof perimeter and the 6:12 portion of the roof’s ridge axis perpendicular to the street.

.02

6.    On lots which are 40 feet or less in width: a main building with a variation of roof lines visible from all adjoining street rights-of-way.

.01

7.    A roof on the main building having a slope of 4:12 or greater for at least 80 percent of the total building area with eaves equivalent to at least five percent of the width of the front facade for the entire sloped roof perimeter with a minimum of 24 inches.

.01

WINDOWS

 

8.    All windows along both side facades of the main building, at the second story, offset horizontally at least 12 inches (edge to edge) from windows of immediately adjoining main buildings. Windows with a sill height of 66 inches or more above the floor or separated by 20 feet or more horizontally are not required to be offset.

.01

STRUCTURAL COVERAGE

 

9.    A maximum total structural coverage of 40 percent with exceptions otherwise permitted:

 

 

A.    For lots with a gross lot area of 5,650 square feet or less; or

.02

 

B.    For lots with a gross lot area greater than 5,650 square feet.

.01

10.    A main building where the second-story gross floor area and floor area equivalent is 50 percent or less of the gross floor area and floor area equivalent of the first story.

.02

GARAGES AND DRIVEWAYS

(A maximum of 0.02 FAR bonus points permitted.)

 

11.    An on-grade detached garage adjacent to the rear property line with the following garage and site restrictions: (a) limited to a depth of 26 feet from the rear property line; (b) a maximum of 11 feet in height for flat roofs or 13 feet in height for sloped roofs of 4:12 or greater; and (c) a minimum rear yard setback of 66 feet to any main building (the separation between the garage and main building shall be open from the ground to the sky except for projections or landscape accessory structures otherwise permitted).

.02

12.    A garage with the following garage and site restrictions: (a) on a lot that does not abut an alley, or due to the location of the lot or physical attributes of the land, the garage may only be accessed by vehicles through the front yard; (b) the garage provides the required covered parking; and (c) the lot is not a corner lot:

 

 

A.    All on-grade garages located in the rear 50 percent of the lot depth with a driveway maximum width of 10 feet in the first 30 percent of the lot depth.

.02

 

B.    All on-grade attached garages with parking garage doors which are visible from the street with a maximum cumulative door width of 18 feet, set back four feet or more from the dominant adjoining building facade and which are wood and contain architectural details.

.01

 

C.    All parking garages with vehicle access doors turned 90 degrees or more from the street or which are otherwise not visible from the street, provided the garage door(s) are facing the adjacent side yard setback and the garage wall facing toward the street does not extend beyond the adjacent front facade of the building.

.01

SETBACKS AND HEIGHT

 

13.    A main building limited to one story with a maximum height of 14 feet to top of a flat roof and 20 feet to the ridge or peak of sloped roofs (otherwise permitted exceptions allowed).

.03

14.    A main building with a maximum flat or ridge roof height of 150 percent of the flat or sloped roof ridge height of the shortest of the immediately adjoining next door main building, provided at least one of the neighboring main buildings does not exceed one story or 14 feet in height (may not be combined with other height features).

.02

15.    A main building with a roof height limited to 90 percent of otherwise allowable height (may not be combined with other height features).

.01

16.    A second-story front facade set back a minimum of eight feet from the dominant first-story facade for a minimum of 70 percent of the width of the first story.

.01

17.    A courtyard on the side facade of the main building which is along a “northerly side lot line,” open to the side yard, of at least 15 feet in width (parallel to the side property line), and a minimum depth of 30 percent of the lot width from the side property line. Said courtyard shall be open to the sky, except for architectural features which may project into the courtyard up to a maximum of 10 percent of the lot width. Said courtyard shall be an integral part of the main building and not open to the front or rear yards.

.01

18.    A main building with one increased side yard setback above 16 feet in height which slopes away from the vertical plane of the required side yard setback line by at least 45 degrees:

 

 

A.    With the increased side yard provided along a “northerly side lot line”; or

.02

 

B.    With the increased side yard located other than along the northerly side property described above.

.01

 

Dormers shall be permitted to encroach into the 45-degree setback; provided, that they comply with CMC 86.56.130, Roof dormers.

 

19.    A main building with increased side yard setbacks on both sides above 16 feet in height which slope away from the vertical plane of the required side yard setback lines by at least 45 degrees. Dormers shall be permitted to encroach into the 45-degree setbacks; provided, that they comply with CMC 86.56.130, Roof dormers (may not be combined with number 18).

.02

20.    One side yard setback above the first story which is at least 33 percent greater than the minimum required side yard setback.

.01

21.    Both side yard setbacks above the first story which are at least 33 percent greater than the minimum required side yard setback (may not be combined with number 20).

.02

22.    On lots which are 30 feet or less in width: two or more attached dwellings and covered parking constructed with a common zero side yard setback on two or more lots having contiguous interior lot lines. The remaining side yards shall not be less than 20 percent of the width of each respective lot. All side street lot lines and interior lot lines adjoining property not part of the development shall not be permitted to have such a reduced side yard.

.02

ARCHITECT AND DESIGN REVIEW

 

23.    Plans drawn, stamped and signed by a California licensed architect with the architect-of-record’s title block on all sheets of the plans and an affidavit signed by the architect stating that the plans were drawn by or under the direct supervision and approval of him or her.

.01

24.    Approval from the Design Review Commission of the exterior design of all proposed structures on the property.

.04

HISTORIC DESIGNATION

 

25.    Approval of a historic alteration permit by the City of Coronado.

.02

FAR DEDUCTIONS

 

26.    FAR Deductions:

 

 

A.    More than 18 lineal feet (cumulative) of garage door(s) or garage doors over 8 feet in height on the front facade of the main building;

-.01

 

B.    For existing dwellings, a deck or balcony on any building adjoining a building facade or on or above the roof which is above the finished floor of the second story or 14 feet above grade, which does not have all of the following minimum setbacks:

-.01

 

 

1.    A front and street side setback of five feet from the adjoining front or street side facade;

 

 

 

2.    An interior side setback from the side facade of the structure as follows:

 

 

 



 

 

 

3.    A rear setback of 50 percent of the lot depth;

 

 

C.    A main building whose front and side elevations have architectural elements such as, but not limited to, windows, doors and columns that are higher than 14 feet;

-.01

 

D.    For existing dwellings, a finished first-story floor or a finished floor directly above an underground parking garage or basement greater than 30 inches above grade;

-.01

 

E.    For existing dwellings, landscaping with plant material or water features between the front of the main building and the front property line which is less than 40 percent of said area for lots with a frontage less than 50 feet in width and less than 60 percent for lots with a frontage of 50 feet or greater;

-.01

 

F.    A main building with facades of the same color, style, and texture as the main building of either adjoining property;

-.01

 

G.    Construction of a new main building with the same roof pitch as the main building of either adjoining property as viewed from the street (a minimum roof pitch of 1:12 difference is required). The following roofs are excluded:

-.01

 

 

1.    Roofs with the main ridge line oriented 90 degrees to the ridge line of both adjoining roofs; and

 

 

 

2.    Roofs with the main ridge line having an eight-foot or greater vertical height difference as compared to the ridge line of both adjoining roofs (e.g., one story vs. two story).

 

(Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.10.040 Front yard required.
There shall be a front yard of not less than 25 feet.

The following are exceptions to this requirement:

A. Lots having a depth of 60 feet or less shall have a front yard of no less than 15 percent of the depth of the lot.

B. Lots with a “front lot line” solely along an alley shall provide a first-story front yard of no less than five feet and a second-story front yard of no less than 10 feet. No portion of a structure within 10 feet of the alley front lot line shall exceed the height limit for accessory buildings.

C. Where the average front yard setback of a block face is less than 25 feet, the required setback may be computed based on said average in accordance with CMC 86.56.630. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.10.050 Rear yard required.
A. There shall be a first-story rear yard of not less than 10 percent of the depth of the lot; provided, however, such rear yard need not exceed 10 feet (the handle portion of a panhandle lot shall be excluded from lot depth calculations).

B. 1. There shall be a setback of five feet from any rear property line for accessory structures and for covered parking which is attached to the main building, except that for lots without vehicle access from an alley or that front solely on an alley, a maximum of three feet shall be required for rear yards of single-story detached garages limited to 24 feet in width and located in the rear 26 feet of the lot depth.

2. That portion of the covered parking which is in the required rear yard and is attached to the main building shall comply with the allowable height for accessory buildings.

C. For all lots except those with a rear property line adjoining a public park or bay, there shall be a second-story rear yard of not less than 40 percent of the depth of the lot, except for lots that are 110 feet or less in depth, for which there shall be a second-story rear yard of not less than 30 percent of the lot depth. However, in no case would the lot area of the required second-story rear yard be required to exceed 40 percent, or 30 percent of the gross lot area, respectively (the handle portion of a panhandle lot shall be excluded from lot depth calculations).

1. The height of a single story within the required second-story rear yard shall comply with the allowable height for accessory buildings.

2. Roof decks and second-story balconies are prohibited in the second-story rear yard, except as otherwise permitted to project from said increased second-story setback line.

D. Rear yards for a reversed corner lot shall be as provided in CMC 86.10.070.

E. Rear yards for a carriage house shall be as provided in CMC 86.56.110. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.10.060 Side yards required – Interior or corner lots.
A. There shall be a minimum side yard on each side of a building in accordance with the following table; provided, however, that such side yard shall not be less than three feet in width:

Lot Size (Square Feet)

Side Yard (Percent of Lot Width)

<8,000

10%

8,000 – 8,999

11%

9,000 – 9,999

12%

10,000 – 10,999

13%

11,000 – 11,999

14%

>11,999

15%

The following are exceptions to this requirement:

1. For side yards adjoining an alley, a maximum of five feet shall be required;

2. For single-story detached accessory structures located in the rear 26 feet of the lot depth, side yards of not less than 10 percent of the width of the lot shall be provided; however, such side yards shall not be less than three feet and need not exceed five feet;

3. For lots without vehicle access from an alley or that front solely on an alley, a single-story detached garage limited to 24 feet in width and located in the rear 26 feet of the lot depth shall be required to provide a maximum three-foot side yard; and

4. For lots 50 feet or less in width, regardless of lot size, side yards of not less than 10 percent of the width of the lot shall be provided; however, such side yards shall not be less than three feet and need not exceed five feet.

B. Where two single-family dwelling buildings, duplex development, or detached garages are proposed for two or more lots having contiguous interior lot lines, one side yard of each lot may be reduced to a zero setback upon site plan approval. The remaining side yard shall not be less than 20 percent of the width of the lot; provided, however, that such side yard shall not be less than six feet. All side street lot lines and interior lot lines adjoining property not part of the development shall not be permitted to have such a reduced side yard. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.10.070 Reversed corner lots – Side and rear yards.
A. There shall be a side yard on the side street lot line of a reversed corner lot of not less than 50 percent of the average of the front yards required on the first five building sites on the block face that are adjoining or adjacent to the rear lot line of the reversed corner lot or as required in CMC 86.10.060(A), whichever is greater. The remaining side yard and the first-story rear yard shall not be less than 10 percent of the width or depth of the lot respectively; provided, however, that such side yard width or first-story rear yard depth shall not be less than three feet and need not exceed five feet. The front yard shall be as provided in CMC 86.10.040.

B. There shall be a second-story rear yard for a reversed corner lot of not less than 20 percent of the depth of the lot. However, in no case shall the lot area of the required second-story rear yard exceed 20 percent of the total lot size, respectively.

1. The height of a single story within the required second-story rear yard shall comply with the allowable height for accessory buildings.

2. Roof decks and second-story balconies are prohibited in the second-story rear yard except as otherwise permitted to project from said increased second-story setback line.

C. Where a single-family dwelling building or duplex development is proposed for two or more lots having contiguous interior lot lines, the reduced side yard as provided under CMC 86.10.060(B) shall apply only to the interior lot line of a reversed corner lot. The side yard on the side street lot line shall be increased by the width of the setback required for the interior lot line prior to reduction.

D. Reversed corner lots having one side lot line on a street and the remaining side lot line on a street or alley shall maintain a setback on the side street lot line of not less than 10 percent of the width of the lot and no less than 25 feet. CMC 86.56.630 (Exceptions – Average front yard setback rule) may be applied to the setback on this side street lot line. The remaining side yard shall be no less than 10 percent of the width (for the front and rear yards) of the lot, respectively; provided, however, that such side yard width or front, or rear yard depth, shall be not less than three feet and need not exceed five feet. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.10.080 Dormers.
Dormers shall be in accordance with CMC 86.56.130. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.10.085 Roof decks and balconies above 14 feet.
Roof decks and balconies above 14 feet shall be in accordance with CMC 86.56.140. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.10.090 Lot area per dwelling.
Each single-family dwelling building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall have a minimum total gross lot area of 3,500 square feet. One single-family dwelling building shall be permitted on a lot or parcel of less area than required by this chapter, provided such lot or parcel was a legal lot or parcel of record and is a lot or parcel under one ownership on July 1, 1973, and provided the owner of such lot or parcel has not owned or purchased any adjoining property since July 1, 1973. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.10.100 Maximum structural coverage allowed.
The total structural coverage shall not exceed 50 percent of the gross lot or building site area and the gross floor area of the second story shall not exceed the gross floor area of the first story (attached enclosed garages shall be considered as part of the first-story gross floor area).

The following are exceptions to this requirement:

A. The total structural coverage may be increased to 60 percent of the gross lot or building site area so long as the main building is limited to one story with a maximum height of 14 feet to the top of a flat roof with a pitch less than 3:12 and 20 feet to the ridge of a sloped roof with a pitch of 3:12 or greater. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.10.110 Off-street parking required.
Off-street parking shall be provided in conformance with Chapter 86.58 CMC. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.10.120 Development landscaping required.
A. A minimum of 35 percent of the total site area of new residential developments and 15 percent of the total site area of new commercial developments (in both cases excluding waterways and required streets and sidewalks) shall be landscaped. Required parking spaces shall not be considered as a portion of the required landscaping;

B. A maximum of 50 percent of the landscaping required by this title may be provided by the use of either water features or by the use of water features and decorative rock, decorative paved surfaces, fixed seating, planter walls, open decks, barbecues, fire pits, arbors or gazebos limited to 50 square feet, and similar garden hard surface features;

C. For lots with a “frontage” less than 50 feet, a minimum of 40 percent of the area between the front of the main building and the front property line shall be landscaped with plant material or water features;

D. For lots with a “frontage” of 50 feet or greater, a minimum of 60 percent of the area between the front of the main building and the front property line shall be landscaped with plant material or water features;

E. When new construction or additions over 500 square feet in size are constructed, the property owner shall plant street trees in all public rights-of-way adjacent to said property, if space is available. It shall be the responsibility of the adjoining property owner to provide an automatic irrigation system for said trees. All shade trees shall have a minimum two-inch diameter trunk (measured four feet, six inches above the root crown) and palm trees shall have a minimum six-foot brown trunk. The tree species, spacing, planting and/or removal of existing trees shall be at the direction of the City of Coronado in accordance with City specifications and the City’s approved street tree list. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.10.130 Facade treatment required.
A. The side facades of all stories of main buildings shall incorporate design components to provide relief and visual and architectural interest and variety. Such components may consist of facade plane offsets, vertical and/or horizontal articulation of the facade, architectural projections, recessed windows, varied texture and materials, and similar design features. Long uninterrupted exterior walls shall be avoided.

B. The side facade treatment shall not encroach into the required side yards except as permitted elsewhere in this title. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.10.140 Courtesy notice.
Courtesy notice shall be in accordance with CMC 86.56.632. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.10.150 Nonconforming uses and structural nonconformities.
Nonconforming uses and structural nonconformities shall be in accordance with Chapter 86.50 CMC. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.10.160 Special provisions.
Special provisions (additional regulations, exceptions and lot and building certification requirements) shall be in accordance with Chapter 86.56 CMC. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.10.170 Lot and building certification required.
Property corners, lot dimensions, gross lot area, grade, building height, front, side and rear yard setback certification shall be in accordance with CMC 86.56.635. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.10.180 Undergrounding of utilities.
Undergrounding of utilities shall be in accordance with CMC 86.56.840. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.10.190 Mechanical equipment.
Mechanical equipment shall be in accordance with CMC 86.56.120. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

Chapter 86.14
R-3 – MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE
Sections:

86.14.010    Purpose.

86.14.020    Permitted and accessory uses.

86.14.025    Density.

86.14.027    Lot area minimum.

86.14.030    Height regulations.

86.14.035    Floor area ratio.

86.14.040    Front yard required.

86.14.050    Rear yard required.

86.14.060    Side yards required.

86.14.070    Interior or corner lots.

86.14.080    Reversed corner lots.

86.14.085    Dormers.

86.14.090    Roof decks and balconies above 14 feet.

86.14.100    Off-street parking required.

86.14.110    Maximum structural coverage allowed.

86.14.120    Design review required.

86.14.130    Development landscaping required.

86.14.140    Facade treatment.

86.14.150    Courtesy notice.

86.14.160    Lot and building certification required.

86.14.170    Undergrounding of utilities.

86.14.180    Mechanical equipment.

86.14.010 Purpose.
A. This chapter provides regulations governing property designated on the City’s official zoning map as R-3.

B. The R-3 Zone provides an area for the development of multiple-family dwellings. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.14.020 Permitted and accessory uses.
The following uses shall be allowed in the R-3 Zone:

A. Multiple-family dwelling structures on a minimum 3,500-square-foot lot or building site;

B. Single-family dwelling buildings (to include manufactured housing) and duplexes of a permanent character located on a minimum 3,500-square-foot lot or building site;

C. The following accessory uses are allowed in conjunction with the uses specified in subsection A of this section:

1. Incidental home occupations subject to the provisions of Chapter 20.08 CMC;

2. Accessory buildings subject to the provisions of Chapter 86.56 CMC;

D. Residential care facility, supportive housing, and transitional housing. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.14.025 Density.
Density shall not exceed one dwelling unit for each 1,556 square feet of lot area. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.14.027 Lot area minimum.
Each lot shall have no less than 3,500 square feet. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.14.030 Height regulations.
A.  Multiple-Family Dwellings or Nonresidential Main Buildings. Multiple-family dwellings or nonresidential main buildings shall not contain more than two stories and shall comply with the following height restrictions:

Multiple-Family Main Building Maximum Height Limit

< 4:12 Roof Pitch

= 4:12 Roof Pitch

30 feet.

30 feet.

 

15% of the roof plan area may extend to 33 feet.

For all roofs, 30% of the building’s roof plan area shall be limited to 26 feet.

B. Single-Family or Duplex Main Buildings. Single-family or duplex main buildings shall not contain more than two stories and shall comply with the following height restrictions:

Single-Family or Duplex Main Building Maximum Height Limit

< 4:12 Roof Pitch

4:12 – < 6:12 Roof Pitch

= 6:12 Roof Pitch

23 feet.

27.5 feet.

27.5 feet.

Parapet walls, guardrails, mechanical equipment or similar features may extend to 25 feet.

15% of the roof plan area may extend to 30 feet.

C. Accessory Buildings. Accessory buildings shall not contain more than one story and shall comply with the following height restrictions:

Accessory Building Maximum Height Limit

< 3:12 Roof Pitch

3:12 – < 6:12 Roof Pitch

= 6:12 Roof Pitch

11 feet.

14 feet, 4 inches.

14 feet, 4 inches.

Parapet walls may extend to 14 feet.

15% of the roof plan area may extend to 15 feet, 7 inches.

(Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.14.035 Floor area ratio.
A. All multiple-family dwelling or nonresidential development shall not exceed a floor area ratio of 0.90.

B. Single-Family or Duplex Development.

1. With Design Review Commission approval shall not exceed a floor area ratio of 0.70;

2. Without Design Review Commission approval shall not exceed a floor area ratio as permitted by the R-1B Zone standard CMC 86.10.035. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.14.040 Front yard required.
There shall be a front yard of not less than 25 percent of the depth of the lot; provided, however, such front yard need not exceed 25 feet.

The following are exceptions to this requirement:

A. Lots having a depth of 60 feet or less shall have a front yard of no less than 15 percent of the depth of the lot.

B. Lots with a “front lot line” solely along an alley shall provide a first-story front yard of no less than five feet and a second-story front yard of no less than 10 feet. No portion of a structure within 10 feet of the alley front lot line shall exceed the height limit for accessory buildings.

C. Where the average front yard setback of a block face is less than 25 feet, the required setback may be computed based on said average in accordance with CMC 86.56.630. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.14.050 Rear yard required.
There shall be a rear yard of not less than 10 percent of the depth of the lot; provided, however, such rear yard need not exceed 10 feet. There shall be a minimum setback of five feet from any rear property line for accessory buildings and for covered parking which is attached to the main building. That portion of the covered parking which is in the required rear yard and is attached to the main building shall comply with the allowable height for accessory buildings. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.14.060 Side yards required.
The minimum side yards shall be required as set forth in CMC 86.14.070 and 86.14.080. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.14.070 Interior or corner lots.
A. There shall be a side yard of not less than 10 percent of the width of the lot; provided, however, that such side yard shall not be less than three feet and need not exceed five feet in width.

B. Where a single-family dwelling building or duplex development is proposed for two or more lots having contiguous interior lot lines, one side yard of each lot may be reduced to a zero setback upon site plan approval. The remaining side yard shall not be less than 20 percent of the width of the lot; provided, however, that such side yard shall not be less than six feet and need not exceed 10 feet in width. All side street lot lines and interior lot lines adjoining property not part of the development shall not be permitted to have such a reduced side yard. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.14.080 Reversed corner lots.
A. There shall be a side yard on the side street lot line of a reversed corner lot of not less than 50 percent of the front yards required by this title on the first five building sites on the block face that are adjoining or adjacent to the rear lot line of the reversed corner lot. The remaining side yard and rear yard shall be not less than 10 percent of the width or depth of the lot respectively; provided, however, that such side yard width or rear yard depth shall not be less than three feet and need not exceed five feet. The front yard shall be as provided in CMC 86.14.040.

B. Where a single-family dwelling building or duplex development is proposed for two or more lots having contiguous interior lot lines, the reduced side yard as provided under CMC 86.14.070 shall apply only to the interior lot line of a reversed corner lot. The side yard on the side street lot line shall be increased by the width of the setback required for the interior lot line prior to the reduction.

C. Reversed corner lots having both side lot lines on a street and alley shall maintain a setback on the side street lot line of not less than 10 percent of the width of the lot and no less than 25 feet. The remaining side yard shall be no less than 10 percent of the width of the lot; provided, however, that such side yard need not exceed five feet. The front yard shall be no less than 10 percent of the depth of the lot but need not exceed five feet. CMC 86.56.630, Exception – Average front yard setback rule, may be applied to the setback on the side street lot line. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.14.085 Dormers.
Dormers shall be in accordance with CMC 86.56.130. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.14.090 Roof decks and balconies above 14 feet.
Roof decks and balconies above 14 feet shall be in accordance with CMC 86.56.140. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.14.100 Off-street parking required.
Off-street parking shall be provided in conformance with Chapter 86.58 CMC. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.14.110 Maximum structural coverage allowed.
A. The total structural coverage of multiple-family dwelling or nonresidential development shall not exceed 60 percent of gross lot area.

B. The total structural coverage of single-family dwelling building or duplex development shall not exceed 50 percent of gross lot area.

The following are exceptions to this requirement:

1. The total structural coverage of single-family or duplex development may be increased to 60 percent of the gross lot area so long as all main buildings are limited to one story with a maximum height of 14 feet to the top of a flat roof with a pitch less than 3:12 and 20 feet to the ridge of a sloped roof with a pitch of 3:12 or greater. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.14.120 Design review required.
Design review is required in conformance with this code. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.14.130 Development landscaping required.
A. A minimum of 25 percent of the total site area of new residential developments and 15 percent of the total site of new nonresidential developments shall be landscaped. Required parking spaces shall not be considered as a portion of the required landscaping.

B. When new construction or additions over 500 square feet in size are constructed, the property owner shall plant a street tree in the public right-of-way adjacent to said property, if space is available. All shade trees shall have a minimum two-inch diameter trunk (measured four feet, six inches above the root crown) and palm trees shall have a minimum six-foot brown trunk. The tree species and planting shall be at the direction of the City of Coronado in accordance with City specifications and the City’s approved street tree list. Irrigation of said tree shall be the responsibility of the adjoining property owner. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.14.140 Facade treatment.
A. The front and side facades of main buildings shall incorporate design components to assure visual interest and relief. Such components may consist of architectural projections, balconies, facade plane offsets and similar design features.

B. In no case shall a main building’s front or side facade plane have less than one facade plane offset, or have a continuous facade plane greater than 55 percent of the building’s length (for side facades) or width (for the front facade).

C. Required facade plane offsets shall be no less in depth than 20 percent of the required side yard setback for the lot. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.14.150 Courtesy notice.
Courtesy notice shall be in accordance with CMC 86.56.632. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.14.160 Lot and building certification required.
Property corners, lot dimensions, gross lot area, grade, building height, front, side and rear yard setback certification shall be in accordance with CMC 86.56.635. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.14.170 Undergrounding of utilities.
Undergrounding of utilities shall be in accordance with CMC 86.56.840. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.14.180 Mechanical equipment.
Mechanical equipment shall be in accordance with CMC 86.56.120. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

Chapter 86.16
R-4 – MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE
See CMC Title 88, Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan, for land use, development regulations and design criteria for this zone.

Prior legislation: Ords. 1392, 1559, 1586, 1649, 1675, 1716, 1756, 1765, 1817, 1834, 1865, 1870, 1910, 1938 and 1954.

Chapter 86.18
R-5 – MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE
Sections:

86.18.010    Purpose and intent.

86.18.020    Permitted and accessory uses.

86.18.030    Height regulations.

86.18.040    Front yard required.

86.18.050    Rear yard required.

86.18.060    Side yard required.

86.18.070    Building site area per family.

86.18.080    Maximum structural coverage allowed.

86.18.090    Off-street parking required.

86.18.100    Design review required.

86.18.110    Deviation from standards.

86.18.120    Development landscape required.

86.18.010 Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide regulations for residential land development at an overall maximum density of 47 dwelling units per acre consisting of high quality multiple-family dwelling structures and supporting facilities consisting of noncommercial recreation facilities and maintenance and operational facilities essential to the development. (Ord. 1559)

86.18.020 Permitted and accessory uses.
A. The following uses shall be allowed in the R-5 Zone:

1. Multiple-family dwelling structures.

B. The following accessory uses are allowed in conjunction with the uses specified in subsection A of this section:

1. Incidental home occupations subject to the provisions of Chapter 20.08 CMC.

2. Accessory buildings subject to the provisions of Chapter 86.56 CMC.

3. Appropriate condominium sales offices are authorized, subject to the requirement that one such office is permitted in each of several buildings of a development, and all such sales offices must cease upon initial sale of 90 percent of the units in that building; and provided further, that such office may be used only for the initial sale of new condominiums and not for rentals of 30 days or less and not for resales except as may be incident to an exchange for a new unit.

C. Residential care facility, supportive housing, and transitional housing. (Ord. 2040 §§ 6, 11, 2014; Ord. 2022 §§ 5, 10, 2011; Ord. 2015 § 9, 2010; Ord. 1559)

86.18.030 Height regulations.
All multiple-family dwelling structures shall be no more and no less than 150 feet in height. No accessory building shall exceed two stories and 25 feet in height. (Ord. 1559)

86.18.040 Front yard required.
There shall be a front yard of 25 percent of the depth of the lot; provided, however, that no such front yard need exceed 25 feet.

86.18.050 Rear yard required.
There shall be a rear yard of not less than 25 percent of the depth of the lot; provided, however, that no such rear yard need exceed 25 feet.

86.18.060 Side yard required.
There shall be a side yard of not less than 10 percent of the width of the lot or building site, however, such side yards shall be no less than five feet, and in cases where the building or structure is more than two stories in height, each such side yard shall be increased one foot in width for each additional story above the second story.

86.18.070 Building site area per family.
Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the overall density of the R-5 Zone as shown in the adopted General Plan shall not exceed 47 dwelling units per acre or an average of 725 square feet of building site area per dwelling unit.

86.18.080 Maximum structural coverage allowed.
The total structural coverage shall not exceed 33 percent of the total gross building site area.

86.18.090 Off-street parking required.
Off-street parking shall be provided in conformance with Chapter 86.58 CMC. (Ord. 1544)

86.18.100 Design review required.
Design review is required in conformance with this code.

86.18.110 Deviation from standards.
If any structure deviates from this chapter, it shall be subject to review and approval pursuant to Chapter 86.54 CMC, Administration and Enforcement.

86.18.120 Development landscape required.
A minimum of 35 percent of the total site area of new residential developments and 15 percent of the total site area of new commercial developments (in both cases excluding waterways, and required street and sidewalks) shall be landscaped. Required parking spaces shall not be considered as a portion of the required landscaping. (Ord. 1586)

Chapter 86.20
R-SCD – RESIDENTIAL-SPECIAL CARE DEVELOPMENT ZONE
Sections:

86.20.010    Purpose and intent.

86.20.020    Permitted and accessory uses.

86.20.030    Height regulation.

86.20.040    Front yard required.

86.20.050    Side yard required.

86.20.060    Rear yard required.

86.20.070    Off-street parking required.

86.20.080    Maximum structural coverage allowed.

86.20.090    Design review required.

86.20.100    Development landscaping required.

86.20.010 Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide regulations governing limited residential special care facilities located in close proximity to hospital services. Such facilities are intended to provide the ambulatory elderly a care and housing opportunity within the community that addresses their unique needs and facilitates their continued participation in community activities. This chapter is also intended to provide regulations governing skilled nursing facilities for either the ambulatory or nonambulatory in such a location. (Ord. 1684; Ord. 1507)

86.20.020 Permitted and accessory uses.
The following uses shall be allowed in the Residential-Special Care Development Zone:

A. A limited residential special care facility located in close proximity to hospital service on a lot not less than one acre in size. Such a facility shall be designed for, and operated at, a resident population density of not more than 64 habitable units per acre and two occupants per habitable unit.

B. Special care may include nursing (excluding on-site medical), centralized kitchen and dining facilities, recreational facilities, noise control features, special ingress and egress, internal communication systems, transportation services, and similar supportive services benefiting from close proximity to a medical complex.

C. A skilled nursing facility on a lot not less than 0.9 acres containing not more than 90 beds in a total of not more than 32 nursing units.

D. The following accessory uses are allowed in conjunction with the residential special care facility or skilled nursing facility:

1. Accessory buildings subject to the provisions of Chapter 86.56 CMC (with the exception of CMC 86.56.100(D) and (E));

2. Off-street parking in conformance with Chapter 86.58 CMC;

3. Supportive special services or facilities, solely for resident use or care, that would conform to the permitted use of the zone. Such uses may include:

a. Group dining facilities;

b. Barber and beauty salon facilities;

c. Office space for management, dietician, and visiting doctor use;

d. Storage facilities for medicine;

e. Group meeting, activity or recreation facilities;

f. Chapel;

g. Any other use determined by the Planning Commission to be of the same general character as the above accessory uses.

86.20.030 Height regulation.
No structure shall exceed 30 feet in height and shall not contain more than two stories.

86.20.040 Front yard required.
There shall be a front yard of not less than 25 feet for skilled nursing facilities and 20 feet for residential special care facilities.

86.20.050 Side yard required.
There shall be side yards of not less than seven and one-half feet.

86.20.060 Rear yard required.
There shall be a rear yard of not less than 20 feet.

86.20.070 Off-street parking required.
Off-street parking shall be provided in conformance with Chapter 86.58 CMC.

86.20.080 Maximum structural coverage allowed.
The total structural coverage shall not exceed 55 percent of the gross lot area. (Ord. 1821)

86.20.090 Design review required.
Design review is required in conformance with this code.

86.20.100 Development landscaping required.
A minimum of 35 percent of the total site area of new residential developments and 15 percent of the total site area of new commercial developments (in both cases excluding waterways, and required streets and sidewalks) shall be landscaped. Required parking spaces shall not be considered as a portion of the required landscaping.

Chapter 86.22
C – COMMERCIAL ZONE
See CMC Title 88, Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan, for land use, development regulations and design criteria for this zone.

Prior legislation: Ords. 1544, 1586, 1773, 1870 and 1954.

Chapter 86.24
P – PARKING OVERLAY ZONE
Sections:

86.24.010    Parking Overlay Zone.

86.24.020    Permitted uses.

86.24.030    Development standards.

86.24.010 Parking Overlay Zone.
The regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply in the Parking Overlay Zone.

86.24.020 Permitted uses.
Open air, temporary parking of transient automobiles and similar passenger type trucks; provided, that the areas so classified and used shall conform to the provisions of Chapter 86.58 CMC. No such land in the Parking Overlay Zone shall be used for the purpose of sales of new or used motor vehicles.

86.24.030 Development standards.
Development occurring on any property designated Parking Overlay for the purpose of constructing a parking lot or structure will comply with the development provisions of the underlying zone. (Ord. 1675)

Chapter 86.26
L-C – LIMITED COMMERCIAL ZONE
(Repealed by Ord. 1954)

Chapter 86.28
C-R – COMMERCIAL RECREATION ZONE
Sections:

86.28.010    Purpose and intent.

86.28.020    Permitted uses – Special use permit required.

86.28.025    Height regulations.

86.28.030    Design review required.

86.28.040    Off-street parking.

86.28.050    Development landscaping required.

86.28.010 Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of the regulations contained in this chapter are to accommodate and promote the location of privately owned commercial-recreational activities in the shoreline areas of Coronado as identified in the General Plan so that limited tourist and recreational activities can be controlled and encouraged without the possibility of opening up such areas to commercial activities allowed in other Commercial Zones.

86.28.020 Permitted uses – Special use permit required.
Uses as listed in CMC 86.55.160 are subject to the provisions as set forth in Chapters 86.54 and 86.55 CMC. (Ord. 1675)

86.28.025 Height regulations.
No building or structure hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed 40 feet. (Ord. 1482)

86.28.030 Design review required.
Design review is required in conformance with this code.

86.28.040 Off-street parking.
Off-street parking shall be provided in conformance with Chapter 86.58 CMC.

86.28.050 Development landscaping required.
A minimum of 15 percent of the total site area of new developments shall be landscaped. Required parking spaces shall not be considered as a portion of the required landscaping. (Ord. 1870; Ord. 1586)

Chapter 86.32
H-M – HOTEL-MOTEL ZONE
Sections:

86.32.010    Purpose and intent.

86.32.020    Principal uses permitted.

86.32.030    Accessory uses.

86.32.040    Height regulations.

86.32.050    Front yard.

86.32.060    Side yard – Interior lot.

86.32.070    Side yard – Corner lot.

86.32.080    Rear yard.

86.32.090    Other required conditions.

86.32.100    Development landscaping required.

86.32.110    Special use permit required.

86.32.010 Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to provide for areas in appropriate locations where centers providing for the needs of tourists, travelers and transient occupants may be established, maintained and protected. The regulations contained herein are designed to encourage the provision of “transient rental” facilities (other than “time-share complexes”), restaurants, and other activities providing for the convenience, welfare or entertainment of the transient. (Ord. 1856; Ord. 1809)

86.32.020 Principal uses permitted.
The following uses shall be allowed in the H-M Zone:

A. Hotels and motels which provide habitable or dwelling units of which not more than six units or 15 percent (whichever is greater) shall be occupied by a resident occupant;

B. Restaurants with entertainment facilities subject to the provisions of CMC 86.56.030;

C. Restaurants serving food and beverages only within buildings and/or adjoining patios;

D. Assembly halls, theaters, or other public or semi-public buildings subject to the provisions of CMC 86.55.280;

E. Private clubs and lodges except those the chief activities of which are a service customarily carried on as a business subject to the provisions of CMC 86.55.280;

F. Art galleries;

G. Gift shops;

H. Other uses that, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, are consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter. (Ord. 1956 § 11, 2004; Ord. 1856; Ord. 1559; Ord. 1495)

86.32.030 Accessory uses.
An accessory use may be located in a main building containing a principal use or may be in one or more accessory buildings on the same lot. An accessory use may also occupy a lot without a principal use, provided the principal use is located on an adjoining lot. The following accessory uses are permitted:

A. Hairstyling;

B. Clothing sales (new);

C. Convenience stores (offering tobacco, magazines, books, liquor, etc.);

D. Health conditioning;

E. Commercial or public parking lots and parking garages, subject to the provisions of Chapter 86.58 CMC;

F. Storage buildings or garages;

G. Facilities for the repairing, cleaning or maintenance of materials associated with the accessory or primary use subject to the provisions of CMC 86.56.020;

H. Offices;

I. Florist; and

J. Any other establishment determined by the commission to be of the same general character as the above accessory uses. (Ord. 1856)

86.32.040 Height regulations.
No building or structure shall exceed 40 feet in height and shall not contain more than three stories.

86.32.050 Front yard.
Each lot shall maintain a front yard setback of 25 feet unless stated otherwise by Resolution 1944 adopted February 7, 1950.

86.32.060 Side yard – Interior lot.
On interior lots, buildings shall maintain a five-foot setback.

86.32.070 Side yard – Corner lot.
On corner lots, buildings shall maintain a 10-foot setback unless stated otherwise by Resolution 1944 adopted February 7, 1950.

86.32.080 Rear yard.
There shall be a rear yard of not less than 10 feet.

86.32.090 Other required conditions.
A. Design review and approval is required for all uses as provided for this code.

B. Trash storage areas are subject to the conditions of CMC 86.56.040.

C. Off-street parking required for all uses as provided for in Chapter 86.58 CMC.

D. All uses shall be conducted with a completely enclosed building or courtyard, except for recreational facilities, patio restaurants, florists and off-street parking.

E. Outdoor storage of merchandise (other than plants and flowers), material or equipment shall be permitted only when incidental to a permitted or accessory use located on the same premises, and provided that:

1. Storage area shall be completely enclosed by walls, fences or buildings, and shall be part of an approved site plan;

2. No outdoor storage of materials or equipment shall be permitted to exceed a height greater than that of any enclosing wall, fence, or building.

F. Information shall be provided and/or posted in a location visible and accessible to the public concerning the availability of public transit and alternative modes of transportation. (Ord. 1856)

86.32.100 Development landscaping required.
A. A minimum of 25 percent of the total site area of new residential developments and five percent of the total site of new nonresidential developments shall be landscaped. Required parking spaces shall not be considered as a portion of the required landscaping.

B. When new construction occurs resulting in the addition of over 500 square feet of floor area, or when property is improved or renovated with a building permit valuation for the improvement or renovation of $50,000 or more, the developer, property owner or tenant of said site shall plant one or more street trees in the public right-of-way adjacent to said property, if space is available. All shade trees shall have a minimum four-inch diameter trunk (measured four feet, six inches above the root crown) and palm trees shall have a minimum six-foot brown trunk. The specific number of trees, species, location, irrigation system, and planting methods shall be at the direction of the City of Coronado in accordance with City specifications and the City’s approved street tree list. Irrigation of said tree(s) shall be the responsibility of the adjoining property owner. (Ord. 1870; Ord. 1586)

86.32.110 Special use permit required.
A special use permit is required in conformance with this code for development consisting of a floor area ratio of greater than 1.8. (Ord. 1856)

Chapter 86.36
C-U – CIVIC USE ZONE
Sections:

86.36.010    Purpose and intent.

86.36.015    Height regulations.

86.36.020    Planning Commission review required.

86.36.030    Design review.

86.36.040    Development landscaping required.

86.36.050    City Hall and Community Center location.

86.36.060    Community Center gymnasium.

86.36.010 Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide for the identification of property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by any public agency including the City, any other city, County, City and County, school district, special district, State of California, United States government, or any quasi-public agency or institution whose property is used by the general public such as a hospital. Such property will most often be used for parks, recreation areas, beaches, civic centers, public schools and hospitals. It is the further purpose of this chapter to provide for review prior to the location of such uses as hereinafter provided.

86.36.015 Height regulations.
No building or structure hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed 40 feet, except as noted in CMC 86.36.060. (Ord. 1482)

86.36.020 Planning Commission review required.
Prior to the construction, exterior alteration or addition to any building in the C-U Zone, the Planning Commission shall review the construction, exterior alteration or addition for conformance with the General Plan or any adopted specific plan.

86.36.030 Design review.
Design review is required in conformance with this code.

86.36.040 Development landscaping required.
A minimum of 25 percent of the total site area of new residential developments and 15 percent of the total site of new nonresidential developments shall be landscaped. Required parking spaces shall not be considered as a portion of the required landscaping. (Ord. 1870)

86.36.050 City Hall and Community Center location.
The Coronado City Hall and the Coronado Community Center shall be located within the area under study for the Glorietta Bay Master Plan, as presented to and accepted by the Coronado City Council on June 2, 1998, and cannot be relocated from that area without approval of a majority vote of the citizens of Coronado. (Ord. 1905)

86.36.060 Community Center gymnasium.
The Community Center gymnasium basketball courts shall be designed and constructed to allow for the playing of regulation league basketball mandating a basketball court of not less than 88 feet in length by 50 feet in width. The Glorietta Bay Master Plan shall have a height limitation not to exceed 35 feet. (Ballot measure passed November 5, 2002)

Chapter 86.37
CIVIC USE OVERLAY ZONE
Sections:

86.37.010    Civic Use Overlay Zone.

86.37.020    Permitted uses.

86.37.030    Development standards.

86.37.010 Civic Use Overlay Zone.
The regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply in the Civic Use Overlay Zone. (Ord. 1954 § 33, 2003)

86.37.020 Permitted uses.
Uses permitted in the Civic Use Zone or the underlying zoning designation. (Ord. 1954 § 33, 2003)

86.37.030 Development standards.
Development occurring on any property designated Civic Use Overlay for the purpose of constructing a civic facility shall comply with the development regulations contained in Chapter 86.36 CMC. (Ord. 1954 § 33, 2003)

Chapter 86.38
OS – OPEN SPACE ZONE
Sections:

86.38.010    Purpose and intent.

86.38.020    Permitted uses.

86.38.030    Uses permitted – Special use permit required.

86.38.040    Height regulations.

86.38.050    Off-street parking.

86.38.060    Design review.

86.38.070    Development landscaping required.

86.38.010 Purpose and intent.
This chapter provides for the protection and preservation of open space areas within the City which are unique due to natural resources, visual amenities, public safety purposes, or recreational opportunities. (Ord. 1839)

86.38.020 Permitted uses.
The following uses shall be allowed in the Open Space Zone and shall be allowed for open space purposes only:

A. Public facilities (such as beaches, parks, recreational areas, open space and wildlife preserves) but limited to:

1. Steps, stairways or ramps that facilitate public access;

2. Restrooms;

3. Lifeguard towers, stations or other facilities for lifesaving or security purposes;

4. Fire rings and other picnic facilities;

5. Trash receptacles;

6. Landscaping;

7. Animal exercise area (dog run);

8. Beach cleaning equipment and structures appurtenant thereto;

9. Recreational, exercise, or sport equipment, facilities, or fields;

10. Nature interpretive facilities;

B. Pedestrian and bicycle trails or paths;

C. Tennis courts and tennis centers;

D. Golf courses and related facilities;

E. Parking facilities for any permitted use in the overlay zone;

F. Utility and lighting facilities;

G. Boat launching ramps;

H. Uses expressly permitted by this title with a special use permit; and

I. Other uses, including limited military operations, that in the opinion of the Planning Commission are fully consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter.

86.38.030 Uses permitted – Special use permit required.
Uses as listed in, and subject to the provisions as set forth in, Chapter 86.55 CMC.

86.38.040 Height regulations.
No building or structure hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed 40 feet. (Ord. 1482)

86.38.050 Off-street parking.
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 86.58 CMC.

86.38.060 Design review.
Design review is required in conformance with this code.

86.38.070 Development landscaping required.
A minimum of 15 percent of the total site area of new developments shall be landscaped or habitat preserved for native ecosystems. Required parking spaces shall not be considered as a portion of the required landscaping or habitat. (Ord. 1870; Ord. 1586)

Chapter 86.39
TOZ – TIDELANDS OVERLAY ZONE
Sections:

86.39.010    Purpose.

86.39.020    Properties designated.

86.39.030    Development criteria.

86.39.040    Inclusion in local coastal program.

86.39.050    Exceptions.

86.39.060    Amendment.

86.39.070    Severability.

86.39.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the Tidelands Overlay Zone (TOZ) is to specify development criteria for certain unique tideland areas and other properties in the City. These criteria are in addition to the requirements of underlying zoning and are designed to permit and encourage development in the TOZ in a balanced manner that preserves their unique open space and recreational potential while permitting new economically viable coastally dependent commercial/recreation use. For the purpose of this chapter, “open space” shall be defined by CMC 86.04.550, except that “open space” shall not include areas not open for public access, roads, parking areas, or other similar facilities. In the event of conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the Coronado Municipal Code and zoning ordinance, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. If any of the numbered section headings of this chapter are unavailable for use, other appropriate designations shall be assigned by the City Council. (Ord. 1438)

86.39.020 Properties designated.
All those properties shown on the map attached to the measure codified in this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of the TOZ.



Tidelands Overlay Zone Map

86.39.030 Development criteria.
All development in the TOZ shall comply with the following requirements in addition to the provisions of underlying zoning:

A. The total ratio for development of the entire TOZ shall not be less than 65 percent public parkland and public open space nor more than 35 percent commercial/recreation.

B. A minimum of 20 contiguous acres of the TOZ, exclusive of parking areas, roads, nonplaying facilities, and public shoreline accessways shall be improved and maintained for public park and playing facilities.

C. No more than one motel or hotel shall be permitted in the TOZ. Said motel or hotel shall be of the nonconvention type, shall be low rise, and shall contain a maximum of 300 rooms.

D. Public access to the existing shoreline shall be preserved throughout the TOZ by, at minimum, a 30-foot public accessway along the shoreline suitable for pedestrian and bicycle use.

E. No structure in the TOZ shall exceed 40 feet in height.

F. No development in the TOZ shall have a floor area ratio (the numerical value obtained by dividing the total floor area of a structure by the total lot area on which it sits) of greater than 100 percent, nor a structural coverage of greater than 60 percent. For purposes of computing floor area ratio and structural coverage, the acreage included in the 20 contiguous acre park and the acreage included in the 30-foot public accessway along the existing shoreline throughout the TOZ shall not be counted as part of any lot area.

G. Coastally dependent commercial/recreation development shall be preferred over other forms of new commercial/recreation development.

H. All new development in the TOZ shall be pursuant to a plan for development of the entire property owned or controlled by the applicant within the TOZ, and shall provide for the concurrent development of parks, public open space, and public facilities with any other permitted new development on property owned or controlled by the applicant.

I. Parking for new development in the TOZ shall conform to the standards of the Coronado Code, the San Diego Unified Port District, the Department of Navigation and Ocean Development, or the Coastal Commission, whichever is more restrictive.

J. Landscaping in the TOZ shall blend commercial/recreational areas with the public park and public open space areas, and all new development in the TOZ shall require a landscape plan approved by the Coronado Design Review Board or a City Council appointed community committee.

K. Pursuant to the authority of Section 87 of Appendix I of the Harbors and Navigation Code of California, direct vehicular access shall be provided, if feasible, from the Coronado Bridge toll station area to adjacent tideland area within the TOZ so that traffic impacts on City streets and services will be minimized. Such direct access shall be infeasible only if the City Council makes such finding supported by substantial evidence that specific economic, social or other factors make direct access infeasible.

L. Existing view corridors from City streets ends shall be preserved in all new development in the TOZ. (Ord. 1469)

86.39.040 Inclusion in local coastal program.
The provisions of this TOZ shall be included in Coronado’s local coastal program for approval by the Coastal Commission. (Ord. 1438)

86.39.050 Exceptions.
The provisions of this TOZ shall not apply to any development which has received all required discretionary approvals and building permits and on which substantial liabilities incurred in good faith as of the effective date of the initiative measure codified in this chapter.

86.39.060 Amendment.
The TOZ may be amended, repealed, or modified only by majority vote of the voters of Coronado voting at an election thereon.

86.39.070 Severability.
If any provision of this chapter shall be found invalid by a court of law, said determination shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter which shall remain in full force and effect. The initiative measure codified in this chapter shall, if passed by the voters, or enacted by the City Council, become effective according to law. For purposes of determining qualification for exception pursuant to CMC 86.39.050 only, the effective date of the initiative measure codified in this chapter shall be deemed to be the date upon which the measure codified in this chapter passed at the polls or was enacted by the City Council, whichever occurs first.

Chapter 86.42
R-PCD – RESIDENTIAL, PLANNED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ZONE
Sections:

86.42.010    Purpose and intent.

86.42.020    Precise development plan (PDP).

86.42.030    Nonresidential uses.

86.42.040    Planning Commission and City Council action.

86.42.050    Minimum standards.

86.42.060    Development landscaping required.

86.42.010 Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of the R-PCD Zone regulations contained in this chapter are to provide for orderly, comprehensively planned residential development, including related open space and accessory community services consisting of desirable recreational and commercial facilities, as well as maintenance and operational facilities essential to the development. Such residential land development normally requires deviation from the normal zoning regulations and standards regarding lot size, yard requirements, bulk and structural coverage in an effort to maximize the benefits accruing to the citizens of the City especially for the preservation of site, view and physical access. (Ord. 1482)

86.42.020 Precise development plan (PDP).
Prior to any development occurring on any property designated R-PCD on the zoning map, the property owner or his authorized representative shall submit to the Community Development Department a precise development plan (PDP) prepared by a licensed engineer or architect which shall include the following information:

A. Legal description and boundary survey map of the exterior boundaries of land to be developed;

B. A topographic map indicating anticipated grading or fill areas and all groupings of existing trees and other natural features. A topographic map shall indicate two-foot contour intervals;

C. A preliminary report describing provisions for storm drainage, sewage disposal, water supply and other utilities and their location;

D. The number of dwelling units proposed by type of dwelling. This may be stated as a range with maximum and minimum number of units of each type;

E. The approximate total population anticipated in the entire development;

F. The proposed standards of height, number of stories, open space, structural coverage, pedestrian and traffic circulation and number of dwelling units per acre of residential development;

G. Pertinent social or economic characteristics of the development such as school enrollment, residents, employment, etc.;

H. The location, area, and type of sites proposed for public and private open space, recreational facilities, and schools (if any). For purposes of this section, open space may include, but is not limited to, swimming pools, pedestrian walkways, bicycle paths, boardwalks, driveways, arbors or shade structures designed as an integral part of the site’s landscaping. Open space shall not include dedicated or private streets, structures used for residential, commercial, professional or operational maintenance purposes, covered or uncovered required parking area or garages, but these must be shown on the precise development plan;

I. The anticipated time for each phase, if any, of the development, including approximate starting and completion dates;

J. Offers to dedicate those areas shown on the precise development plan as “public access area” in a form acceptable to the City Attorney.

86.42.030 Nonresidential uses.
For the commercial, commercial recreational or other nonresidential development portion of any proposed R-PCD Zone development, the following information is required:

A. Types of uses proposed in the entire area;

B. Anticipated total number of persons employed; may be stated as a range;

C. Methods proposed to control or limit dangerous or objectionable elements, if any, which may be caused or emitted by such proposed uses. Such dangerous or objectionable elements may include fire, explosion, noise or vibration, smoke, dust, odor, or other forms of air pollution, heat, cold, dampness, electrical or other disturbances, glare, or other substance or element which might adversely affect the surrounding area;

D. The proposed standards of height, number of stories, open space, buffering, pedestrian and traffic circulation, off-street parking and loading.

86.42.040 Planning Commission and City Council action.
The Planning Commission and City Council shall act upon the precise development plan in the manner prescribed by Chapter 86.55 CMC relating to special use permits. (Ord. 1956 § 18, 2004)

86.42.050 Minimum standards.
The following minimum development standards shall apply to any project in the R-PCD Zone:

A. All utility distribution facilities within the boundaries of the zone shall be located underground.

B. Off-street parking requirements shall be in accordance with the off-street parking performance standards of this title.

C. Design review shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this code.

D. In order to protect and preserve the scenic view of San Diego Bay and the metropolitan skyline beyond, and in order to provide for public access through the property identified in the General Plan as R-PCD, and in order to provide a buffer between more intense residential use and adjacent less intense residential use as identified in the General Plan, the precise development plan shall indicate the methods used to protect, provide or preserve such view and access.

E. No building or structure hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed 40 feet. (Ord. 1482)

86.42.060 Development landscaping required.
A minimum of 35 percent of the total site area of new residential developments and 15 percent of the total site area of new commercial developments (in both cases excluding waterways, and required streets and sidewalks) shall be landscaped. Required parking spaces shall not be considered as a portion of the required landscaping. (Ord. 1586)

Chapter 86.44
S-H – SCENIC HIGHWAY OVERLAY ZONE
Sections:

86.44.010    Purpose and intent.

86.44.020    Permitted uses.

86.44.030    Prohibited uses.

86.44.040    Prohibited signs.

86.44.050    Regulation of permitted uses.

86.44.060    Height regulations.

86.44.070    Site plan required.

86.44.080    Application for site plan approval.

86.44.090    Review of site plan approval applications.

86.44.100    Approval, disapproval of site plan.

86.44.110    Building permit pursuant to site plan.

86.44.120    Waiving requirements.

86.44.130    Modification of site plan.

86.44.140    Expiration of site plan – Extension.

86.44.150    Grading.

86.44.160    Boundaries.

86.44.010 Purpose and intent.
To assist in the implementation of the Scenic Highway Element of the General Plan, this chapter provides regulations that apply within the boundaries of a scenic highway corridor adjacent to a scenic highway designated by the State of California and the City. The regulations are designed to eliminate unsightly conditions which may distract or impair the safety of highway users, to protect views from scenic highways and to retain unusual and attractive natural and manmade features within the scenic corridor. The S-H Overlay Zone provisions will overlay the provisions of the underlying basic zone. The provisions of this chapter shall govern where there is a conflict or where there is no underlying City zone for the area.

86.44.020 Permitted uses.
The following shall be allowed in the S-H Overlay Zone:

A. Uses permitted in the underlying zone classification of the land except those that are expressly prohibited by this chapter;

B. Informational, directional or historical markers, shelters or kiosks regarding directions, points of interest of historical or environmental significance, noncommercial in nature, and combined with automobile turnout facilities;

C. Emergency public telephones combined with automobile turnout facilities; and

D. Within the Wildlife Preserve (Modifying) Zone, those uses permitted by that overlay zone.

86.44.030 Prohibited uses.
The following shall not be allowed in the S-H Overlay Zone:

A. Junkyards, dumps, or auto dismantling yards;

B. Shipyards, including boat building or repair; and

C. Any other use which is determined by the Planning Commission to be of the same general character of other prohibited uses and whose presence would similarly conflict with the intent of this zone.

86.44.040 Prohibited signs.
The following shall not be allowed in the S-H Overlay Zone:

A. Off-premises outdoor advertising signs, structures or displays;

B. Temporary signs such as banners, pennants, streamers or posters;

C. Animated, revolving, or rotating signs; and

D. Freestanding signs.

86.44.050 Regulation of permitted uses.
A. Every business and commercial use of whatever nature shall be consistent with the intent of this title.

B. On-premises signs for business and commercial uses shall be limited to an aggregate area of 25 square feet per use or to the standard required by the underlying zone, whichever is more restrictive.

86.44.060 Height regulations.
No building or structure hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed 40 feet in height, or the standard required by the underlying zone, whichever is more restrictive. (Ord. 1482)

86.44.070 Site plan required.
Prior to the issuance of any building permit or commencement of any construction of any building or structure, except one- and two-family dwellings and structures appurtenant thereto which meet all requirements of this chapter, a site plan of the proposed development shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning and Design Review Commissions.

86.44.080 Application for site plan approval.
Applications for site plan approval shall be submitted to the Community Development Department and shall be accompanied by such maps, plans, drawings, and sketches as are necessary to show:

A. Boundaries and existing topography of the property and adjoining or nearby streets;

B. Location and height of all existing buildings and the proposed disposition or use thereof;

C. Location, height, proposed use of all proposed structures, including walls, fences and location and extent of individual building sites;

D. Location and dimensions of ingress and egress points, interior roads, and driveways, parking areas, and pedestrian walkways;

E. Location and proposed treatment of important drainage ways;

F. Proposed grading and removal or placement of natural materials, including finished topography of the site; and

G. Proposed landscaping plan.

86.44.090 Review of site plan approval applications.
The Planning and the Design Review Commissions shall review applications for site plan approval and in carrying out such review, the Planning Commission shall consider whether the proposed uses and development design would be consistent with the intent of the S-H Overlay Zone, and the Design Review Commission shall consider, but not be limited to, the following criteria:

A. All elements of the proposed development shall be consistent with the intent and all requirements of the S-H Overlay Zone;

B. Buildings and structures shall be so designed and located on-site as to create a harmonious relationship with surrounding development and the natural environment;

C. Buildings, fences, walls or structures and plant materials shall be constructed, installed or planted so as not to unnecessarily obstruct scenic view visible from the scenic highway, but rather to enhance such scenic views. Fences and walls shall be constructed to allow see-through wherever possible;

D. Potentially unsightly features shall be located so as to be inconspicuous from the scenic highway or effectively screened from view by planting and/or fences, walls or grading;

E. Insofar as feasible, natural topography, vegetation and scenic features of the site shall be retained and incorporated into the proposed development;

F. Any grading or earth moving operation in connection with the proposed developments shall be planned and executed so as to blend with the existing terrain both on and adjacent to the site, and vegetative cover shall be provided to hide scars on the land resulting from such operations.

86.44.100 Approval, disapproval of site plan.
The Planning and Design Review Commissions shall each approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the site plan. Such action may be appealed within 10 working days to the City Council.

86.44.110 Building permit pursuant to site plan.
No building permit shall be issued, except for a one- or two-family dwelling or structure appurtenant thereto, for the construction of any building or structure in the S-H Overlay Zone except pursuant to a site plan which has been approved by the Planning and Design Review Commissions or by the City Council on appeal as provided for in this chapter.

86.44.120 Waiving requirements.
The Planning Commission may waive the requirements of this chapter when it finds that provisions of this chapter have been or will be fulfilled by the conditions of a special use permit or by other means.

86.44.130 Modification of site plan.
Upon request of the applicant, modification of an approved site plan may be made by the Planning and Design Review Commissions if they find that the modification is consistent with the intent and requirements of the S-H Overlay Zone.

86.44.140 Expiration of site plan – Extension.
Any approval of a site plan shall expire one year from the date of the Planning Commission approval except where construction and/or use in reliance on such site plan has commenced prior to its expiration. If construction and/or use in reliance thereupon has not commenced within a one year period, that period may be extended by the Planning Commission at any time prior to the original expiration date for additional three-month periods.

86.44.150 Grading.
No grading, removal or deposit of natural materials shall take place on any lot or parcel in the S-H Overlay Zone except by a grading permit in connection with a building permit issued for construction which conforms to the provisions of this title; or by a grading permit not in connection with construction that is issued with the concurrence of the Design Review Commission. Minor excavation or placement of natural materials, incidental to the planting of trees, shrubs and other plant materials, and to the installation of minor structural features not requiring a grading permit such as fences, walls, walkways, patios and similar elements customarily accessory to a permitted use, are activities exempt from the requirements of this chapter, provided such excavation or placement of materials does not alter the general overall topographical configuration of the land.

86.44.160 Boundaries.
The boundaries of the Scenic Highway Overlay Zone shall extend from the edge of the scenic highway right-of-way for 200 feet or to the nearest ocean or bay shoreline, whichever is less.

Chapter 86.46
PCD – PLANNED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONE
Sections:

86.46.010    Purpose and intent.

86.46.020    Application – Precise development plan (PDP).

86.46.030    Planning Commission and City Council action.

86.46.040    Minimum standards.

86.46.050    Repealed.

86.46.010 Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of the Planned Community Development Overlay Zone regulations contained in this chapter is to provide for residential land development consisting of a related group of residential housing types including but not limited to single-family dwelling buildings or duplexes, cluster housing, patio homes, townhouses, apartments, condominiums or cooperatives or any combination thereof and including related open spaces and community services consisting of recreational, commercial, professional and maintenance and operational facilities essential to the development, all comprehensively planned as a three-dimensional entity. Such residential land development normally requires deviation from the normal zoning regulations and standards regarding lot size, yard requirements, bulk and structural coverage in an effort to maximize the benefits accruing to the citizens of Coronado. (Ord. 1559)

86.46.020 Application – Precise development plan (PDP).
Once a property has been rezoned to place a PCD overlay on it, a PDP may be initiated in the manner prescribed by Chapter 86.55 CMC.

A. Legal description and boundary survey map of the exterior boundaries of land to be developed in the proposed Planned Community Development.

B. A topographic map indicating anticipated grading or fill areas and all groupings of existing trees and other natural features. The topographic map shall indicate two-foot contour intervals.

C. A preliminary report describing provisions for storm drainage, sewage disposal, water supply and other utilities.

D. For the residential development position of any proposed PCD development:

1. The number of dwelling units proposed by type of dwelling. This may be stated as a range with maximum and minimum number of units of each type but shall not exceed the previous residential density and height limit of the most recent zone designation prior to any proposed Planned Community Development;

2. The approximate total population anticipated in the entire development;

3. The proposed standards of number of stories, open space, structural coverage, pedestrian and traffic circulation and number of dwelling units per acre of residential development.

E. For commercial, professional, institutional or commercial recreational or other nonresidential development portion of any proposed PCD development:

1. Types of uses proposed in the entire area;

2. Anticipated total number of persons employed; may be stated as a range;

3. Methods proposed to control or limit dangerous or objectionable elements, if any, which may be caused or emitted by such proposed uses. Such dangerous or objectionable elements may include fire, explosion, noise or vibration, smoke, dust, odor, or other forms of air pollution; heat, cold, dampness, electrical or other disturbances; glare, or other substance or element which might adversely affect the surrounding area;

4. The proposed standards of number of stories, open space buffering, pedestrian and traffic circulation, off-street parking and loading;

5. Pertinent social or economic characteristics of the development such as enrollment, residence, employment, etc.

F. The location, area, and type of sites proposed for public and private open space, recreational facilities, and schools. For purposes of this section, open space may include swimming pools, pedestrian walkways, driveways, arbors or shade structures designed as an integral part of the site’s landscaping. Open space shall not include dedicated or private streets, structures used for residential, commercial, professional or operational maintenance purposes, covered or uncovered required parking area or garage.

G. The anticipated timing for each phase, if any, of the development, including approximate starting and completion dates.

H. Offers to dedicate those areas shown on the precise development plan as public property in a form acceptable to the City Attorney. (Ord. 1869)

86.46.030 Planning Commission and City Council action.
The Planning Commission and City Council shall act upon the PCD application in the manner prescribed by Chapter 86.55 CMC for special use permits. (Ord. 1869)

86.46.040 Minimum standards.
The following minimum development standards shall apply to projects within a Planned Community Development:

A. All utility distribution facilities within the boundaries of the zone shall be located underground.

B. Off-street parking requirements shall be in accordance with the off-street parking performance standards of this title.

C. The number of units proposed within a Planned Community Development shall not exceed the maximum residential density allowed by the underlying zone.

D. The maximum height limit shall not exceed the height limits of the underlying zone.

E. The project shall comply with the landscaping requirement of the underlying zone. (Ord. 1869)

86.46.050 Repealed.
Repealed by Ord. 1869.

Chapter 86.48
MZ – MILITARY ZONE
Sections:

86.48.010    Purpose and intent.

86.48.010 Purpose and intent.
The purpose of the Military Zone classification shall be to identify on the zoning map those properties within the City under Federal control and available exclusively for military operations, housing, personnel, recreation, and similar ancillary military facilities or environmental habitat preservation. (Ord. 1666)

Chapter 86.50
NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURAL NONCONFORMITIES
Sections:

86.50.010    Purpose.

86.50.015    Establishment of nonconformity.

86.50.020    Nonconforming use defined.

86.50.030    Structural nonconformity.

86.50.032    Floor area ratio nonconformity.

86.50.035    Dwelling density nonconformity.

86.50.050    Nuisance.

86.50.070    Prohibition on increasing a nonconformity.

86.50.075    Lot area less than required.

86.50.080    Building permit.

86.50.090    Alteration of structures with nonconforming setbacks or height.

86.50.095    Reconstruction of damaged nonresidential buildings with structural nonconformities.

86.50.100    Involuntarily destroyed or damaged single-family and multifamily dwellings with structural nonconformities.

86.50.105    Voluntarily destroyed, damaged or altered buildings with structural or floor area ratio nonconformities.

86.50.120    Nonconforming rental dwelling or habitable unit use.

86.50.130    Nonconforming guest dwelling use.

86.50.140    Nonconforming commercial, office or manufacturing use.

86.50.150    Other nonconforming uses.

86.50.160    Termination upon enlargement of nonconforming use.

86.50.165    Alteration of structures nonconforming due to density.

86.50.170    Relief from strict application to nonconforming use.

86.50.180    Timing of required removal or alteration of structures containing nonconforming uses.

86.50.200    Two or more nonconforming main buildings on one lot having different abatement schedules – Abatement.

86.50.210    Value of $10,000 or less – Abatement.

86.50.220    Uses subject to special use permit.

86.50.230    Nonconforming hotels and motels.

86.50.240    Nonconforming professional offices and commercial uses.

86.50.250    Nonconforming residential condominiums.

86.50.260    Nonconforming historic resource.

86.50.010 Purpose.
This chapter is enacted to accomplish the regulation and possible elimination of nonconforming uses, structures, floor area ratios and dwelling densities. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.50.015 Establishment of nonconformity.
A “nonconformity” is a condition which was lawfully established prior to the enactment of current zoning restrictions, standards or procedures with which the condition does not comply. A use or design aspect inconsistent with current zoning restrictions may be legally continued within the provisions of this chapter; provided, that the person asserting a claim of nonconformity can establish that the use or design aspect was lawful and continuing at the time of the enactment of the applicable zoning restriction. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.50.020 Nonconforming use defined.
A “nonconforming use” is a use that:

A. Is not within the scope, either expressly or implicitly, of zoning restrictions set forth in current zoning ordinance provisions announcing the purpose, intent, permissible uses, and allowable accessory uses for the zone in which the particular use is located; and

B. Has not been issued a special use permit, if applicable, under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.50.030 Structural nonconformity.
A “structural nonconformity” is an aspect of a building, fence or wall, structure or improvement that does not conform to the current zoning restrictions or design standards to include, without limitation, height, setbacks, parking, type of building, or coverage of lot by structures. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.50.032 Floor area ratio nonconformity.
A “floor area ratio nonconformity” is a building that does not conform to the current zoning restrictions or design standards establishing a floor area ratio for the property. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.50.035 Dwelling density nonconformity.
A “density nonconformity” is a residential property containing one or more dwelling units that does not meet the minimum lot area requirements per dwelling within the zone. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.50.050 Nuisance.
Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the City from declaring a building, structure, improvement or use to constitute nuisance and a danger to the safety, health or welfare of the public and to take lawful action to remedy the danger. The following shall be defined as “nuisance”:

A. Whenever any building or structure is in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance known to the common law or in equity jurisprudence.

B. Any attractive nuisance that may prove detrimental to children whether in a building or on an unoccupied lot. This includes any abandoned well, shaft, basement or excavation; abandoned refrigerators and motor vehicles; any structurally unsound fences or structures; or any lumber, trash, fences, debris or vegetation that may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors.

C. Whatever is dangerous to human life or is detrimental to health, as determined by the Health Officer.

D. Overcrowding a room with occupants.

E. Insufficient ventilation or illumination.

F. Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities.

G. Uncleanliness, as determined by the Health Officer.

H. Whatever renders air, food or drink unwholesome or detrimental to the health of human beings, as determined by the Health Officer. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.50.070 Prohibition on increasing a nonconformity.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, neither a nonconforming use nor a structural nonconformity shall be enlarged, extended, expanded or in any other manner changed to increase its inconsistency with the current zoning restrictions. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.50.075 Lot area less than required.
One single-family dwelling building shall be permitted on a lot of less area then required by this chapter, provided such lot was a legal lot of record and is a lot under one ownership on July 1, 1973, and provided the owner of such lot has not owned or purchased any adjoining property since July 1, 1973. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.50.080 Building permit.
Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the City from requiring an owner of a structure constructed, expanded or altered, either without required building permits or contrary to the specification of the building permits issued, to modify or remove said structure or to obtain the required inspections and final approval for it. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.50.090 Alteration of structures with nonconforming setbacks or height.
A building or structure which does not conform to the yard or height regulations applicable to the land on which such building or structure is located may be structurally altered, added to, or enlarged, only when:

A. The alteration, addition or enlargement does not increase the nonconformity and the “proposed gross floor area” is less than 150 percent of the existing “gross floor area”; or

B. The alteration, addition or enlargement causes the building or structure to conform with the general regulations of this title; or

C. A nonconforming accessory building may be attached to a main building, if said attachment does not increase the nonconformity; or

D. Any structure that is nonconforming due to setback or height requirements may be altered and/or enlarged by approval of the Zoning Administrator on the basis that such alteration and/or enlargement shall conform to the provisions of CMC 86.54.070 through 86.54.200. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.50.095 Reconstruction of damaged nonresidential buildings with structural nonconformities.
A. Any nonresidential building with one or more structural nonconformities that is damaged by 50 percent or more of its gross floor area, as established by the Building Official at the time of damage by fire, flood, explosion, wind, earthquake, war, riot, or other calamity or act of God, shall be required to conform to all City regulations, as contained herein, upon completion of any restoration or reconstruction project.

B. Any nonresidential building with one or more structural nonconformities that is damaged by less than 50 percent of its gross floor area, as established by the Building Official at the time of calamity or act of God, may be restored or reconstructed as before such happening. However, if the reconstruction is less than 25 percent completed within 12 consecutive months of the issuance of required permits, it shall not be restored or reconstructed as before such calamity or regulations as contained herein. Total reconstruction shall be accomplished within five years from the issuance of required permits. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.50.100 Involuntarily destroyed or damaged single-family and multifamily dwellings with structural nonconformities.
A. The reconstruction, restoration, or rebuilding of any single-family and multifamily dwelling with one or more structural nonconformities that, as the result of a catastrophic event(s) or public enemy, is involuntarily destroyed or suffers involuntary damage of 50 percent or more of its gross floor area shall conform with all City zoning ordinances and regulations.

B. Notwithstanding the requirements in subsection A of this section, any structurally nonconforming single-family and multifamily dwelling that, as the result of a catastrophic event(s) or public enemy, is involuntarily destroyed or suffers involuntary damage of 50 percent or more of its gross floor area may be reconstructed, restored, or rebuilt up to its predamaged size and number of dwelling units; provided, that the building permit is applied for within two years from the date of the damage or destruction. The reconstruction, restoration, or rebuilding of such a dwelling shall otherwise conform with all other City zoning ordinances and regulations.

C. Any single-family and multifamily dwelling that suffers involuntary damage of less than 50 percent of its gross floor area as a result of a catastrophic event(s) may be reconstructed, restored, or rebuilt with any structural nonconformities that existed prior to the damage, unless the building permit is obtained more than two years after the date of the damage, or the reconstruction, restoration, or rebuilding is completed more than three years after the date of the damage. The reconstruction, restoration, or rebuilding of such a dwelling shall otherwise conform with all other City zoning ordinances and regulations.

D. For purposes of this section, “catastrophic event” includes fire, flood, explosion, wind, earthquake, war, riot, or other calamity or act of God.

E. For purposes of this section, “multifamily dwelling” is defined as any structure designed for human habitation that is divided into two or more independent living quarters. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.50.105 Voluntarily destroyed, damaged or altered buildings with structural or floor area ratio nonconformities.
A. Any building with a “structural nonconformity” or “floor area ratio nonconformity” that is proposed to be structurally altered or demolished where more than 50 percent of the exterior walls are removed shall be required to conform to all City regulations as contained herein, upon completion of any restoration or reconstruction project.

B. Any building with one or more “structural nonconformity” or “floor area ratio nonconformity” that is proposed to be enlarged where the proposed “gross floor area” is 150 percent or greater than the existing building “gross floor area” shall be required to conform to all City regulations in effect at the time of building permit issuance.

The following are exceptions to this requirement:

1. Approval from the Design Review Commission or Historic Resource Commission (if a designated historic resource); provided, that:

a. The existing architectural style shall be preserved and applied to the enlarged building; and

b. The existing front facade shall be preserved in place. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.50.120 Nonconforming rental dwelling or habitable unit use.
A. A nonconforming rental dwelling or habitable unit use is inactive if the dwelling or habitable unit is not occupied and is not subject to being occupied in accordance with an existing lease or rental agreement:

1. Entered into for a fair market rent; and

2. Entered into with the intention of the tenant to occupy the unit.

B. A nonconforming rental dwelling or habitable unit use is terminated if it is inactive for 120 consecutive days.

C. Exception. Dwelling or habitable units in motels, hotels, hospitals, in facilities governed by special use permits or in the Residential-Special Care Development Zone are exempted from regulation by this section. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.50.130 Nonconforming guest dwelling use.
A. A nonconforming guest dwelling use is inactive if the dwelling is not occupied by a guest.

B. A nonconforming guest dwelling use is terminated if it is inactive for more than 350 days during the preceding 365 days.

C. A nonconforming guest dwelling use is terminated if it is the subject of a rental or lease agreement. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.50.140 Nonconforming commercial, office or manufacturing use.
A. A nonconforming commercial, professional office, manufacturing or industrial use is inactive if business is not being conducted or City licenses and permits required for such business have not been obtained.

B. A nonconforming commercial, professional office, manufacturing or industrial use is terminated if it is inactive for 120 consecutive days or if it is inactive for more than 180 days during the preceding 365 days.

C. Any nonconforming commercial, professional office, manufacturing or industrial use of a residential building or residential accessory building in any Residential Zone shall be terminated two years from the date the property owner receives notification from the City to terminate such use. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.50.150 Other nonconforming uses.
Unless otherwise specified, a nonconforming use terminates if inactive for 180 consecutive days. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.50.160 Termination upon enlargement of nonconforming use.
If a nonconforming use is enlarged, extended, expanded or in any other manner changed to increase its inconsistency with the current zoning restrictions, the nonconforming use shall be terminated in its entirety in the event that:

A. The City notifies the property owner of the enlargement of the nonconforming use; and

B. The property owner fails to restore the nonconforming use to its previous level within 60 days of such notice. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.50.165 Alteration of structures nonconforming due to density.
Properties nonconforming due to density may have a building, structure or improvement structurally altered, added to, or enlarged, only when:

A. The alteration, addition or enlargement does not increase the number of dwellings or other nonconforming aspects of the property; or

B. The alteration, addition or enlargement causes the building or structure to conform with the general regulations of this title. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.50.170 Relief from strict application to nonconforming use.
A. Upon timely application by a person with an interest in a nonconforming use, the Planning Commission may determine whether the operation of the provisions of this chapter conflict with such person’s rights under the Constitution and applicable statutes of the United States or of the State of California or in some manner produce an inequitable result.

B. In the event of an affirmative determination reached under the provisions of subsection A of this section, the Planning Commission may, by resolution, adjust the impact of this chapter on such person to alleviate the conflict or inequity.

C. The determination of the Planning Commission shall be final and shall thereafter control the operation of this chapter on such nonconformity unless within 15 days of such determination an appeal is filed with the City Council. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.50.180 Timing of required removal or alteration of structures containing nonconforming uses.
Every building in any R Zone, except residential buildings, churches and schools; and hotels, motels and professional offices (existing prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title) on Block 16 within the R-3 Zone, and in Blocks 68, 69, 108, 109, 121, 122, 142, 143, 152, and 153 within the R-4 Zone and commercial uses located in Block 139 within the R-1B Zone, which were designed or intended for a use not permitted in the R Zone in which it is located, shall be completely removed or altered to structurally conform to the uses permitted in the zone, and the use of such building shall be changed to conform with the uses permitted in the zone within the time period as fixed by the appropriate sections of this chapter. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.50.200 Two or more nonconforming main buildings on one lot having different abatement schedules – Abatement.
Where two or more nonconforming main buildings located on one lot have different abatement schedules, the abatement schedule for the nonconforming main building existing on the lot which provides the longest abatement period shall apply to all main buildings to be abated on the lot. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.50.210 Value of $10,000 or less – Abatement.
Nonconforming structures having a valuation made by the Building Official of $10,000 or less shall be abated within one year from the date of notification of the property owner. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.50.220 Uses subject to special use permit.
A. Property owners voluntarily applying for a special use permit for an existing use shall not be required to submit a fee for the SUP application.

B. Any existing use that is subject to a special use permit shall not be expanded or increased in the intensity of use requiring additional off-street parking nor change the type of use to a category requiring a special use permit without first obtaining a special use permit under the provisions of this title. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.50.230 Nonconforming hotels and motels.
Any provisions of this title to the contrary notwithstanding:

A. Existing structures and uses of nonconforming motels and hotels shall be allowed to be reconstructed and retain existing nonconformities so long as the replacement project does not expand the prior structural nonconformities.

B. Existing structures and uses of nonconforming motels and hotels shall not be enlarged, extended, reconstructed, structurally altered or increased in the intensity of use such as to require additional off-street parking under the provisions of this title without a minor special use permit allowing such enlargement, extension, reconstruction, alteration or increase in intensity of use. Subsequent enlargements or other structural changes shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 86.32 CMC, except that such construction shall comply with the underlying zoning requirements concerning height, setback, structural coverage, landscaping, floor area ratio, facade treatment, off-street parking and design review regulations. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.50.240 Nonconforming professional offices and commercial uses.
A. Professional offices located on Block 16 within the R-3 Zone and on Blocks 68, 69, 108, 109, 122, 142, 152 and 153 within the R-4 Zone and commercial uses located in Block 139 within the R-1B Zone existing prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title shall be allowed to be reconstructed and retain existing nonconformities so long as the replacement project does not expand the prior structural or use nonconformities. In the case of professional offices described herein, the reconstruction shall be accomplished within the applicable provisions of R-3 Zone (CMC 86.14.030, 86.14.040, 86.14.050, 86.14.070, 86.14.080, 86.14.100, and 86.14.110) and R-4 Zone (sections found in the Specific Plan). In the case of the commercial uses described herein, the reconstruction shall be accomplished within the provisions of the Commercial Zone sections found in CMC Title 88, Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan.

B. Nonconforming professional offices and commercial uses described herein shall not be enlarged, extended, reconstructed, structurally altered or increased in intensity of use such as to require additional off-street parking, under the provisions of this title, without a major special use permit allowing such enlargement, extension, reconstruction, alteration, or increase in intensity of use. Subsequent enlargements or other structural changes shall comply with the underlying zoning requirements described in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.50.250 Nonconforming residential condominiums.
Nonconforming residential condominiums may be reconstructed or structurally altered so long as neither the number of dwelling units for each complex nor the number of bedrooms for each unit is increased, the height of a structure is not increased, existing building profiles are maintained, and the number and size of existing parking spaces are not reduced. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.50.260 Nonconforming historic resource.
A structure designated as a National, State, or City historic resource or pending such designation shall not be subject to the abatement and regulatory provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

Chapter 86.52
VARIANCES
Sections:

86.52.010    Purpose.

86.52.020    When granted.

86.52.030    Planning Commission – Powers, duties.

86.52.040    Application – Contents, fee.

86.52.050    Notice and hearing on variance application.

86.52.060    Planning Commission hearing – Findings and decisions by resolution.

86.52.070    Repealed.

86.52.080    Repealed.

86.52.090    Repealed.

86.52.100    Repealed.

86.52.110    Continuation of hearings.

86.52.120    Notice of decision of Council on appeal.

86.52.130    Revocations – Expiration of variance, appeal.

86.52.010 Purpose.
The sole purpose of any variance shall be to prevent discrimination, and no variance shall be granted which would have the effect of granting a special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone in which such property is situated. No variance shall be granted for a parcel of property which authorizes a use or activity which is not otherwise expressly authorized by the zone regulation or regulations governing the parcel of property.

86.52.020 When granted.
Variances from regulations set forth in this title applicable to the particular zone in which the property is located shall be granted only when, because of special circumstances applicable to the property including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, the strict application of the regulations deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under identical zoning classification.

86.52.030 Planning Commission – Powers, duties.
The Planning Commission shall have the power and the responsibility to perform the duties relating to the hearing of and applications for variances from the requirements of this title pursuant to applicable provisions of the Government Code of the State of California and this code. Variances may be granted upon such conditions and limitations as the Planning Commission or City Council shall deem reasonable and necessary or advisable under the circumstances so that the objectives of this title shall be achieved. The Planning Commission shall have continuing jurisdiction over any variance which is or has been granted and may terminate it at any time in whole or in part for failure to comply with any condition or requirement imposed at the time of approval, but any such condition of limitation shall be subject to appeal as hereinafter provided.

86.52.040 Application – Contents, fee.
Applications for a variance shall be in writing on forms provided for that purpose by the Community Development Department and shall contain such information as may be required by the Community Development Department to adequately provide for the research, hearing and final disposition of the variance request. All applications shall be signed and dated by the property owner or his authorized representative. A filing fee as required by City Council resolution shall be paid and made payable to the City at the time a completely executed application form is submitted to the Community Development Department. Such fee is for the purpose of defraying the expenses of publication of legal notices of public hearing, postage and other costs incidental to the proper conduct of the proceedings herein provided. No application shall be accepted unless and until it complies with the requirements of this chapter. Variance applications filed pursuant to this chapter shall become a part of the permanent public record of the City and there shall be attached and filed therewith copies of all notices, affidavits, resolutions and minute actions pertaining thereto. (Ord. 1808; Ord. 1408)

86.52.050 Notice and hearing on variance application.
Upon the filing of a verified application for a variance and payment of the required fee, the Community Development Department shall cause to be published a notice of public hearing entitled “notice of proposed variance.” The notice shall be published one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Coronado not less that 10 days prior to the date of the public hearing and shall contain a description of the property under consideration and the nature of the variance requested. In addition, the Department shall mail the notice to each owner of property contiguous to the property that is the subject to the variance.

86.52.060 Planning Commission hearing – Findings and decisions by resolution.
Not later than 21 days following the close of a public hearing on any variance request, the Planning Commission shall render its decision by formal resolution stating therein the reasons and facts, which, in the Commission’s judgment, make the granting of the variance necessary to carry out the provisions of this title. If the variance is granted, the resolution shall also recite such conditions and limitations as the Commission may impose. The decision of the Commission shall become final 10 calendar days after the adoption of the resolution unless a notice of appeal to the City Council is filed with the City Clerk in accordance with Chapter 1.12 CMC. (Ord. 2025 § 32, 2011)

86.52.070 Appeals to Council – Time, filing of notice.
Repealed by Ord. 2025.

86.52.080 Appeals to Council – Hearing, notice.
Repealed by Ord. 2025. (Ord. 1570)

86.52.090 Decision of Council after hearing on appeal.
Repealed by Ord. 2025.

86.52.100 Council to announce findings and decision of appeal by resolution.
Repealed by Ord. 2025.

86.52.110 Continuation of hearings.
Any hearing provided for in this chapter may be continued from time to time; provided, that the presiding officer at the hearing shall, prior to adjournment, publicly announce the time and place of the continuance. No further notice shall be required.

86.52.120 Notice of decision of Council on appeal.
Immediately upon adoption of a resolution rendering a final decision on a variance, the City Clerk shall mail a copy of the resolution to the applicant for the variance and any other parties requesting such resolution. The City Clerk shall send one copy to the Community Development Department which shall be attached to the Commission’s file of the case, and the file shall be returned to the Commission for permanent filing.

86.52.130 Revocations – Expiration of variance, appeal.
The Planning Commission may, after a public hearing held pursuant to this chapter, revoke or modify any variance issued upon any one or more of the following grounds:

A. Failure to comply with any condition, requirement or limitations imposed at the time of approval of the variance;

B. That no substantial construction has taken place under such variance;

C. That there has been a lapse of work for six months under such variance;

D. That the variance granted is being or has recently been exercised contrary to or in violation of any condition of approval, statute, law, ordinance or regulation;

E. That the variance granted when exercised is found to be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare by the Commission or Council, and shall become null and void if not exercised within one year from the date of final approval of the variance. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Commission on any revocation may appeal to the Council as provided for in this chapter;

F. Upon final denial of any variance applied for pursuant to this chapter, no identical, subsequent application shall be accepted for filing for a period of six months commencing on the effective date of the final denial.

Chapter 86.53
DENSITY BONUS FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS
Sections:

86.53.010    Purpose and intent.

86.53.020    Applicability.

86.53.030    Definitions.

86.53.040    Density bonus affordability and longevity.

86.53.050    Density bonus calculations, justifications, incentives, concessions and location.

86.53.060    Donation of land.

86.53.070    Child care facilities.

86.53.080    Development standards.

86.53.090    Parking standards.

86.53.100    Appeals.

86.53.010 Purpose and intent.
The purpose of these regulations is to: (1) comply with State density bonus law (California Government Code Section 65915); (2) implement the Housing Element of the Coronado General Plan; and (3) better provide a broad range of affordable housing opportunities for the City’s residents. The regulations are intended to materially assist the housing industry in providing adequate and affordable shelter for all economic segments of the community and to provide a balance of housing opportunities for low-income, very low-income, and senior households, as well as moderate-income owners of condominium or planned developments as defined in Civil Code Section 1351, Subdivisions (f) and (k), respectively, throughout the City. It is intended that the affordable housing density bonus and any additional development incentive be available for use in all types of residential developments. It is also intended that these regulations implement the provisions of California Government Code Sections 65915 through 65918. It is further intended that these regulations will require any increase in density of residential developments to be distributed and constructed within the same development site as the market rate housing; however, in no event shall the number of residential units granted exceed 135 percent of the usual maximum density. (Ord 1973 § 1, 2005)

86.53.020 Applicability.
This chapter applies to any residential development of five or more dwelling units when the written request of an applicant proposes density beyond that permitted by the underlying zone in exchange for an agreement that a portion of the total dwelling units in the proposed development is reserved for low- or very low-income households, senior citizens or moderate-income families in a condominium or planned development. (Ord 1973 § 1, 2005)

86.53.030 Definitions.
The following terms are hereby defined for the purposes of this chapter:

A. “Affordable housing agreement” means an agreement between the applicant and the City guaranteeing the affordability of rental or ownership units to applicable income households for a period of not less than 30 years, and is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

B. “Affordable housing costs” are those amounts set forth in Section 50052.5 of the Health and Safety Code, as the same may be amended from time to time, or any State law replacing Section 50052.5.

C. “Appreciation” means the increase in value of a moderate income unit in a condominium or planned development project approved as a density bonus unit as determined by the difference between the original market value of the unit minus the price of the unit as sold to the first moderate income purchaser. If the value of the unit increases, the City and the initial purchaser shall divide the “appreciation” by respective percentage share with the City’s share equal to the percentage that the original sales price was less than fair market price at the time of original sale. So, if the original sales price was $200,000 for a unit with a fair market price of $300,000, the original unit sold for two-thirds or 66.67 percent of its fair market price and the City’s share of appreciation would be 33.33 percent.

D. “Child care facility” means a day nursery as defined in CMC 86.04.250.

E. “Concession” or “incentive” means:

1. A reduction in site development standards or a modification of zoning code requirements or architectural design requirements that exceed the minimum building standards approved by the California Building Standards Commission as provided in Part 2.5 (commencing with Section 18901) of Division 13 of the Health and Safety Code, including, but not limited to, a reduction in setback and square footage requirements and in the ratio of vehicular parking spaces that would otherwise be required that results in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions;

2. Approval of mixed use development in conjunction with the housing project if commercial, office, industrial, or other land uses will reduce the cost of the housing development and if the commercial, office, industrial, or other land uses are compatible with the housing project and the existing or planned development in the area where the proposed housing project will be located; or

3. Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the developer or the City that result in identifiable, financially sufficient and actual cost reductions.

F. “Condominium project” means a project as defined by Section 1351(f) of the Civil Code, as the same may be amended from time to time.

G. “Density bonus,” for housing projects that have the requisite percentage of housing reserved for lower-income households, very low-income households or senior citizen housing developments, means a density increase of at least 20 percent, but not more than 35 percent, unless a lesser percentage is elected by the applicant, over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density under the applicable zoning ordinance and Land Use Element of the General Plan as of the date of application by the applicant to the City.

“Density bonus,” for housing projects that are condominium projects or planned developments in which at least 10 percent of the total dwelling units are reserved for persons and families of moderate income, means a density increase of at least five percent, but not more than 35 percent, unless a lesser percentage is elected by the applicant, over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density under the applicable zoning ordinance and Land Use Element of the General Plan as of the date of application.

H. “Development standard” includes site or construction conditions that apply to a residential development pursuant to any ordinance, General Plan element, specific plan, or other local condition, law, policy, resolution, or regulation.

I. “Families of low or moderate income” means persons or families whose income meets the requirements set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 50093, as the same may be amended from time to time, or any State law replacing Section 50093.

J. “Housing development” means one or more groups of projects for residential units with a minimum of five residential units, including a condominium project and a planned development. “Housing development” also includes either (1) a project to substantially rehabilitate and convert an existing commercial building to residential use, or (2) the substantial rehabilitation of an existing multifamily dwelling, as defined in Subdivision (d) of Government Code Section 65863.4, as the same may be amended from time to time, or any State law replacing Section 65863.4, where the result of the rehabilitation would be a net increase in available residential units.

K. “Lower-income households” means households defined in Section 50079.5 of the Health and Safety Code, as the same may be amended from time to time, or any State law replacing Section 50079.5. At the time of the adoption of this chapter, Section 50079.5 defines “lower-income households” as those whose income is equal to or less than 80 percent of the area median income (“AMI”).

L. “Maximum allowable residential density” means the density allowed under the zoning ordinance, or if a range of density is permitted, means the maximum allowable density for the specific zoning range applicable to the project.

M. “Persons and families of moderate income” means persons and families defined in Section 50093 of the Health and Safety Code, as the same may be amended from time to time, or any State law replacing Section 50093. At the time of the adoption of this chapter, Section 50093 defines “moderate-income households” as those whose income does not exceed 120 percent of the area median income.

N. “Planned development,” “planned unit development” or “planned residential development” means a project as defined by Section 1351(k) of the Civil Code, and as defined by a planned community development in this title.

O. “Senior citizen housing development” means a project as defined by Section 51.3 of the Civil Code as the same may be amended from time to time, or any State law replacing Section 51.3.

P. “Very low-income households” means households defined in Section 50105 of the Health and Safety Code, as the same may be amended from time to time, or any State law replacing Section 50105. At the time of the adoption of this chapter, Section 50105 defines “very low-income households” as those whose income is equal to or less than 50 percent of the area median income. (Ord 1973 § 1, 2005)

86.53.040 Density bonus affordability and longevity.
A. Affordability in General. The affordable dwelling units proposed or constructed as defined in this chapter shall be subject to an affordable housing agreement, and such deed restrictions and other applicable documents, approved by the City Attorney, ensuring continued affordability of the dwelling units for a period of not less than 30 years or a longer period of time (if required by the construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, first-time home buyer’s program, rental subsidy program or any local, State and Federal laws, regulations or statutes). Affordability limits are established as follows:

1. Rental units targeted for lower-income households shall be affordable at a rent that does not exceed 30 percent of 60 percent of AMI.

2. Rental units targeted for very low-income households shall be affordable at a rent that does not exceed 30 percent of 50 percent of AMI.

Ownership units shall be made available only to households whose income does not exceed the limits for the targeted households for the duration of the affordable housing agreement.

B. Affordability for Moderate-Income Condominium or Planned Community Development Units. The City shall ensure that the initial occupant of each moderate-income unit that is directly related to the receipt of the density bonus in a condominium project or planned community development is a person or family of moderate income as defined in CMC 86.53.020(M). Upon resale, the seller of the unit shall retain the value of any improvements, the down-payment, and the seller’s proportionate share of appreciation. The City shall recapture its proportionate share of appreciation, which shall be used as required by Government Code Section 65915, as the same may be amended from time to time, or any applicable State law replacing Section 65915. The City’s share shall be equal to the percentage by which the initial sales price of the moderate-income household was less than the fair market value of the home at the time of initial sale. If there is any direct financial contribution from the City through participation in the cost of infrastructure, write-down of land costs, or subsidizing the cost of construction, the City may limit the amount of the appreciation upon resale for at least 30 years or more if required by the project funding source.

C. Affordability Covenants. Affordability shall be ensured by requiring that the applicant enter into an affordable housing agreement which shall be reviewed by the City Community Development Department and approved by the City Attorney and shall be recorded and run with the land. The 30-year or longer affordability period shall commence from the date that the final certificate of occupancy is issued, or the date of the recording of the affordable housing agreement, whichever shall last occur. (Ord 1973 § 1, 2005)

86.53.050 Density bonus calculations, justifications, incentives, concessions and location.
A. Density Bonus Calculations. Upon written request of an applicant through the processing of density bonus request in the manner of a “determination of development standards” per CMC 86.02.124, the Planning Commission shall grant a density bonus of at least 20 percent, but not more than 35 percent, and incentives or concessions as provided in this section when the applicant for the housing development agrees or proposes to construct at least any one of the following (note: The applicant shall also simultaneously process each and every other development application required by this title for the proposed project):

1. Ten percent of the total units of a housing development for lower-income households;

2. Five percent of the total units of a housing development for very low-income households;

3. A senior citizen housing development; or

4. Ten percent of the total dwelling units in a condominium project or planned development for persons and families of moderate income.

B. Additional Density Bonus.

1. If an applicant exceeds the percentages set forth in subsection A of this section, the applicant shall be entitled to an additional density bonus above 20 percent calculated as follows:

a. For each one percent increase above 10 percent in the percentage of units affordable to lower-income households, the density bonus shall be increased by one and one-half percent, up to a maximum of 35 percent for the total project;

b. For each one percent increase above five percent in the percentage of units affordable to very low-income households, the density bonus shall be increased by two and one-half percent, up to a maximum of 35 percent for the total project;

c. For each one percent above 10 percent in the percentage of units affordable to moderate-income households, the density bonus shall be increased by one percent, up to a maximum of 35 percent for the total project.

2. For the above calculation, all density bonus calculations resulting in fractions shall be rounded up to the next whole number.

C. Justification for Concessions and Incentives. In addition to all other requirements of the “determination of development standards” process per CMC 86.02.124, an applicant requesting a density bonus and/or development standard concession(s) or incentive(s) shall also show, using one of the following methods, that the waiver or modification is necessary to make the housing units economically feasible:

1. A development pro forma with the capital costs, operating expenses, return on investment, loan-to-value ratio and the debt coverage ratio, including the contribution(s) provided by any applicable subsidy program(s), and the economic effect created by the minimum 30-year use and income restrictions on the affordable housing units; or

2. An appraisal report indicating the value of the density bonus and of the incentive(s)/concession(s); or

3. A use of funds statement identifying the projected financing gap for the project with the affordable housing units. The analysis shall show how much of the funding gap is covered by the density bonus and how much by the incentive(s)/concession(s).

D. Concessions and Incentives.

1. When the Planning Commission grants a density bonus in accordance with this section, the Planning Commission shall grant the additional concession or incentive requested by the applicant and make all of the following findings, based upon substantial evidence, that:

a. The concession or incentive is required in order to provide for affordable housing costs or rents for the targeted units to be set as specified in CMC 86.53.040; and

b. The concession or incentive would not have a specific adverse impact [as defined in Government Code Section 65589.5(d)(2), as the same may be amended from time to time, or any applicable State law replacing Section 65589.5] upon the public health and safety or the physical environment and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to low- and moderate-income households; and

c. The concession or incentive would not have a specific adverse impact on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources.

2. Number of Incentives/Concessions. The applicant shall be entitled to receive the following number of incentives or concessions:

a. One incentive or concession for projects that include at least five percent of the total units for very low-income households, or at least 10 percent of the total units for lower-income households or persons and families of moderate income in a condominium or planned unit development.

b. Two incentives or concessions for projects that include at least 10 percent of the total units for very low-income households, or at least 20 percent of the total units for lower-income households or persons and families of moderate income in a condominium or planned community development.

c. Three incentives or concessions for projects that include at least 15 percent of the total units for very low-income households, or at least 30 percent of the total units for lower-income households or persons and families of moderate income in a condominium or planned community development.

E. The granting of a density bonus, incentive or concession shall not be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a General Plan amendment or zoning change. The request for such items shall be processed in the manner of a “determination of development standards” per CMC 86.02.124, in addition to every other applicable planning application as described in this title.

F. An applicant may submit a written request to the Community Development Department detailing the specific incentives or concessions that the applicant requests pursuant to this section.

G. This section does not limit or require the provision of direct financial incentives for the housing development, including the provision of publicly owned land, by the City, or the waiver of fees or dedication requirements.

H. All affordable units shall be of similar design and quality as the market rate units, including exteriors and floor plans.

I. All affordable units shall be dispersed throughout the housing development rather than clustered in a single area or building. (Ord 1973 § 1, 2005)

86.53.060 Donation of land.
When an applicant for a tentative subdivision map, parcel map, or other residential development donates land to the City that meets the requirements of this section, the applicant shall be entitled to a 15 percent increase above the otherwise maximum allowable residential density under the applicable zoning ordinance and Land Use Element of the General Plan for the entire development.

A. The developable acreage and zoning classification of the land must be sufficient to permit construction of units in an amount not less than 10 percent of the number of residential units of the proposed development;

B. The units shall be affordable to very low-income households; and

C. Any increase in the density required by this section shall be in addition to any increase in density provided to the applicant under CMC 86.53.050; provided, however, that the project shall not be allowed density bonuses under this section and under CMC 86.53.050 in excess of 35 percent combined. (Ord 1973 § 1, 2005)

86.53.070 Child care facilities.
When an applicant proposes to construct a housing development that conforms to the requirements of this title and includes a child care facility that will be located on the premises of, as part of, or adjacent to the project, the following shall apply:

A. The Planning Commission shall grant either of the following, unless a finding is made in accordance with subsection C of this section:

1. An additional density bonus that is an amount of square feet of residential space that is equal to or greater than the amount of square feet in the child care facility; or

2. An additional concession or incentive that contributes significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction of the child care facility.

B. The Planning Commission shall require the following as conditions of approving the housing development; these requirements shall be included in the affordable housing agreement:

1. The child care facility shall remain in operation for a period of time that is as long as or longer than the period of time during which the density bonus units are required to remain affordable pursuant to CMC 86.53.040; and

2. Of the children who attend the child care facility, the children of very low-income households, lower-income households, or families of moderate income shall equal a percentage that is equal to or greater than the percentage of dwelling units that are required for very low-income households, lower-income households, or families of moderate income in the proposed housing development pursuant to CMC 86.53.050(A) and (B).

C. The Planning Commission shall not be required to provide a density bonus or concession for a child care facility if it finds, based upon substantial evidence, that the City already has adequate child care facilities.

D. The density bonus allowed under this section shall be in addition to any density bonuses already given to the applicant pursuant to CMC 86.53.050 and 86.53.060. (Ord 1973 § 1, 2005)

86.53.080 Development standards.
A. The City shall not apply any development standard that will have the effect of precluding the construction of a development meeting the criteria of this title while at the same time at the densities or with the concessions or incentives permitted by this chapter.

B. All development standards of the underlying zone shall apply to density bonus projects unless one or more concessions have been granted.

C. Any discretionary actions for modification or waiver shall be processed as a “determination of development standards” per CMC 86.02.124 and each and every other development application required by this title for the proposed housing project.

D. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to require the City to waive or reduce development standards if the waiver or reduction would have a specific adverse impact, as defined in Government Code Section 65589.5(d)(2), as the same may be amended from time to time, or any applicable State law replacing Section 65589.5, upon the health, safety, or the physical environment, and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact.

E. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to require the City to waive or reduce development standards that would have an adverse impact on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources. (Ord 1973 § 1, 2005)

86.53.090 Parking standards.
A. Upon request of the applicant for any housing development qualifying for a density bonus under this chapter, the following maximum parking standards shall apply, inclusive of handicapped and guest parking, for the entire housing development:

1. One on-site parking space per dwelling unit that has up to one bedroom;

2. Two on-site parking spaces per dwelling unit that has up to three bedrooms;

3. Two and one-half parking spaces per dwelling unit that has more than three bedrooms.

B. All parking calculations for the development resulting in a fraction shall be rounded up to the next whole number.

C. Parking may be provided by tandem parking and need not be covered or garaged, but may not be on-street parking.

D. An applicant may request additional parking incentives or concessions beyond those provided in this section pursuant to CMC 86.53.050(D). (Ord 1973 § 1, 2005)

86.53.100 Appeals.
The decision of the Commission shall become final 10 calendar days after the adoption of a resolution unless a notice of appeal to the City Council is filed with the City Clerk in accordance with Chapter 1.12 CMC. (Ord. 2025 § 35, 2011)

Chapter 86.54
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Sections:

86.54.010    Purpose and intent.

86.54.020    Zone boundary amendments authorized.

86.54.030    Initiation of amendments.

86.54.040    Application for zone boundary change or reclassification by property owner.

86.54.050    Procedure – Hearing, notice.

86.54.060    Limitation on filing subsequent identical application.

86.54.070    Creation of Zoning Administrator – Purpose.

86.54.080    Authority and duties of Zoning Administrator.

86.54.090    Variances.

86.54.100    Application for variance.

86.54.110    Notice of variance application.

86.54.120    Findings and decisions by Zoning Administrator.

86.54.130    Variance – Appeal procedure.

86.54.140    Appeals to Planning Commission – Hearing.

86.54.150    Site plan approval.

86.54.160    Repealed.

86.54.170    Temporary structures.

86.54.180    Fences, hedges, walls.

86.54.190    Referral to Planning Commission.

86.54.200    Limitation on filing subsequent, identical application.

86.54.210    –

86.54.309    Reserved.

86.54.310    Enforcement.

86.54.320    Violations declared public nuisances.

86.54.330    Penalty for violation.

86.54.010 Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to refer to regulations that apply in addition to the regulations of this title. These regulations are contained in Chapter 70.08 CMC and are incorporated hereby by reference.

86.54.020 Zone boundary amendments authorized.
Boundaries of any of the several zones established by this title or the classification or reclassification of property therein may be amended whenever public necessity, convenience and general welfare require.

86.54.030 Initiation of amendments.
A. Such zone boundary or reclassification amendments may be initiated by:

1. A verified application of one or more owners of property proposed to be so changed or reclassified;

2. Resolution of intention of the City Council;

3. Resolution of intention of the Planning Commission.

B. Such other amendments to this title may be initiated by:

1. Resolution of intention of the City Council;

2. Resolution of intention of the Planning Commission.

86.54.040 Application for zone boundary change or reclassification by property owner.
Whenever the owner of any land desires a zone boundary change or reclassification of his property, he shall file with the Community Development Department an application on forms provided for by the Department and duly verified by him requesting such change or reclassification. Such application shall be accompanied by a fee as established by City Council resolution. (Ord. 1586; Ord. 1408)

86.54.050 Procedure – Hearing, notice.
Upon the filing of such verified application, or passage of such resolution of intention, the Commission shall hold such public hearings, duly noticed, as required by applicable provisions of the “Planning and Zoning Law” of the State of California for such zone boundary changes or reclassification. The Planning Commission and City Council shall take such action hereon as may be requested by the “Planning and Zoning Law” of the State of California and this title.

86.54.060 Limitation on filing subsequent identical application.
Upon final denial of any zone boundary amendment applied for pursuant to CMC 86.54.030(A), no identical, subsequent application shall be accepted for filing for a period of six months commencing on the effective date of the final denial.

86.54.070 Creation of Zoning Administrator – Purpose.
A Zoning Administrator is hereby created under Article 3, Section 65900 of the California Government Code so as to relieve the Planning Commission of certain routine functions and to properly administer the City zoning ordinances with such authority as granted to him by this chapter.

86.54.080 Authority and duties of Zoning Administrator.
The functions set forth in CMC 86.54.090 through 86.54.200 are considered either minor in nature or proper zoning enforcement duties and the Zoning Administrator is authorized to approve, deny, or conditionally approve such applications as may be required.

86.54.090 Variances.
The Zoning Administrator shall be authorized to grant variances for limited relief in the case of:

A. Modification of distance regulations not to exceed 10 percent of the requirements applicable in the appropriate zone;

B. Modification of area regulations not to exceed five percent of the requirements applicable in the appropriate zone;

C. Walls or fences to exceed permitted heights due to special site conditions not to exceed 10 percent of the requirements set forth in the ordinance;

D. Any structure that is nonconforming due to setback or height requirements may be altered and/or enlarged by approval of the Zoning Administrator, pursuant to Chapter 86.50 CMC, and subject to the percentage limitations herein; provided, that such alteration or enlargement shall not exceed the maximum height limit of the zone in which the property is located.

86.54.100 Application for variance.
Applications for a variance shall be submitted on forms provided for that purpose to the Community Development Department, and shall be accompanied by plot plans, elevations, or other data as may reasonably be required by the director of the Community Development Department to show the detail of the proposed use or structure. The application shall be accompanied with a filing fee as established by City Council resolution. (Ord. 1586; Ord. 1408)

86.54.110 Notice of variance application.
Upon the filing of a verified application, the Zoning Administrator shall notify, by mail, all property owners within 300 feet of the property that is the subject of the variance. The notice shall describe the nature of the variance requested and the period of time the variance will be under consideration and appeal procedures available to the public concerning such variance.

86.54.120 Findings and decisions by Zoning Administrator.
Not later than 10 calendar days following the mailing of the notices, any interested party may notify the Community Development Department, in writing, articulating any substantial objections to the variance requested. The Zoning Administrator shall, at the end of the 10-calendar-day period, render a decision by written statement explaining the reasons for and facts substantiating the decision. The Zoning Administrator shall mail a copy of the statement to the applicant, members of the Planning Commission, and any other interested party requesting a copy of the decision. The statement shall be filed with the Community Development Department and will become effective 10 calendar days after the decision by the Zoning Administrator. (Ord. 2025 § 37, 2011)

86.54.130 Variance – Appeal procedure.
The applicant or other interested parties may appeal the decision of the Zoning Administrator to the Planning Commission within 10 calendar days after the decision is filed with the Community Development Department. The appeal shall be in writing and filed with the Community Development Department and shall specify the reason(s) for appealing the decision of the Zoning Administrator. The appeal fee shall be as set forth by resolution by the City Council. (Ord. 2025 § 38, 2011)

86.54.140 Appeals to Planning Commission – Hearing.
The Zoning Administrator shall provide public notice of the appeal hearing to consider the variance request as outlined in Government Code Section 65091. The Planning Commission will consider the variance application, Zoning Administrator determination, appeal letter, along with written or oral testimony provided at the hearing, and adopt a resolution to affirm, modify or overturn the Zoning Administrator. The decision of the Commission shall become final 10 calendar days after the adoption of a resolution unless a notice of appeal to the City Council is filed with the City Clerk in accordance with Chapter 1.12 CMC. (Ord. 2025 § 39, 2011)

86.54.150 Site plan approval.
The Zoning Administrator shall be authorized to grant site plan approval as provided herein.

86.54.160 Home occupations.
Repealed by Ord. 2022.

86.54.170 Temporary structures.
The Zoning Administrator shall be authorized to permit temporary structures for the housing of tools, equipment, building assembly operations and supervisory or engineering offices in connection with major construction projects; provided, however, that such temporary structures are located within or adjacent to the development or construction site to which they are incidental.

86.54.180 Fences, hedges, walls.
In any Commercial or Industrial Zone, fences, walls, or hedges may be allowed or required to a maximum of eight feet if it is determined by the Zoning Administrator that the increase in height is necessary to protect public health, safety or welfare and would have no detrimental effect upon the surrounding neighborhood.

86.54.190 Referral to Planning Commission.
The Zoning Administrator may, at his discretion, refer any of the matters on which he is authorized to rule to the Planning Commission for review and disposition pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 86.52 CMC.

86.54.200 Limitation on filing subsequent, identical application.
Upon final denial of any variance applied for pursuant to this chapter, no identical, subsequent application shall be accepted for filing for a period of six months commencing on the effective date of the final denial.

86.54.210 – 86.54.309 Reserved.
86.54.310 Enforcement.
All department directors, officials or other employees of the City vested with the duty or authority to issue any permit, license or certificate shall conform to the provisions of this title and shall issue no permit, license or certificate for uses, buildings, structures or purposes in conflict with the provisions contained in this title, and any such permit, license or certificate so issued, intentionally or otherwise, shall be null and void. It shall be the duty of the director of the Community Development Department to enforce the provisions of this title.

86.54.320 Violations declared public nuisances.
Any building or structure set up, erected, constructed, altered, enlarged, converted, moved or maintained contrary to the provisions of this title and any use of any land, building, or premises established, conducted, operated or maintained contrary to the provisions of this title shall be and the same are hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance, and the City Attorney shall immediately take actions or proceedings for the abatement and removal and enjoinment therein in the manner provided by law, and shall take such steps and shall apply to such courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate and remove such building, structure or use, and restrain and enjoin any person, firm or corporation from setting up, erecting, constructing, altering, enlarging, converting, moving, maintaining or using such building, structure or property contrary to the provisions of this title. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive.

86.54.330 Penalty for violation.
Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee, employer or otherwise, who violates or causes the violation of any provision of this title shall be guilty of an infraction. Each separate day or any portion thereof during which the above-referenced violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 1400)

Chapter 86.55
SPECIAL USE PERMITS
Sections:

86.55.010    Purpose.

86.55.020    Prohibitions.

86.55.030    Application.

86.55.040    Procedure for permit issuance.

86.55.050    Imposition of conditions.

86.55.060    Basis for denial.

86.55.070    Final determination – Appeal.

86.55.080    Expiration/extension/amendment of permit.

86.55.090    Revocation of permit.

86.55.100    Emergency suspension.

86.55.110    Special uses by permit – Any zone except Commercial.

86.55.120    Special uses by permit – Any zone except C-U, OS, Commercial, and R-4.

86.55.130    Special uses by permit – H-M Zone.

86.55.140    Special uses by permit – C Zone.

86.55.150    Repealed.

86.55.160    Special uses by permit – C-R Zone.

86.55.170    Special uses by permit – R-4 Zone.

86.55.175    Special uses by permit – R-4 Zone existing nonresidential facilities.

86.55.178    Special uses by permit – R-4 Zone clubs, lodges and churches.

86.55.180    Special uses by permit – R-3 Zone.

86.55.190    Special uses by permit – Open Space Zone.

86.55.193    Repealed.

86.55.195    Historic resources and special uses by permit – Residential Zones.

86.55.200    Veterinarian hospital.

86.55.210    Antenna tower and antenna mast.

86.55.215    Wireless communication facilities (WCFs).

86.55.220    Aquaculture.

86.55.230    Automobile car wash.

86.55.240    Repealed.

86.55.250    Automobile service station.

86.55.260    Auto repair.

86.55.270    Building materials retail sale.

86.55.280    Clubs, lodges, assembly halls, and public buildings.

86.55.290    Industrial/manufacturing.

86.55.300    Hospital or convalescent hospital.

86.55.310    Repealed.

86.55.320    Reserved.

86.55.330    Repealed.

86.55.340    Lodging houses.

86.55.350    Mixed use development.

86.55.360    Formula fast food restaurants.

86.55.370    Formula business.

86.55.380    Repealed.

86.55.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide procedures for the review and, where necessary, the imposition of special conditions on the creation and maintenance of designated uses which involve special site or design requirements, operating characteristics or potential adverse effects on the surrounding area. (Ord. 1745)

86.55.020 Prohibitions.
A. Without first having obtained a special use permit, it is unlawful for any person to create or maintain a use when the provisions of this code require that a special use permit be obtained before such use is created or obtained.

B. It is unlawful for any person to create or maintain a use contrary to the provisions of a special use permit issued for such use.

C. Until a special use permit is obtained, no building permit or other development permit shall be issued relating to a use for which a special use permit is required by this code.

86.55.030 Application.
A. An application shall be filed with the Community Development Department on forms provided by the City.

B. The applicant shall provide envelopes (affixed with sufficient first class postage) addressed to each applicant, to all persons who have requested to be on a mailing list for the specific project, and to all owners of property within 300 feet of the perimeter of the site proposed for a use requiring a special use permit.

C. The application shall not be complete until the applicant has provided all information deemed necessary by the Community Development Department to properly administer this title and the applicant has paid the processing fee established by the City Council.

D. Upon final denial of any application, no subsequent application for the same use at the same site shall be accepted for filing for a period of six months from the effective date of the final denial.

86.55.040 Procedure for permit issuance.
A. Special Use Permit (Minor). For uses identified in this title as requiring a special use permit (minor), the Planning Commission is the agency authorized to grant the special use permit, subject to an appeal to the City Council.

1. Upon the filing of an application, the Community Development Department shall cause the application to be set for public hearing before the Planning Commission no less than 14 days nor more than 60 days from the date of filing.

2. Notice shall be published one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Coronado not less than 14 days prior to the date of consideration and shall contain a description of the property under consideration and the nature of the use proposed.

3. Notice shall be mailed to all owners of property within 300 feet of the site of the proposed use, as shown on the latest tax rolls.

4. Notice shall be accomplished in accordance with Government Code Section 65091.

B. Special Use Permit (Major). For uses identified in this title as requiring a special use permit (major), the City Council is the agency authorized to grant the special use permit.

1. Upon the filing of an application, the Community Development Department shall cause the application to be set for a public hearing before the Planning Commission no less than 14 days nor more than 60 days from the date of filing, noticed in accordance with subsection A of this section.

2. The Planning Commission’s recommendation shall be set for a public hearing before the City Council at the next available meeting, noticed in accordance with subsection A of this section.

86.55.050 Imposition of conditions.
A. The agency authorized to grant a special use permit may impose those conditions and exactions necessary to mitigate the impacts of the proposed use found by the agency to be reasonably likely to be contrary to the provisions of this title or to cause an adverse impact upon the environment or upon the health, safety, or welfare of the community without the imposition of those conditions or exactions.

B. The granting of a special use permit shall be conditioned upon obtaining environmental design review in accordance with this code.

86.55.060 Basis for denial.
A special use permit shall be granted unless the authorized agency makes findings of fact based upon the information presented in the application or during the consideration of the application which support one or more of the following conclusions:

A. The use as proposed will be detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of persons residing or working in the vicinity;

B. The use as proposed will be injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity;

C. The use as proposed is inconsistent with the General Plan, any applicable specific plan, or a zoning regulation; or

D. The location or operating characteristics of the proposed use will be incompatible with or will adversely affect or will be materially detrimental to impacted uses, residences, buildings, structures or natural resources, with consideration given to, but not limited to:

1. The inadequacy of public facilities, services and utilities to serve the proposed use;

2. The harmful effect, if any, upon a desirable neighborhood character;

3. The inability of the capacity and physical character of surrounding streets to safely deal with traffic that will be generated by the proposed use;

4. The unsuitability of the site for the type or intensity of use which is proposed; and

5. The harmful effect, if any, upon the environmental quality and natural resources of the City.

86.55.070 Final determination – Appeal.
The decision of the Commission shall become final 10 calendar days after the adoption of a resolution unless a notice of appeal to the City Council is filed with the City Clerk in accordance with Chapter 1.12 CMC. (Ord. 2025 § 41, 2011)

86.55.080 Expiration/extension/amendment of permit.
A. A special use permit shall expire upon the end of the term contained in the special use permit.

B. The date of expiration of any special use permit may be extended for one or more periods, the total of which is no greater than one year, upon application to the Planning Commission at least 30 days prior to the date of expiration. The Planning Commission shall not extend the term of any permit unless it is demonstrated by the permittee to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission that extending the use poses no danger to the health, safety or welfare of the community. The determination of the Planning Commission must be by resolution which contains the reasons for making the determination. The Planning Commission determination is appealable to the City Council.

C. A special use permit may be amended at the request of the permittee. The amendment procedures shall be identical to the process then in effect for applying for a permit. A fee as required by Council resolution shall be paid at the time the application is submitted. (Ord. 1808)

86.55.090 Revocation of permit.
A. A special use permit may be revoked by the City Council upon no less than 30 working days’ notice to the permittee setting forth the basis of the intention to revoke and giving the permittee the opportunity to present information at an administrative hearing before the City Council.

B. In the event that the identified basis is not corrected forthwith by the permittee, the City Council may suspend, impose new conditions, modify existing conditions or revoke the permit if it makes findings of fact based upon the information presented during the administrative hearing which support one or more of the following conclusions:

1. As a result of any principal or employee of the permittee being found guilty by a court of law of having criminally violated local, State or Federal law, it is reasonably likely that the continuing conduct of the permitted use by the permittee will threaten the public health or safety;

2. The permittee’s conduct of the use is contrary to local, State or Federal law;

3. The permittee’s conduct of the use constitutes a public nuisance;

4. The permittee’s conduct of the use is contrary to any condition or restriction previously established in the special use permit;

5. The permittee has not substantially initiated the use within one year from the date of the issuance of the special use permit or the time otherwise specified in the special use permit; or

6. After commencing the use, the permittee’s conduct of the use has been abandoned for a period of 180 consecutive days or more.

86.55.100 Emergency suspension.
A. At any time when the conduct of the use is in violation of the terms and conditions of the permit or in some other manner immediately threatens the public health or safety, any City official responsible for enforcing this code may immediately suspend the special use permit by so notifying the permittee or the permittee’s responsible employee or agent involved in the threatening conduct.

B. The City official suspending the permit shall reinstate the permit when the threat is removed. The actions of the suspending City official may be appealed orally to the City Manager during the suspension. The City Manager shall determine whether an existing threat requires the continuation of the suspension and thereafter advise the permittee of the determination.

86.55.110 Special uses by permit – Any zone except Commercial.
The following uses may be established and maintained in any zone except Commercial only if the designated type of special use permit is first obtained and thereafter the permittee complies with all of the provisions therein:

Use

Type of Permit

Antenna tower

Minor

Antenna mast

Minor

Publicly owned

Major

Public utility/service

Uses and structures, including but not limited to reservoirs, tanks, pumping stations, telephone exchanges, power and transformer stations or facilities, but not including distribution lines

Major

Transmitters

Radio/television

Similar facilities

Major

(Ord. 1954 § 9, 2003; Ord. 1827; Ord. 1817)

86.55.120 Special uses by permit – Any zone except C-U, OS, Commercial, and R-4.
The following uses may be established and maintained in any zone, except the C-U, OS, Commercial, and R-4 Zones, unless specifically authorized in other sections of the Municipal Code, and only if the designated type of special use permit is first obtained and thereafter the permittee complies with all of the provisions therein:

Use

Type of Permit

Church

Major

Philanthropic institution

Major

Planned community development

Major

School

College

Elementary

Nursery

Day nursery

Preschool

Private

Secondary

University

Major

(Ord. 1981 § 6, 2006; Ord. 1954 § 10, 2003; Ord. 1817)

86.55.130 Special uses by permit – H-M Zone.
The following uses may be established and maintained in the H-M Zone only if the designated type of special use permit is first obtained and thereafter the permittee complies with all of the provisions therein:

Use

Type of Permit

Aquaculture

Major

Assemblages of many people/
automobiles, open-air theaters, sport/recreational enterprises

Major

Automobile car wash, whether or not in conjunction with any other use

Major

Boarding house

Major

Clinic, medical

Major

Dumps/landfills

Public

Private

Major

Formula fast food restaurants

Minor

Formula retail

Major

Hospitals

General

Convalescent

Major

Nursing home

Major

Rest home

Major

Sanitarium

Major

(Ord. 1954 § 11, 2003; Ord. 1919; Ord. 1910; Ord. 1881)

86.55.140 Special uses by permit – C Zone.
See CMC Title 88, Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan, for uses allowed in the Commercial Zone with a special use permit. (Ord. 1954 § 12, 2003; Ord. 1868)

86.55.150 Special uses by permit – L-C Zone.
Repealed by Ord. 1954. (Ord. 1868)

86.55.160 Special uses by permit – C-R Zone.
The following uses may be established and maintained in the Commercial Recreation Zone only if the designated type of special use permit is first obtained and thereafter the permittee complies with all of the provisions therein:

Use

Type of Permit

Art galleries

Major

Cocktail lounge

Major

Marine oriented activities

Boat/yacht sales

Not refueling facilities

Major

Meeting halls

Clubs

Lodges

Assembly halls

Major

Restaurant

Full service, fast food or formula fast food

Major

Theater for the performing arts

Major

Tourist oriented specialty shops

Major

Compatible uses determined by the Planning Commission to be closely related to uses in this section

Major

(Ord. 1910)

86.55.170 Special Uses by Permit – R-4 Zone.
A. The following uses may be established and maintained in the R-4 Zone only if the designated type of special use permit is first obtained and thereafter the permittee complies with all of the provisions therein:

Stand Alone Uses

Type of Permit

Hotel and motel

Major

Professional

Major

Residential care facility, large

Major

Boarding house

Major

Single-room occupancy units

Major

Combined Use Development

Type of Permit

Boarding house with residential

Major

Nursing home with residential

Major

Professional with residential

Major

B. A maximum of three professional sites are permitted in the R-4 Zone including new and existing facilities.

C. Professional office space as part of a combined use development is limited to the first floor of a building. (Ord. 2040 § 14, 2014; Ord. 1981 § 7, 2006; Ord. 1910)

86.55.175 Special uses by permit – R-4 Zone existing nonresidential facilities.
Existing nonresidential uses and facilities located in the R-4 Zone are permitted subject to one of the following:

A. To be maintained as stand alone uses.

B. To be reconstructed as stand alone uses subject to the issuance of a major special use permit.

C. To be reconstructed as a combined use development with professional and residential uses, provided professional office space is limited to the first floor and the total number of professional sites in the R-4 Zone does not exceed three, and subject to the issuance of a major special use permit. (Ord. 1981 § 8, 2006)

86.55.178 Special uses by permit – R-4 Zone clubs, lodges and churches.
Existing clubs, lodges, and churches in nonresidential facilities located in the R-4 Zone can be changed to different clubs, lodges and churches within an existing facility subject to a major special use permit. (Ord. 1981 § 8, 2006)

86.55.180 Special uses by permit – R-3 Zone.
The following uses may be established and maintained in the R-3 Zone only if the designated type of special use permit is first obtained and thereafter the permittee complies with all of the provisions therein:

Use

Type of Permit

Boarding house

Major

Lodging house (Note: Allowed only in “P” Overlay Zone)

Major

(Ord. 1788)

86.55.190 Special uses by permit – Open Space Zone.
The following uses may be established and maintained in the Open Space Zone only if the designated type of special use permit is first obtained and thereafter the permittee complies with all of the provisions therein:

Use

Type of Permit

Aquaculture

Major

Campground, public and private

Major

Commercial use incidental to the operation of public or private recreational facilities

Sale of food and refreshments

Boat refueling services

Major

Permanent structure necessary for and accessory to a permitted use

Major

Private recreational facility

Major

Compatible uses determined by the Planning Commission to be closely related to uses in this section

Major

(Ord. 1839)

86.55.193 Special uses by permit – Civic Use (C-U) Zone.
Repealed by Ord. 2040. (Ord. 2015 § 17, 2010)

86.55.195 Historic resources and special uses by permit – Residential Zones.
In addition to the aforementioned sections contained within this chapter, in any Residential Zone a historic resource may be used as a residential use, a combined residential and commercial use, solely as a commercial use, or any other use permitted by the Planning Commission and City Council through a major special use permit. (Ord. 1918)

86.55.200 Veterinarian hospital.
An animal hospital or veterinarian facility shall be subject to the applicable zoning regulations of this title, subject to the following:

A. The use shall be located no closer than 100 feet to any Residential Zone, or existing restaurant, hotel, or motel.

B. The use must have measures and controls that prevent offensive noise and odor. (Ord. 1954 § 13, 2003)

86.55.210 Antenna tower and antenna mast.
A. An antenna tower or antenna mast shall be subject to the applicable zoning regulations of this title, subject to such conditions as may be necessary to accomplish the purposes of this title.

B. No special use permit is required for a tower or mast which complies with each of the following:

1. Does not exceed 66 feet in height measured from grade level;

2. The first eight feet above grade level shall be visually screened by appropriate fences, walls or hedges;

3. No portion of the tower or mast is located within a setback area; and

4. Required building permits have been approved.

C. This section does not apply to antenna tower or masts associated with a wireless communications facility. (Ord. 2083 § 3 (Exh. A), 2018)

86.55.215 Wireless communication facilities (WCFs).
A. “Wireless communications facility” is defined as a facility that sends and/or receives radio frequency signals, AM/FM, microwave, and/or electromagnetic waves for the purpose of providing voice, data, images or other information, including, but not limited to, cellular and/or digital telephone service, personal communications services, and paging services. Wireless communications facilities include antennas and all other types of equipment for the transmission or receipt of such signals; towers or similar structures built to support such equipment; equipment cabinets, base stations, and other accessory development; and screening and concealment elements.

B. All wireless communication facilities, and any modifications, collocations, expansions or other changes to existing WCFs, are subject to review and applicable permits as specified in City Council procedures and all WCFs shall comply with said procedures.

C. “Wireless communication facility (WCF)” means any component, including antennas and all related equipment, buildings and improvements for the provision of personal wireless services defined by the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 and as subsequently amended. Personal wireless services include, but are not limited to, cellular, personal communication services (PCS), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), paging, ground-based repeaters for satellite radio services, micro-cell antennas and similar systems which exhibit similar technological characteristics. (Ord. 2083 (Exh. A), 2018)

86.55.220 Aquaculture.
Aquaculture shall be subject to the applicable zoning regulations of this title subject to the following: Mitigation of all significant environmental impacts into insignificance.

86.55.230 Automobile car wash.
An automobile car wash shall be subject to the applicable zoning regulations of this title, subject to the following:

A. All equipment used for the facility shall be soundproofed so that any noise emanating therefrom, as measured from any point on adjacent property, shall be no more audible than the noise emanating from the normal street traffic at a comparable distance;

B. Hours of operation shall be as specified in the special use permit;

C. Vacuuming facilities shall be located to discourage the stacking of vehicles entering the car wash area and causing traffic congestion adjacent to any areas used for ingress or egress; and

D. The minimum setback from the car wash structure to the front property line shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator, upon submission of plans for design review and architectural approval.

86.55.240 Automobile sales facilities, new and/or used.
Repealed by Ord. 1954.

86.55.250 Automobile service station.
A special use permit shall be required for an automobile service station under the following conditions:

1. Construction of a new service station;

2. Reopening of a service station that has been vacant for a period of at least six months; or

3. Renovation, alteration or addition to an existing service station when such change, within a 12-month period, exceeds 50 percent of the value of the existing building or structure as officially established by the latest records of the County Assessor of San Diego County.

When an automobile service station is proposed, then, in addition to the applicable zoning regulations and the regulations of this chapter, the proposed use shall be subject to the following:

A. Application Procedure. The applicant shall submit the following information:

1. A full dimensioned plot plan of the property drawn to scale, showing location of all buildings, canopies, points of vehicular access, pump islands, storage facilities, landscape planters, exterior lighting standards, signs, walls, parking spaces, trash enclosures, curb cuts and driveway approaches;

2. An engineered on-site grading plan, which shows compliance with all requirements of the City governing grading and drainage;

3. A landscape and irrigation plan showing the size, location, number and variety of plant materials to be used, including the botanical or common plant names and the location, type and design of all irrigation facilities;

4. Architectural elevations of all buildings, walls, signs and trash enclosures including a description of the materials, textures and colors to be used; and

5. A list of services and operations intended to be provided.

B. Activities and Services. In addition to the sale of motor fuel, activities and services shall be permitted, limited or precluded as follows:

1. Rental of trucks, trailers and similar vehicles may be permitted; provided, that the site contain adequate space for display and/or parking and that such rentals be displayed and/or parked only in an area so designated as part of the special use permit. Unless expressly stated otherwise as part of the special use permit, displaying and/or parking of rentals shall not be within 20 feet of any street frontage property line.

2. All new and used merchandise shall be stored and displayed within the service station building, except new and reconditioned tires, batteries, accessories and lubrication items which are maintained in enclosable cabinets or racks designed for the display and sale of said merchandise. The location of enclosable cabinets and racks shall be designated on the special use permit.

3. No used or discarded automotive parts or equipment or permanently disabled, junk or wrecked vehicles shall be located outside the service station building except within an enclosed trash storage area screened from public view.

4. All major auto repair, as defined herein, including but not limited to painting, welding, body and fender repair, tire recapping and the rental of heavy equipment and the sale and rental of other merchandises other than that specified in this section and in the special use permit, is expressly prohibited.

5. Public telephones are permitted, provided they shall observe the same front and side yard setbacks as any adjoining property and are located so as to be visible from the public right-of-way and accessible on a 24-hour basis.

6. Products which render an express convenience of service to the customer, such as pump island racks containing oil cans and additives, may be displayed under the pump island canopy when maintained in a cabinet or display rack. Such cabinets or racks shall not obstruct vehicular access to pump islands.

7. The sales and rental of any type of merchandise not related to the motoring public is prohibited except vending machines shall be permitted only within an enclosed building and shall not be visible from off the premises, and such proprietary items as road maps, highway flares, insecticides or other small items incidental and related to the convenience of the motoring public.

8. Tow trucks and similar service vehicles may be allowed if approved as part of the special use permit and shall be parked only in an area expressly provided and approved as part of the special use permit.

9. The use of a service station as a commercial parking lot is prohibited unless expressly approved as part of the special use permit.

10. Storage and trash shall be kept only in areas approved as part of the special use permits and shall not be placed higher than the walls enclosing such areas. Trash may be collected in containers at the pump islands or inside buildings and service bays. Any such containers visible from off the premises shall be designed as an integral part of the building architecture.

11. Hours of operation may be designated as part of the special use permit if exceptional circumstances exist such as close proximity to Residential Zones.

12. The removal, overhaul, and replacement of motors, differentials and transmissions is permitted, provided these activities occur within a completely enclosed building, and on vehicles with a rated capacity not to exceed one and one-half tons. These activities shall constitute only an accessory and incidental use of the service station operation and shall not create obnoxious odors, smoke, noise, vibration or otherwise create a nuisance.

C. Combination Uses. Service stations combined with another use may be approved as part of the special use permit providing the other use is permitted within the zone district, parking and access is provided for the customers in an area additional to the area required for the service station and access to the other use is safe and not in conflict with the service station.

D. Development Standards. The architectural design of service station development shall be compatible with the character of development of the area in which it is to be located. However, innovative architectural design and site layout which would contribute to the efficiency and appearance of the station and minimize adverse effects on adjacent property is encouraged.

E. Access.

1. Two driveways on each street frontage may be permitted with the approval of the City Engineer. Access driveways shall be no closer than 35 feet from the point of intersection of the ultimate right-of-way lines of the adjoining street, but in no case closer than five feet to the point of curb return. Such driveways shall be at least 25 feet apart and they may be no closer than five feet to the side property line.

2. Whenever possible, a combined driveway for both the service station and adjacent shopping center or commercial property shall be designated and provided.

3. Access to lube bays shall be from the side or rear of the station except in cases where the Planning Commission finds that front access will best preserve the interests of adjacent land users, will serve the interests of the public and the station operation from the standpoint of safety and convenience, and will foster the development of desirable circulation patterns. Stations where front access to lube bays is permitted shall have landscaping and/or related screening devices to reduce the view into the lube room work areas.

F. Lot Grading and Drainage. Grading of service station sites shall provide a minimum rise, in order to ensure required fall for drainage, and shall be engineered in a compatible manner with the surrounding properties. All drainage to the street shall be by underground structures to avoid drainage across City sidewalks or drive aprons, and shall be subject to the approval of the Director of Public Services.

G. Utilities. All on-site utilities (electrical and communication) shall be installed underground. Existing off-site abutting utility lines shall be converted to underground if street widening necessitates relocation of such utility facilities.

H. Setbacks. All buildings shall be set back from interior and street frontage property lines a minimum of 30 feet, pump islands parallel to the adjacent street shall be situated a minimum of 20 feet from all property lines, pump islands perpendicular to the adjacent street shall be a minimum of 24 feet from all property lines, and canopies shall be a minimum of 10 feet from any street frontage property line.

I. Canopy Structure. Every pump shall be covered by a canopy structure designed and constructed of material to blend with the main building. Where design permits, the pump island canopy structure shall be attached to and made an integral part of the main building structure.

J. Storage Area. Each service station shall have a storage area. The required storage area may be constructed outside of the main building providing that it be enclosed by an eight-foot high solid masonry wall, containing an opening enclosed with a view obscuring gate made of a durable material, and be roofed and contiguous to the main building unless approved otherwise as part of the special use permit.

K. Trash Enclosure. Each service station shall have at least one trash enclosure. All outside trash areas shall have a minimum area of 100 square feet with a minimum dimension of five feet by eight feet, have a concrete floor, be constructed to accommodate a refuse container, and except for one entrance, are to be surrounded by an eight-foot high solid wall constructed of masonry or steel and shall be constructed in a manner so that the materials used will blend architecturally with the design of the main structure. The entrance shall be enclosed with a view obscuring gate made of a durable metal material.

L. Restrooms. All restroom entrances shall be situated either to the side, to the rear or within the main building. The restroom area may be situated in a location other than above if approved by the Planning Commission as part of the special use permit. All outside restroom entrances shall be screened by not less than a five-foot high decorative structure and screen landscaping conforming to the design of tile station.

M. Lighting. All exterior lighting, including canopy lighting and perimeter lighting, shall be located, arranged and shielded so as to prevent substantial glare or reflection onto adjacent properties or public right-of-way.

N. Perimeter Walls. Whenever a service station abuts property in a Residential Zone, there shall be constructed along the property line abutting the Residential Zone a solid decorative masonry wall not less than six feet nor more than eight feet in height, measured from finished grade elevation of abutting residential property. Walls need not be installed when building walls or other acceptable walls already exist on such property lines, or the service station is part of a shopping center development. The wall requirement may be modified as part of the special use permit.

O. Walls as Landscaped Separation. A wall constructed on the interior property lines shall make provisions for three wells or landscaped planting areas not less than 16 square feet in area. When included as part of the wall design, the wells or plantings shall be spaced not less than eight feet nor more than 16 feet apart. Continuous planters or planters of uneven length may satisfy this requirement if they are at least four feet deep, extending at least one-third of the length of the wall, and include trees planted not more than 16 feet apart.

P. Landscaping. At least 10 percent of the site shall be landscaped with plant materials designed to provide beautification and screening. Planting areas shall include but are not limited to the following:

1. All landscaped planters shall be enclosed with a brick or concrete curb not less than six inches high above the finished grade of the site.

2. A minimum five-foot wide (inside dimension) raised planter, with six-inch curb face made of concrete or brick, for purposes of separating pump islands from the sidewalk. Landscaped planters may be rounded at driveway entrances utilizing a minimum 10-foot radius.

3. A minimum of 150 square feet of raised planter with curb, minimum six inches in height, shall be provided at the street frontage of the intersecting corner of the site, from curb cut to curb cut.

4. All planting other than trees shall be so maintained so as not to exceed a height greater than 30 inches, shall not be thorny or spiked and shall not extend over the sidewalk or public right-of-way.

5. Fifteen-gallon trees shall be placed in the parkway area (between curb face and back of sidewalk) with spacing and variety of trees to be approved by the Director of Public Services and the Design Review Commission.

6. The main structure of each service station shall be provided with masonry enclosed planters adjacent to all building areas not occupied by doorways, trash areas, by opening, or other such reasonable areas of deletion, or possess a 42-inch high masonry veneer wall. This provision shall apply in such cases where metal buildings are constructed.

7. Except for common traffic movement drives, service stations within shopping centers or tourist centers shall be delineated from the remainder of the property by a landscaped buffer with minimum inside dimensions of four feet and enclosed by a six-inch concrete or brick curb. Common and integrated traffic movement drives between the service station and the remainder of the property shall be encouraged.

8. All planting areas shall be provided with a permanent irrigation system of a design suitable for the type and arrangement of the plant materials selected.

9. All planted areas shall be maintained so as not to constitute a health or fire hazard.

86.55.260 Auto repair.
An auto repair facility shall be subject to the applicable zoning regulations of this title, subject to the following:

A. The repair activity shall be enclosed in a building.

86.55.270 Building materials retail sale.
A building materials retail sales use shall be subject to the applicable zoning regulations of this title, subject to the following:

A. Outdoor storage yard activity shall be completely screened from public view.

86.55.280 Clubs, lodges, assembly halls, and public buildings.
A club, lodge, assembly hall or public building shall be subject to the applicable zoning regulations of this title, subject to the following:

A. Any such use shall provide access without causing heavy traffic congestion on adjacent residential streets;

B. They will not be a nuisance to residences or other adjacent uses; and

C. Incidental commercial activity shall be confined completely within the building.

86.55.290 Industrial/manufacturing.
An industrial or manufacturing use involving the manufacture, repair or processing of materials or goods shall be subject to the applicable zoning of this title, subject to the following:

A. The use shall be conducted within an enclosed building; and

B. Where materials or goods are to be stored outside, such materials or goods shall be completely screened from public view.

86.55.300 Hospital or convalescent hospital.
A hospital or convalescent hospital shall be subject to the applicable zoning regulations of this title, subject to the following. In any R Zone, other than the R-SCD Zone, the use:

A. Shall be located on a collector street or thoroughfare;

B. Shall be located on a parcel of one acre or more;

C. Shall maintain a 10-foot wide minimum landscaped strip or solid eight-foot fence or masonry zoning wall on all property lines abutting any R Zone (except that the fence or wall may be reduced to three and one-half feet in a landscaped front setback area not containing parking facilities); and

D. Shall have side yard and rear yard setbacks of at least 20 feet.

86.55.310 Kennels for dogs/cats.
Repealed by Ord. 1954. (Ord. 1885)

86.55.320 Reserved.
86.55.330 Repealed.
Repealed by Ord. 1827.

86.55.340 Lodging houses.
A lodging house shall be subject to the applicable zoning regulations of this title, subject to the following:

A. The use shall occur in a structure constructed prior to 1900 for which City of Coronado historic resource designation must be obtained and maintained per CMC Title 84.

B. The historic dwelling unit shall be maintained on its original site in a manner to reflect the dwelling’s original architecture, massing and bulk. (Ord. 2018 §§ 6, 7, 2010; Ord. 1788)

86.55.350 Mixed use development.
A. Mixed use development incorporating residential uses may be allowed in the Central Commercial or Limited Commercial Zones as a “Planned Community Development” per the standards and procedures of Chapter 86.46 CMC and the residential density permitted in the R-4 Zone.

B. Repealed by Ord. 1954. (Ord. 1954 § 16, 2003; Ord. 1868)

86.55.360 Formula fast food restaurants.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the standards in this section is to regulate the number, location and operation of formula fast food restaurants in order to maintain the City’s unique village character, the vitality of our commercial districts, and the quality of life of Coronado residents.

B. Regulations.

1. The formula fast food restaurant shall fully comply with all applicable regulations in this code.

2. The regulations in this section shall be used by the Planning Commission in reviewing an application or amendment for a minor special use permit concerning a formula fast food restaurant, and by staff when reviewing a building permit application, an application for occupancy or a Design Review or Planning Commission application.

3. A formula fast food restaurant may only be established on a site after obtaining a minor special use permit from the City for the operation of that use on said site. Similarly, a formula fast food restaurant may only relocate or physically expand in a manner to increase its seating capacity after obtaining a minor special use permit or minor SUP amendment as applicable.

4. Change of ownership shall not, by itself, require obtaining a minor special use permit or minor SUP amendment as applicable.

C. Establishment or Relocation. A formula fast food restaurant may only be established or relocated:

1. On a site that is not located on a street corner; except such a restaurant may be located on a street corner where the immediate prior use was a formula fast food restaurant;

2. Where it would not result in two or more formula fast food restaurants operating on that site (i.e., two or more formula fast food restaurant business entities requiring separate business licenses, or displaying in a manner visible from public property separate business trademarks, logos, service marks or other mutually identifying names or symbols, for the daily or weekly conducting of business on the same site);

3. When it would not result in formula fast food restaurants operating at more than 10 sites under the jurisdiction of this title; and

4. So long as the Planning Commission finds that establishing or relocating the formula fast food restaurant will not increase the intensity of use on the site to a level that will adversely impact:

a. Land uses in the area;

b. Pedestrian or motor vehicle traffic; or

c. The public welfare.

D. Physical Expansion. An existing formula fast food restaurant may only be physically expanded in a manner to increase seating capacity:

1. Onto a site other than a corner;

2. Where it would not result in two or more formula fast food restaurants operating on that site (i.e., two or more formula fast food restaurant business entities requiring separate business licenses, or displaying in a manner visible from public property separate business trademarks, logos, service marks or other mutually identifying names or symbols, for the daily or weekly conducting of business on the same site); and

3. So long as the Planning Commission finds that physically expanding the formula fast food restaurant will not increase the intensity of use on the site to a level that will adversely impact:

a. Land uses in the area;

b. Pedestrian or motor vehicle traffic; or

c. The public welfare.

E. Trash. The formula fast food restaurant will operate in accordance with a “trash disposal plan,” approved by the Planning Commission. The plan shall address litter control, trash collection, on-site storage, and pick up on a regular basis. The plan shall include proof of a contract with the City disposal contractor, and specify that such a contract shall be maintained as a requirement for the issuance and retention of the minor use permit.

F. Design Review. Establishment or external alteration of a formula fast food restaurant is subject to Design Review Commission review. (Ord. 1901; Ord. 1881)

86.55.370 Formula business.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the standards in this section is to regulate the location and operation of formula business establishments in order to maintain the City’s unique village character, the diversity and vitality of the community’s commercial districts, and the quality of life of Coronado residents. It is presumed that establishing or preserving an appropriate and balanced mix of local, regional, and national-based businesses and small, medium or large-sized businesses will more effectively serve to achieve this purpose as a strategy to maintain the economic health of the community’s business districts and the small-scale eclectic ambiance.

B. Regulations.

1. A formula business establishment may be allowed in the Hotel-Motel Zone with a major special use permit;

2. The cumulative expansion of a formula business establishment by 500 or more square feet of floor area shall require a minor special use permit amendment or a minor SUP if the establishment does not already have a major special use permit;

3. A formula business establishment (except for grocery stores, banks, savings and loans, full service restaurants and theaters) shall not have a street level frontage of greater than 50 linear feet on any street or have its retail space occupy more than two stories;

4. A formula business establishment shall fully comply with all applicable regulations of this code including environmental design review; and

5. Change of ownership of an existing formula business establishment shall not, by itself, require obtaining a major special use permit or major SUP amendment as applicable.

C. Required Findings for Approval.

1. The formula business establishment will be compatible with existing surrounding uses, and has been designed and will be operated in a nonobtrusive manner to preserve the community’s character and ambiance;

2. Approval of the formula business establishment will be consistent with the policies and standards of the General Plan and the local coastal program, and that the proposed intensity of uses on the sites is appropriate given the uses permitted on the site and on adjoining sites by these documents;

3. Approval of the formula business establishment will contribute to an appropriate balance of local, regional or national-based businesses in the community; and

4. Approval of the formula business establishment will contribute to an appropriate balance of small, medium and large-sized businesses in the community. (Ord. 1954 § 14, 2003; Ord. 1919)

86.55.380 Emergency shelters.1
Repealed by Ord. 2040. (Ord. 2015 § 17, 2010)

1
Code reviser’s note: Ordinance No. 2015 adds these provisions as CMC 86.55.370. This section has been editorially renumbered to prevent duplication of numbering.


Chapter 86.56
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

86.56.005    Family day care home.

86.56.010    Reserved.

86.56.020    Repairing, cleaning, maintenance associated with permitted use.

86.56.030    Restaurants with entertainment facilities, night clubs and similar recreation facilities.

86.56.035    Drive-thru restaurants.

86.56.040    Trash storage.

86.56.045    Exception – Building height limits for development located in all zones except R-1A, R-1A(BF), R-1B, R-3 and R-4 Zones.

86.56.048    Exception – Building height limits for multiple-family and nonresidential development in the R-4 Multiple-Family Residential Zone.

86.56.050    Exceptions – Height limits.

86.56.070    Trailers, mobile homes, travel trailers, camp cars, campers.

86.56.080    Boats, ships or other watercraft.

86.56.090    Main buildings.

86.56.100    Accessory buildings.

86.56.105    Accessory dwelling unit.

86.56.110    Carriage house.

86.56.120    Mechanical equipment.

86.56.130    Roof dormers.

86.56.140    Roof decks and balconies above 14 feet.

86.56.159    Fences, walls or hedges – Measurement of height.

86.56.160    Fences, walls or hedges – Height limit, side or rear yard.

86.56.165    Fences, walls or hedges – Height limit, front yard.

86.56.170    Fences, walls or hedges – Height limit, street side yard.

86.56.175    Vertical barriers – Fences, walls or hedges – Height limit, sight triangle for residential corner lot.

86.56.180    –

86.56.200    Reserved.

86.56.210    Repair of vehicles in Residential Zones.

86.56.220    –

86.56.559    Reserved.

86.56.560    Zoning wall or fence.

86.56.570    Exceptions – Pools.

86.56.575    Exceptions – Basements.

86.56.580    Setback exceptions – Architectural projections.

86.56.590    Exceptions – Fire escapes.

86.56.595    Setback exceptions – Landscape accessory structures in front and rear yards.

86.56.600    Setback exceptions – Stairways, balconies, and decks except for multiple-family residential development in the R-4 Zone.

86.56.602    Setback exceptions – Stairways, balconies, decks, and bay windows for multiple-family development in the R-4 Zone.

86.56.604    Setback exceptions – Encroachment of main building into required front and rear yards except for multiple-family residential development in the R-4 Zone.

86.56.606    Setback exceptions – Encroachment of main building into required front yard for multiple-family residential development in the R-4 Zone.

86.56.608    Exceptions – Porte-cochere except for multiple-family residential development in the R-4 Zone.

86.56.610    Exceptions – Porches and landing places except for multiple-family residential development in the R-4 Zone.

86.56.615    Exceptions – Porches and landing places for multiple-family residential development in the R-4 Zone.

86.56.620    Exceptions – Encroachments into building separation areas.

86.56.630    Exceptions – Average front yard setback rule.

86.56.632    Courtesy notice for residential zones.

86.56.635    Lot and building certification required.

86.56.640    Exceptions – Alley splits.

86.56.650    Illegal alley subdivisions.

86.56.660    Reserved.

86.56.670    Massage establishment.

86.56.700    Reserved.

86.56.730    Amusement device center – Location.

86.56.740    Adult video cassette activity.

86.56.750    Prediction of worldly events.

86.56.760    Exceptions – Structural coverage.

86.56.770    Private storage space for residential condominium complexes.

86.56.780    Reserved.

86.56.790    Satellite antennas.

86.56.800    Development landscaping required.

86.56.810    Historic resources.

86.56.820    Vacant premises.

86.56.830    Manufactured housing requirements.

86.56.840    Undergrounding of utilities for residential zones.

86.56.005 Family day care home.
A. “Family day care home” means a home which regularly provides care, protection, and supervision of 12 or fewer children in the provider’s own home, for periods of less than 24 hours per day, while the parents or guardians are away, of which there are two types:

1. “Large family day care home” means a home which provides family day care to seven to 12 children, inclusive, including children who reside at the home; and

2. “Small family day care home” means a home which provides family day care to six or fewer children, including children who reside at the home.

B. A large family day care home shall be subject to the applicable zoning regulations of this title including the general regulations of residential uses, subject to the following:

1. An application for a large family day care home shall be processed by the Director of Community Development in accordance with the standards presented in Section 1597.46(a)(3) of the State of California Health and Safety Code;

2. Large family day care homes shall have available for use one parking space per two employees and/or resident adults, calculated for that month, day and hour of operation when the greatest number of such employees and/or adults could be on site, but shall not be required to provide parking in excess of that required by this code for the underlying residential land use;

3. Large family day care homes shall provide a zoning wall acceptable to the Director of Community Development around rear or side yards utilized for play areas. In nonresidential zones, a zoning wall may also be required by the Director of Community Development for the front yard if it is to be utilized as a play area. Such a front yard zoning wall shall also be subject to Director review;

4. Large family day care homes shall not be permitted in the following locations in Residential Zones unless a finding is made by the Director of Community Development that closer proximity of such facilities to each other will not negatively effect the character of the specific neighborhood surrounding the proposed site for such a facility:

a. On the same block face as any other large family day care home; or

b. Within 300 feet of any other large family day care home. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.010 Reserved.
(Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.020 Repairing, cleaning, maintenance associated with permitted use.
Facilities for the repairing, cleaning or maintenance of materials associated with the primary or accessory use shall be subject to the following minimum requirements:

A. All buildings and equipment shall observe the same yard requirements applicable to all buildings within the zone.

B. Such facilities shall be surrounded by a solid masonry wall or chain link fence subject to Community Development Department approval, not less than six feet in height, with lockable gates at all access points.

C. The wall or fence shall be set back not less than 15 feet from the principal street frontage and the space between the wall and street lot line provided with permanent landscaping and adequate sprinklers or appropriate automatic irrigation devices.

D. The wall or fence may be waived by the Planning Commission if they find there would be no detrimental effect on the adjacent areas by elimination of this requirement. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.030 Restaurants with entertainment facilities, night clubs and similar recreation facilities.
Restaurants with entertainment facilities, nightclubs, and similar recreation facilities shall comply with the following provisions:

A. Any such use shall show that adequate controls or measures will be taken to prevent offensive noise or vibration in conformance with the noise ordinance of the City.

B. They will not be a nuisance to residences or other adjacent uses. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.035 Drive-thru restaurants.
Drive-thru restaurants are prohibited. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.040 Trash storage.
Any change of land use or buildings constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, added to or structurally altered in all Multiple-Family, Commercial and Industrial Zones shall provide for adequate trash storage as follows:

A. All trash areas shall be enclosed within a minimum five-foot-high masonry wall or fence.

B. At no time shall the trash exceed the height of the fence or wall.

C. The precise location of any trash area shall be approved by the Community Development Department upon review of the site plan.

D. The trash enclosure shall be permanently and continuously maintained. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.045 Exception – Building height limits for development located in all zones except R-1A, R-1A(BF), R-1B, R-3 and R-4 Zones.
For all zones except R-1A, R-1A(BF), R-1B, R-3 and R-4 Zones, in no case shall the average height of a roof’s highest ridge or the average height of a parapet exceed by more than 10 percent the maximum building height permitted in the zone. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.048 Exception – Building height limits for multiple-family and nonresidential development in the R-4 Multiple-Family Residential Zone.
A. For multiple-family and nonresidential development in the R-4 Multiple-Family Residential Zone with a flat roof and parapet, mansard, or sloped roof less than 2:12, cable railing systems that are 90 percent transparent may extend two feet beyond the allowable building height.

B. For multiple-family and nonresidential development in the R-4 Multiple-Family Residential Zone, a maximum of 20 percent of allowable lot coverage (building footprint) can be increased to 40 feet in building height if the following criteria are met:

1. The roof increased beyond 35 feet has a pitch equal to or greater than 2:12.

2. The building volume of the main building adjoining or adjacent to the building bulk of the structure increased beyond 35 feet is reduced in a proportionate fashion so that the net result is that the total building volume of all structures is not increased.

3. The increased building height shall be compatible with adjoining properties as determined by the Design Review Commission. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.050 Exceptions – Height limits.
Height limitations imposed in this title shall not apply to:

A. Church spires, flagpoles and monuments erected on public property, and similar architectural features when approved by the Design Review Commission;

B. Vents and chimneys. In no case shall the height or bulk of said items exceed the minimum height or bulk required by the Uniform Building Code;

C. Cupolas, domes, towers, sky lights, spires, flagpoles or masts, and similar architectural features (excluding enclosed or covered structures providing access to roofs or roof decks, which are not allowed to exceed height limits, e.g., enclosed or covered stairwells or elevators) in accordance with the following limits:

1. Single-family dwelling or duplex main buildings in all zones except for the R-1A(BF) Subzone:

a. The total of said features shall not exceed 100 square feet and 10 feet in width or diameter on any one side up to a maximum of 25 feet in height;

b. The total of said features shall not exceed 36 square feet and six feet in width or diameter on any one side up to a maximum of 28 feet in height;

c. The total of said features shall not exceed 16 square feet and four feet in width or diameter on any one side up to a maximum of 33 feet in height;

d. The total of said features shall not exceed one square foot and one foot in width or diameter on any one side up to a maximum of 35 feet in height.

2. Multiple-family dwellings or nonresidential main buildings in the R-3 Zone:

a. The total of said features shall not exceed 100 square feet and 10 feet in width or diameter on any one side up to a maximum of 30 feet in height;

b. The total of said features shall not exceed 36 square feet and six feet in width or diameter on any one side up to a maximum of 33 feet in height;

c. The total of said features shall not exceed 16 square feet and four feet in width or diameter on any one side up to a maximum of 38 feet in height;

d. The total of said features shall not exceed one square foot and one foot in width or diameter on any one side up to a maximum of 40 feet in height.

3. Multiple-family dwellings or nonresidential main buildings in nonresidential zones:

a. The total of said features shall not exceed 100 square feet and 10 feet in width or diameter on any one side up to a maximum of 40 feet in height;

b. The total of said features shall not exceed 36 square feet and six feet in width or diameter on any one side up to a maximum of 43 feet in height;

c. The total of said features shall not exceed 16 square feet and four feet in width or diameter on any one side up to a maximum of 48 feet in height;

d. The total of said features shall not exceed one square foot and one foot in width or diameter on any one side up to a maximum of 50 feet in height;

D. Elevator shafts and mechanical equipment associated with multiple-family residential development in the R-4 Zone cannot exceed 35 feet in height subject to the following conditions:

1. Mechanical equipment shall not exceed an area of 25 square feet per dwelling unit.

2. Mechanical equipment shall be architecturally compatible with the building and be approved by the Design Review Commission. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.070 Trailers, mobile homes, travel trailers, camp cars, campers.
A. It is unlawful to use a trailer, travel trailer, mobile home, camp car, camper, or similar vehicle for living or sleeping purposes on private property, except for temporary period(s) not to exceed 10 days during any 90-day period by guests or visitors of residents and/or homeowners of the City, subject to the locational restrictions specified for unoccupied vehicles of this type in subsection B of this section.

B. A trailer, travel trailer, mobile home, camp car, camper or similar vehicle may be stored only upon the rear of the property owned or rented by the owner of said motor vehicle or trailer.

C. It is unlawful to park or store a trailer, travel trailer, mobile home, camp car, camper or similar vehicle greater than 18 feet in length, 95 inches in width, or six feet in height (including its cargo) on any portion of the lot between the main building and the front property line including a driveway in said area, except for temporary period(s) not to exceed 10 days during any 90-day period.

D. It is unlawful to use a trailer, travel trailer, mobile home, camper or similar vehicle for office purposes in any zone, except that a general contractor and/or property owner or lessee may obtain a temporary permit for the parking of one or more such vehicles described above for watchmen, supervisory or other personnel, or for use as a temporary office at or immediately adjoining a major construction site upon commencement of such construction. Any such permit shall be issued by the Director of Community Development, after an application, in writing, is submitted by the general contractor specifying the following:

1. The number of such vehicles and number of personnel to occupy such vehicles;

2. The hours during which such personnel will occupy such vehicles;

3. The total period for which such permit is sought; and

4. All trailers for which a permit is issued shall be removed from the premises within 10 days from notification of expiration of the temporary permit or an extension thereof. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.080 Boats, ships or other watercraft.
A. It is unlawful to use a boat, ship or any other watercraft for living or sleeping purposes except when moored at an authorized water berth designed for such purpose.

B. Boats or boat trailers shall be placed, kept or maintained only upon the rear of the property of the resident if accessible for such use, and if not accessible, the side yard (except one of the required side yards shall remain unobstructed) area may be utilized for such purpose and screening from public view is encouraged.

C. It is unlawful to park or store a boat, boat trailer, or a boat on a trailer greater than 18 feet in length, 95 inches in width, or six feet in height on any portion of the lot between the main building and the front property line, including a driveway in said area, except for temporary period(s) not to exceed 10 days during any 90-day period. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.090 Main buildings.
There shall be a minimum 10-foot separation between all main buildings on a lot except for main buildings in the R-1A Zone and R-1A Subzones which shall maintain a minimum 20-foot separation. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.100 Accessory buildings.
A. An accessory building may be erected detached from the main building on a lot.

B. Any accessory building attached to the main building shall be made structurally a part of the main building and shall comply in all respects with the requirements of this title applicable to the main building prior to said attachment. A structural attachment shall consist of the following minimum standards:

1. It shall be made an integral part of the structure of the main building by providing an adjoining foundation as well as vertical and horizontal building elements.

2. It shall constitute an enclosed or enclosable space for the purpose of providing a functional use for the attachment, such as, but not limited to, a habitable room, storage or laundry facility. Roof connections, fences, walls, patio covers, and aboveground utilities shall not be considered as structural attachments.

C. Accessory buildings shall be separated from all other accessory buildings, patios, covered parking and similar structures by a distance of at least six feet or may be attached.

D. Accessory buildings may occupy not more than 25 percent of a required rear yard, provided such buildings are located at least 10 feet from the nearest part of a main building, are not more than one story (except for a “carriage house”) and comply with the zone height limit for accessory buildings.

E. Detached garages and/or covered parking required to comply with Chapter 86.58 CMC (Off-Street Parking) shall not be limited by the foregoing 25 percent structural coverage requirement and may be located at least six feet from the nearest part of a main building or may be attached to the main building. That portion extending into the required rear yard shall not exceed one story and shall comply with the zone height limit for accessory buildings.

F. Metal storage buildings not exceeding 100 square feet in area must maintain required side and rear yard setbacks for accessory buildings but shall not be required to meet any building separation requirements. Metal storage buildings exceeding 100 square feet shall comply with all requirements pertaining to accessory buildings.

G. In any case where a through lot has a depth of not more than 140 feet, accessory buildings may be located in one of the required front yards; provided, every portion of such building is at least 10 feet from the nearest lot line, does not exceed one story and complies with the zone height limit for accessory buildings.

H. An accessory building shall not constitute a separate dwelling unit unless it is established as an ADU in accordance with CMC 86.56.105. Accessory buildings that are “habitable units” shall not contain a kitchen and shall be only for use by the resident of the main building or such resident’s guests. Accessory buildings or “habitable units” within accessory buildings shall not be rented, let or leased independent of the main building for any lot. Except as otherwise provided herein, no building or portions of buildings shall be leased apart from the entire parcel, and any agreement to rent, let, or lease any portion of a building, home, or lot contrary to the provisions of this subsection shall be a violation of this chapter unless it includes all buildings and all habitable units on the lot or parcels comprising the residential lot as the defined tenancy under the lease.

A covenant prepared by the City of Coronado, signed by the property owner and recorded by the San Diego County Recorder’s Office outlining the regulations of accessory buildings and habitable units shall be required prior to construction plans being approved and a building permit being issued for conversion to, or construction of, a habitable unit or carriage house.

1. Notwithstanding the restrictions on the lease of portions of buildings provided in this subsection H, an owner of a property may enter into a lease for any habitable unit in a home in which the property owner is also residing, which is not located in an accessory building or structure.

2. Nothing herein shall permit the lease of a room as a “habitable unit” where the room is separated from the home or building by means of walls or doors locked, or lockable, from the main building or home in order to prevent entry, and where the tenant is required to access the unit from an exterior door not shared by the owner or any other occupants of the building or home. (Ord. 2067 § 5 (Exh. A), 2017; Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.105 Accessory dwelling unit.
One accessory dwelling unit (“ADU”) may be permitted on a residentially zoned property improved with one single-family dwelling unit in accordance with Government Code Section 65852.2, subject to all of the following in addition to the development standards applicable to the zone in which the ADU is proposed:

A. Size Limitations. ADUs, whether attached or detached, shall be limited to a maximum size of 800 square feet or 50 percent of the main dwelling size, whichever is less.

B. Parking.

1. A minimum of one parking space is required for each ADU unless exempted by State law. Parking shall be provided at the rate of one parking space for each bedroom.

2. Primary dwellings shall comply with the current parking requirements for single-family dwellings in order to establish an ADU on the same property.

3. If required parking for the primary dwelling is demolished or removed in conjunction with the construction of an ADU and the ADU is exempt from parking requirements per State law, replacement parking for the primary dwelling shall comply with the current City parking requirements for single-family dwellings including number and location of spaces.

4. If required parking for the primary dwelling is demolished or removed in conjunction with the construction of an ADU and the ADU is not exempt from parking requirements, replacement parking spaces can be either open and unenclosed, or covered and enclosed, and may be in a tandem configuration as long as they are not located within the required front yard setback area.

C. Location (New Construction). ADUs are prohibited on all lots that do not have a minimum of 25 feet of frontage on a street.

D. Carriage House Conversion Prohibition. An existing carriage house that was built in accordance with CMC 86.56.110 shall not be allowed to be converted to an ADU as it would no longer be in compliance with the carriage house regulations found in CMC 86.56.110.

E. Historic Alteration Permits. If an applicant proposes new construction or an addition for an ADU on a property that has been historically designated, the applicant shall apply for a historic alteration permit pursuant to Chapter 84.20 CMC.

F. Design Review. If an applicant proposes new construction or an addition of a single-family house that includes an ADU, the applicant may voluntarily elect for Design Review Commission approval for a floor area ratio design feature bonus point pursuant to CMC 80.00.030(M).

G. Transient Rental Requirement. Any ADU on a residentially zoned property shall be rented to one tenant for six months or longer.

H. Owner Occupancy Requirement. The property owner of any property improved with an ADU shall not allow any building or portions of buildings of the property to be leased apart from the entire parcel unless the owner of the property continually occupies either the main dwelling unit or the ADU.

A covenant prepared by the City of Coronado, signed by the property owner and recorded by the San Diego County Recorder’s Office outlining the ADU regulations, shall be required prior to construction plans being approved or a building permit being issued for conversion to, or construction of, an ADU. (Ord. 2075 § 3 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2072 § 3 (Exh. A), 2017; Ord. 2067 § 5 (Exh. A), 2017)

86.56.110 Carriage house.
One “carriage house” shall be permitted on single-family residential and single-family residential subzone lots that have both street and alley access subject to all of the following standards:

A. The second story of the main dwelling is set back a minimum of 50 percent of the lot depth from the rear property line, except that the second story of the main dwelling may encroach into said 50 percent setback a maximum of five percent of the lot depth for no more than half of the rear facade width, provided there is an equal or greater volume of building set back the same distance beyond said 50 percent setback line.

B. There is a minimum of 25-foot open space between any part of the main dwelling and the first and second story of the carriage house building, not including a maximum of one open and unenclosed stairway providing access to the second story of the carriage house building.

C. There shall be a minimum setback of five feet from the rear property line for the first story and a minimum of three feet and maximum of six feet setback from the rear property line for the second story.

D. A minimum of 60 percent of the second-story facade along the alley shall be offset from the first-story facade a minimum of 24 inches towards the alley (an additional 12-inch eave is permitted) or a minimum of 12 inches towards the main dwelling.

E. No portion of the second story of the carriage house building is permitted to extend beyond 26 feet from the rear property line (excluding one open, unenclosed stairway).

F. No carriage house building shall exceed 600 square feet on the first story and 400 square feet on the second story (not including one open, unenclosed stairway).

G. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided on the first story of the carriage house building in accordance with the underlying zone requirements.

H. The exterior of the second-story habitable space shall not exceed 22 feet in width along the facade which is most parallel to the alley.

I. No portion of the second story is permitted to project beyond the first story except adjoining the alley.

J. “Architectural projections” as permitted in other sections of this code shall be allowed to project into the required setbacks or building separation area, except for “bay, bow, or garden windows,” which shall not be permitted to encroach into the required setbacks or building separation area, except along the alley as permitted in subsection D of this section.

K. No portion of the second-story main roof, dormers, or roof architectural features of a carriage house building with a 3:12 or greater roof pitch shall have a pitch of less than 3:12 (first-story roof elements may vary).

L. One 16-square-foot (i.e., four feet by four feet) open, unenclosed stair landing place shall be allowed at the second-story level entrance to the carriage house and one intermediate landing not to exceed 16 square feet if an L-shaped stair or 32 square feet if a U-shaped stair shall be permitted.

M. Access to the second story shall only be external to the carriage house building with an open and unenclosed stair with the foot of said access stairs only entered from the main dwelling side of the structure.

N. Other than along the side property line, no fence is allowed within the required open space between the carriage house building and the main dwelling, except for a transparent temporary construction fence.

O. A trellis, attached to the main house and not to exceed 14 feet in height at highest point, is allowed in required open space between structures.

P. No balconies or roof decks of any kind are allowed on a carriage house building.

Q. The use of a carriage house building shall be in accordance with CMC 86.56.100(H) for accessory buildings.

R. Architectural style and materials shall be compatible with the main dwelling. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.120 Mechanical equipment.
A. Setbacks. New or replacement mechanical equipment such as, but not limited to, air conditioning and pool equipment, whether below or above grade, shall not be permitted in any required front, side or rear yards except that the front yard need not exceed 20 feet, the side yard 10 feet and the rear yard five feet. If located on a roof, the equipment shall be positioned a minimum of two feet from an exterior facade. Transformers, gas or electric meters, tankless water heaters designed as an architectural projection in accordance with CMC 86.56.580, and similar equipment shall be exempt from this section.

B. Required Screening. In all zones, all mechanical equipment where the top of said equipment is greater than six feet above grade shall be screened on all sides. The required screening shall be part of the building architecture and not a freestanding wall and said equipment or screening shall not protrude above the daylight plane or building height limit. Mechanical equipment located in a front yard shall be screened on all sides. (Ord. 2068 § 2 (Exh. A), 2017)

86.56.130 Roof dormers.
A. A dormer with its lowest point of the vertical face above the ceiling joists of a second story, or greater than 18 feet in height above “grade,” or a dormer with window openings into an attic above a second story, and which faces a side, front, or rear yard, shall be subject to the following requirements:

1. Each dormer facing a side property line shall be set back from the exterior side facade of the wall below a minimum of 50 percent of the required side yard setback and need not exceed three feet;

2. Each dormer facing a front or rear property line shall be set back from the exterior front or rear facade of the wall below a minimum of three feet;

3. Each dormer shall not exceed a width of eight feet, and there shall be a minimum separation between each dormer of no less than one and one-half times the width of the narrowest dormer along each respective front, side or rear of a building;

4. The total cumulative width of all dormers on any one front, side or rear of a building shall not exceed 35 percent of the length of the roof abutting the given front, side or rear yard, with a minimum cumulative width of eight feet permitted;

5. The highest point of any dormer shall be no higher than one foot lower than the ridge of the abutting main roof for roofs of less than 6:12 slope, or one foot, six inches lower than the ridge for roofs of 6:12 or greater slope;

6. Gable dormers shall be exempt from subsection A of this section if said dormers have a minimum roof pitch equal to or greater than the main roof, the exterior vertical face is continuous with the exterior facade of the story below and if the dormer contains windows they must open to the first or second story.

B. Each dormer shall contain vertical windows or vents of at least four square feet in cumulative size facing the adjoining front, side or rear yard (excluding gable dormers with a minimum roof pitch equal to or greater than the main roof and where the exterior vertical face is continuous with the exterior facade of the story below). (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.140 Roof decks and balconies above 14 feet.
A. A deck or balcony with a walking surface 14 feet or greater above “grade” shall be subject to the following requirements:

1. Design Review Commission approval shall be required;

2. Access to decks or balconies shall not be enclosed or covered unless the access is incorporated into the roof of the building, shall not be through a roof dormer, and shall not have the appearance of a separate structure;

3. No portion of decks or balconies shall be covered and shall be 100 percent permanently open;

4. No portion of decks or balconies or the top of structures or equipment placed on said decks or balconies (e.g., fireplaces and associated chimneys, spas, barbecues, storage cabinets, mechanical equipment, or similar) shall project beyond the daylight plane or exceed the allowable building height limit.

B. Design Review Commission approval shall not be required for a roof deck if all of the following is satisfied:

1. Does not exceeding 40 square feet;

2. Is solely for mechanical equipment;

3. Is located below the daylight plane and building height limit;

4. Is screened by the building architecture, not a freestanding wall and positioned a minimum of two feet from an exterior facade;

5. Is not accessed by permanent stairs or a permanent ladder;

6. Is not covered and is 100 percent permanently open to the sky. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.159 Fences, walls or hedges – Measurement of height.
The height of a fence, wall or hedge separating private property shall be measured from grade to the highest point on the fence, wall, or hedge. Where a fence, wall or hedge is located within a required front, side or rear yard where adjoining properties have unequal ground levels, the lower grade shall be used to measure the height.

The height of a fence, wall or hedge separating public and private property shall be measured from grade or the surface level of the public property closest to the property line on which the fence, wall or hedge is located, whichever is lower, to the highest point on the fence, wall or hedge. (Ord. 2068 § 2 (Exh. A), 2017)

86.56.160 Fences, walls or hedges – Height limit, side or rear yard.
Any fences, walls or hedges located in Residential Zones shall not exceed eight feet in height in a required side or rear yard and six feet in the area between the front or side lot line and the nearest building located on the lot when no front or side yard is required.

The following is an exception to this requirement: Hedges located in the rear yard of residentially zoned properties which abut an alley shall not exceed 10 feet in height. (Ord. 2087 § 3 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.165 Fences, walls or hedges – Height limit, front yard.
A. Fences, walls, or hedges located within the required front yard shall not exceed four feet in height.

The following are exceptions to this requirement:

1. A fence or wall up to six feet in height may be located along the side property lines, within the front yard, and project into the front yard eight feet. Said six foot fence or wall shall extend no closer than 10 feet to the front property line;

2. Those lots which front solely on an alley or the following streets may enclose 100 percent of their front yards with an eight-foot wall, fence, or hedge: Third Street between A Avenue and Alameda Boulevard, all of Fourth Street, Alameda Boulevard between Third and Fourth Street and Pomona Avenue between Third and Fourth Street. Where walls or fences are permitted to be over four feet in height and adjoin public rights-of-way, said wall or fence shall be buffered with landscaping to soften the fence or wall. The proposed landscaping shall be approved by the City of Coronado prior to installation. Walls or fences over four feet in height, adjacent to an alley, are not required to be buffered with landscaping. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.170 Fences, walls or hedges – Height limit, street side yard.
Fences, walls, or hedges shall not exceed six feet in height in any required street side yard required on any corner lot.

Exception: Those lots which are located along the following streets may construct a fence, wall, or hedge not to exceed eight feet in height along the street side yard: Third Street between A Avenue and Alameda Boulevard, all of Fourth Street, Alameda Boulevard between Third and Fourth Street and Pomona Avenue between Third and Fourth Street. Where walls or fences are permitted to be over four feet in height in the street side yard, said fences or walls shall not be located within the sight triangle required in CMC 86.56.175. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.175 Vertical barriers – Fences, walls or hedges – Height limit, sight triangle for residential corner lot.
In the case of corner lots in Residential Zones, vertical barriers, including fences, walls and hedges, shall not exceed three feet in height in a triangle area created by a line connecting points along the street curb lines which are established 50 feet in distance from the intersection of such curb lines at the corner of a block. Exception: Single stem plants or trees without foliage between a height of three and eight feet may be planted and maintained within the corner triangular area and shall be measured from the established curb grade. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.180 – 86.56.200 Reserved.
(Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.210 Repair of vehicles in Residential Zones.
The repair of all motorcycles, motor trucks and motor vehicles, as defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of California, is prohibited in any Residential Zone unless all of the following conditions are met:

A. All major repair of vehicles shall be conducted within a totally enclosed garage or behind a fence or wall not less than six feet in height.

B. No more than one vehicle shall be in a state of disrepair or in an inoperable condition at any one time on any lot.

C. No repair of vehicles shall be conducted as a business.

D. No vehicle in a state of disrepair or in an inoperable condition may be located outside of a totally enclosed garage or a fence or wall not less than six feet in height for a period of more than 48 hours.

E. No repair of vehicles shall take place between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.

F. No storage of vehicle parts shall be located in any place where repair of vehicles is prohibited herein. Any area used for such storage shall not exceed 100 square feet in area.

G. Nothing in this section is intended to prohibit the making of minor repairs, such as tire changing or repair, replacement of spark plugs and minor engine adjustments, lubrication or battery and brake adjustments by a resident on his or her vehicle anywhere on the lot where the vehicle owner resides. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.220 – 86.56.559 Reserved.
(Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.560 Zoning wall or fence.
A 10-foot-high (or less) solid masonry zoning wall may be required to be erected to separate any Commercial Zone or use from an adjoining Residential Zone or use as a condition precedent to granting of a special use permit, variance, coastal permit or subdivision map. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.570 Exceptions – Pools.
The waterline of pools, spas, ponds or other water areas shall not encroach into the required side yards except that the side yard need not exceed five feet. Associated equipment shall comply with CMC 86.56.120, Mechanical Equipment. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.575 Exceptions – Basements.
Basements which require dewatering during construction shall observe a minimum three-foot side yard setback. A single basement egress well may encroach into the required side yard setback. (Ord. 2085 § 3 (Exh. A), 2018)

86.56.580 Setback exceptions – Architectural projections.
“Architectural projections” may:

A. Extend or project into a required side yard setback for a distance of not more than one-third of the required side yard setback width up to a maximum of 24 inches (roof eaves are exempt from said 24-inch limitation), subject to the following restrictions and exceptions:

1. No single “architectural projection” into a required side yard shall be greater than eight feet in length along the facade. Cornices, roof eaves, roof gutters and down spouts, a sill, window and door awnings, and architectural features projecting a maximum of four inches are excepted;

2. The minimum horizontal separation along the facade between “architectural projections” into required side yards shall be no less than 10 feet. Cornices, roof eaves, roof gutters and down spouts; a sill, window and door awnings; and architectural features projecting a maximum of four inches are excepted; and

3. The cumulative total linear distance of “architectural projections” into required side yards, measured at their widest point, along a given side facade shall not exceed the lesser of 20 percent of the length of the facade or 16 feet. Cornices, roof eaves, roof gutters and down spouts, a sill, window and door awnings, and architectural features projecting a maximum of four inches are excepted.

B. Extend or project into a required front or rear yard setback not more than four feet. Such projection shall never extend closer than three feet to the front or rear lot line.

C. Accessory buildings constructed in the required rear yard setback may have architectural projections into the rear yard setback so long as such projections never extend closer than three feet to the rear lot line. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.590 Exceptions – Fire escapes.
Subject to the approval of the Director of Fire Services, fire escapes may:

A. Extend or project into a required side yard setback for a distance of not more than one-third of the required side yard setback.

B. Extend or project into a required front or rear yard setback not more than four feet. Such projection shall never extend closer than three feet to the front or rear lot line. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.595 Setback exceptions – Landscape accessory structures in front and rear yards.
Landscape accessory structures and entries such as arbors, trellises and arches may be located in the required front or rear yard setbacks so long as said structures maintain the required side yard setback, do not exceed 10 feet in height, and the total based on the outside perimeter of said structures does not exceed five percent of the required or existing front or rear yard area, whichever is less. In no case shall the total structural coverage of such structures exceed 50 square feet in lot coverage per front or rear yard. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.600 Setback exceptions – Stairways, balconies, and decks except for multiple-family residential development in the R-4 Zone.
For all zones except for multiple-family residential development in the R-4 Zone:

A. Covered, unenclosed stairways structurally attached to the building and covered, unenclosed balconies or decks may extend or project into the required rear yard setback not more than four feet. Such stairways, balconies, or decks shall not extend closer than three feet to the rear property line.

B. No portion of a covered, unenclosed balcony or deck including roofs, eaves, columns or guardrails may extend or project into a required front yard setback more than four feet. Such projection shall never extend closer than three feet to the front property line.

C. Covered, unenclosed balconies or decks above and attached to the roof of a porch may extend to the eave of said porch or project a maximum of eight feet into a required front yard setback, whichever is less. That portion projecting greater than four feet shall be 100 percent open to the passage of light and air to the sky and the surrounding guardrail shall be a minimum of 70 percent transparent above the lower six inches. (Clear glass meeting building code standards may be used to satisfy the transparency criterion.). No portion of a roof, eave, column or guardrail less than 70 percent transparent, above said second-story balcony or deck walking surface, shall project into the required front yard greater than four feet.

D. Covered, unenclosed balconies may extend or project for a distance of not more than one-third of the required side yard setback, up to a maximum of 24 inches, into portions of side yards that adjoin public rights-of-way. Said balconies shall be limited to eight feet in length, shall maintain a minimum horizontal separation between balconies of 10 feet, and the cumulative total linear distance of said balconies along the side facade shall not exceed the lesser of 20 percent of the length of the facade or 16 feet. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.602 Setback exceptions – Stairways, balconies, decks, and bay windows for multiple-family development in the R-4 Zone.
A. Covered, unenclosed stairways structurally attached to the building, and covered, unenclosed balconies, decks or bay windows may extend or project into the required rear yard setback not more than four feet and never extend closer than three feet to the rear property line.

B. Covered, unenclosed balconies, decks, or bay windows may extend or project into a required front yard setback not more than eight feet. Such projection shall be measured from the standard 25-foot setback required front yard setback line and never extend closer than three feet to the front property line.

C. Covered, unenclosed balconies may extend or project for a distance of not more than one-third of the required side yard setback into portions of side yards that adjoin public rights-of-way. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.604 Setback exceptions – Encroachment of main building into required front and rear yards except for multiple-family residential development in the R-4 Zone.
For all zones except for multiple-family residential development in the R-4 Zone:

A. Bay windows, building popouts, and similar design features of main buildings, which extend to the ground and contain floor area, may encroach up to three feet into a required front or rear yard setback. The height of such encroachment shall not extend above the level of the first floor or exceed 13 feet. The length shall not exceed 50 percent of the length of the facade and shall be limited to modules of 10 feet or less. Such encroachment shall be included in the allowable floor area and in no case shall extend closer than three feet to the front or rear property line.

B. Main buildings may encroach up to five feet into the front yard, provided there is an equal or greater volume of building set back the same distance behind the setback line. Such encroachment shall be limited to the first story and 13 feet in height and shall not extend closer than 20 feet to the front property line. Eaves on the portion of the building allowed to encroach by this section may project one foot beyond said building encroachment. The distance that architectural projections, porches, and similar design features are allowed to project shall be measured from the standard 25-foot setback line. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.606 Setback exceptions – Encroachment of main building into required front yard for multiple-family residential development in the R-4 Zone.
For multiple-family residential development in the R-4 Zone, a maximum of 50 percent of the width of a building may encroach up to five feet into the front yard setback, provided there is at least half that building volume set back behind the front setback line. This provision is allowed at the first and second stories of the building. The distance that architectural projections, porches, and similar design features are allowed to project shall be measured from the standard 25-foot setback line. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.608 Exceptions – Porte-cochere except for multiple-family residential development in the R-4 Zone.
For all zones except for multiple-family residential development in the R-4 Zone:

Columns and roofs of covered and unenclosed porte-cocheres may extend or project into a required side yard setback for a distance of not more than one-third of the required side yard setback width but no less than three feet from the side property line. If a front porch is present, the porte-cochere may extend into the front yard setback as provided for in CMC 86.56.610. Said porte-cochere shall be architecturally similar in design and materials to the attached dwelling, limited to one story and 14 feet in height, attached to the dwelling and open on three sides, and not exceed a depth of 20 feet. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.610 Exceptions – Porches and landing places except for multiple-family residential development in the R-4 Zone.
For all zones except for multiple-family residential development in the R-4 Zone:

Covered, unenclosed porches, platforms, landing places, pergolas or open trellis structures which do not extend above the level of the first floor shall be allowed to project into a required front or rear yard not more than eight feet, with eaves allowed an additional 12-inch projection. Such projection shall never extend closer than three feet to the front or rear property line. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.615 Exceptions – Porches and landing places for multiple-family residential development in the R-4 Zone.
For multiple-family residential development in the R-4 Zone, covered, unenclosed porches, platforms or landing places may extend into a required front yard setback not more than eight feet. Said encroachment shall be measured from the standard 25-foot setback line. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.620 Exceptions – Encroachments into building separation areas.
Encroachments herein provided for rear yards may extend and project into the area separating buildings on the same lot so long as such encroachments or projections never extend closer than five feet to an adjacent building or to any projection from an adjacent building. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.630 Exceptions – Average front yard setback rule.
Where the majority of the parcels on a block face are improved, with structures, the required front yard setback may be computed by taking the average existing front yard setback, measured from the front property line to the outside of the wall of the nearest enclosed habitable space of the main building excluding architectural projections, garages and basements. In no case shall the required front yard be less than five feet. 25 feet shall be used for calculating the average where a lot is developed with an existing front yard greater than 25 feet. 50 percent of the required front yard for the subject property shall be used for calculating the average for those lots developed with an existing front yard of less than one-half of the required front yard for the subject property. Panhandle lots where the panhandle exceeds 50 feet in length shall not be considered in computing any average front yard setback. In the case of reversed corner lots having both side lot lines on a street and alley, this rule may be applied to the setback on the side street line. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.632 Courtesy notice for residential zones.
No building or demolition permit for the demolition or new construction of 200 square feet or more, in any residential zone, except R-5, R-PCD and R-SCD Zones, shall be approved unless the adjacent residents are notified in advance of the permitted work commencing. Addressed and stamped envelopes and letters in a form prescribed by the Community Development Department shall be submitted to the City of Coronado by the applicant at the time of permit application and shall be a minimum of 10 calendar days in advance of the building or demolition permit being approved. Each notice shall be completed by the applicant and mailed by the City. Noticed properties shall include residents of adjoining properties which share a property line with the subject property and those properties, lots, parcels or residences of which all or any part thereof is directly across any adjoining public or private right-of-way or easement from the subject property. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.635 Lot and building certification required.
A. All construction plans for new or replacement buildings or the addition of new square footage to existing buildings, where any portion of the new or replacement building or building addition is over 500 square feet, shall include:

1. The following, provided by a California licensed land surveyor or civil engineer:

a. Lot line distances;

b. Gross lot area;

c. Description and location of all corner monuments; and

d. Existing and proposed grade, whichever is lower, with one-foot contour lines shown with the benchmark location and data identified.

2. Corner monuments, if not currently set, shall be set, mapped and certified by a California licensed land surveyor or civil engineer.

B. Prior to a foundation and framing inspection by a building inspector, and upon completion of exterior framing for new or replacement buildings or the foundation or framing for the addition of new square footage to existing buildings where any portion of the new or replacement building or building addition is over 500 square feet or more than 14 feet in height, certification by a California licensed land surveyor or civil engineer shall be provided to the Community Development Department certifying that the following comply with the approved plans:

1. Foundation and building height from grade using the same benchmark identified in subsection (A)(1)(d) of this section;

2. Foundation and building setback distances from all property lines; and

3. Foundation and building architectural projections from all setback lines.

C. Notwithstanding subsection A or B of this section and due to unique lot or site conditions, the Director of Community Development is hereby authorized to require a property owner to provide the information called for in subsections A and B of this section as needed to assure new development is consistent with zoning regulations. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.640 Exceptions – Alley splits.
Except as hereinafter provided in CMC 86.56.650, no lots or parcels in any Residential Zone shall be divided, split or reconfigured in any manner whatsoever so as to result in having frontage solely on an alley. It is the intent of this section to prohibit development that relies on an alley as the sole and hence primary means of access to that development. This section shall not apply to lots fronting on El Chico Lane, Adella Lane or Pendleton Road. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.650 Illegal alley subdivisions.
An owner of any alley parcel created of record prior to July 1, 1973, which was considered illegal by the City shall not be required to submit an application for a division of land pursuant to applicable provisions of this title. It is the intent of this section to recognize all previous recorded divisions of land not approved by the City pursuant to any previously existing division of this title. This section shall not apply to contiguous parcels which are under identical ownership on or after February 19, 1974. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.660 Reserved.
(Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.670 Massage establishment.
Massage establishments shall not be permitted in the following locations:

A. Residential Zones;

B. Within 100 feet of any Residential Zone;

C. Within 100 feet of any church or grade school; and

D. Within 100 feet of another massage establishment. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.700 Reserved.
(Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.730 Amusement device center – Location.
Amusement device centers may be located only on property zoned Central Commercial or Hotel-Motel and shall not be located in any other zone. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.740 Adult video cassette activity.
A. No establishment shall use more than 15 percent of its total floor area for the purpose of an adult video cassette activity.

B. Adult video cassette activity shall not be permitted in the following locations:

1. Residential Zones.

2. Within 100 feet of any Residential Zone, as measured from the nearest boundary of the Residential Zone to the closest, discernible boundary containing the activity, such as, but not limited to, bearing wall, partition wall, glass enclosure, etc.

3. Within 100 feet of any church or grade school, as measured from the nearest property line of the church or grade school to the closest discernible boundary containing the activity, such as, but not limited to, bearing wall, partition wall, glass enclosure, etc.

4. Within 100 feet of another adult video cassette activity establishment, as measured from the closest discernible boundary containing the activities, such as, but not limited to, bearing wall, partition wall, glass enclosure, etc.

C. All openings, entries, and windows of an establishment in which an adult video cassette activity is located shall be positioned, covered or screened in such a manner as to prevent a view of any adult video cassette activity material which has as its dominant theme the depiction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas from any public or semi-public area, including sidewalks, streets, arcades, hallways or passageways.

D. The adult video cassette activity shall be located, covered or screened in such a manner as to prevent an unwarned view by a member of the public within the establishment of any adult video cassette depiction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. There must be sufficient notice to allow members of the public to avoid viewing such adult video cassette activity material.

E. No sign, graphic, display or other advertisement relating to an adult video cassette activity shall be erected or maintained at the premises of the adult video cassette activity which is viewable from off-premises. On-site signs, graphics, displays or other advertisements which in no way present, depict, illustrate, or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas may be erected and maintained so long as they are not viewable from off-site, public areas.

F. If the adult video cassette activity involves the preview of cassettes as part of its operation, soundproof booths or rooms shall be made available, at no charge, for use by customers who desire such preview. Each booth or room shall have:

1. One clear window visible immediately upon entering the premises, covering not less than one-fourth of the wall area into which the window is set, which window shall not be covered or obscured in any manner while the booth or room is in use;

2. Sufficient seating to accommodate the expected number of persons who will occupy the booth or room at any one time;

3. The number of persons who shall occupy the booth or room at any one time shall be clearly stated on or near the door to the booth or room and no more than the posted number shall be permitted inside the booth or room at any one time; and

4. The door or doors opening into such booth or room shall be incapable of being locked or otherwise fastened from the inside of such booth or room. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.750 Prediction of worldly events.
A business activity which provides predictions of worldly events in the life of the client, using palmistry reading, fortune telling, horoscope reading or similar methods, shall comply with the following provisions:

A. Any such business use shall not be permitted in the following locations:

1. Residential Zones.

2. Automobile parking zones.

3. Within 100 feet of any residential or automobile parking zone, as measured from the nearest property line of the residential or automobile parking zone to the closest boundary of the interior space containing the activity, such as, but not limited to, bearing wall, partition wall, glass enclosure, etc.

4. Within 100 feet of any church, grade school or school district property, as measured from the nearest property line of the church, grade school or school district property to the closest boundary of the interior space containing the activity, such as, but not limited to, bearing wall, partition wall, glass enclosure, etc.

5. Within 100 feet of another similar or related activity or establishment, as measured from the closest boundaries of the interior spaces containing the activities, such as, but not limited to, bearing wall, partition wall, glass enclosure, etc.

B. The activity shall not be a nuisance to adjacent uses.

C. All activity shall be confined completely within the building. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.760 Exceptions – Structural coverage.
A. Cornices, roof eaves, roof gutters and down spouts, sills, window and door awnings, and architectural features projecting a maximum of four inches into a required side, front, or rear yard shall not be included in the calculation of structural coverage;

B. The following shall not be included in the calculation of structural coverage as long as the cumulative lot coverage of such features does not exceed five percent of the gross lot area. All such coverage in excess of five percent of the gross lot area shall be included in the calculation of the structural coverage on the lot:

1. Unenclosed steps, landing places, porches, patios, benches, planters, barbecues, fountains, and similar structures which are two or more feet in height;

2. Uncovered and unenclosed balconies and stairways; and

3. Covered unenclosed patios, gazebos, trellises and similar shade structures. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.770 Private storage space for residential condominium complexes.
Residential condominium complexes shall have for each condominium unit at least 200 cubic feet of enclosed private storage space in addition to guest, linen, pantry and closets customarily provided. Such space shall not be divided into two or more locations, but may be provided either in a separate closet within each unit or as storage space exterior to the individual units. If the storage space is provided exterior to the individual units, it must be enclosed, weatherproofed, lockable, separately designated for each unit, and designed to appear as an integral part of the total complex. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.780 Reserved.
(Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.790 Satellite antennas.
No building permit or any other approval shall be issued for the installation of a satellite antenna until the proposed installation is approved by the Design Review Commission. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.800 Development landscaping required.
A. For commercial and multiple-family dwelling development, not more than three-quarters of the landscaping required by this title may be provided by the use of either water features or by the use of water features and decorative rock, decorative paved surfaces, fixed seating, planter walls, open decks, barbecues, fire pits, small arbors or gazebos, and similar garden hard surface features. However, not more than one-half of the landscaping required by this title may be provided by the use of such garden hard surface features.

B. For commercial development, while some landscaping must be provided between each building facade and the abutting street public right-of-way, such landscaping shall neither unduly separate nor conceal pedestrian views from the street public right-of-way into nonresidential commercial structures.

C. Landscaping provided in accordance with this title for parking areas shall be considered as satisfying a portion of the landscaping requirement of this title for development with each zone. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.810 Historic resources.
An owner of a designated historic resource is eligible to apply for special zoning provisions as outlined in CMC Title 84. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.820 Vacant premises.
A. The owner of any vacant premises shall assure that said lot or structure is maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition so as not to cause a blighted condition, or adversely affect the public health or safety.

B. Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this section:

“Blighted condition” shall mean any vacant lot, building or accessory structure that is not being maintained, in which at least one of the following conditions exists:

1. Missing or boarded windows or doors, except boarded openings installed as a temporary security measure for a period of 180 days or less;

2. Walls, roofs or flooring, which are collapsing or missing entirely, or any other condition preventing legal occupancy, as determined by the Building Official;

3. Exterior walls which contain breaks, faded or peeling paint, dirt or mold, loose or rotting materials, or those materials which are not properly surface-coated to prevent deterioration;

4. Dead or dying or otherwise unhealthy landscaping, including dead or dying trees and landscaping in the adjacent public right-of-way;

5. Dirty, broken or missing tiles;

6. Painted signs or other materials which adhere to or cover glass windows, including abandoned or obsolete advertising;

7. Visible obsolete, damaged or inoperable sign supports or brackets, including electrical or plumbing hardware located on the exterior of the building;

8. Faded or ripped awnings and window screens;

9. Broken, missing or inoperable exterior lighting fixtures;

10. The premises are vacant and attracting illegal activity as documented in Police Department records, or are a factor in creating a substantial and unreasonable interference with the use and enjoyment of other properties within the surrounding area, as documented by neighborhood complaints, police reports or the cancellation of insurance on proximate properties.

“Boarded openings” shall mean any opening in the building or structure covered with cut and fit pieces of solid building material, secured at the perimeter with nails and/or screws, painted to match the body color of the building, and used as a temporary security measure for less than one year.

“Building Official” shall mean such officer appointed in accordance with the City of Coronado Municipal Code, or his designee.

“Legal occupancy” shall mean occupancy in accordance with California State building and fire codes, and local zoning and housing codes, and all other pertinent codes.

“Owner” shall mean any person, institution, foundation, entity, or authority, which owns real property within the City of Coronado, or the executor or administrator of any estate containing real property within the City in its inventory, or the trustee of any trust holding legal title to real property within the City for the benefit of others.

“Premises” shall mean a legal parcel of land, building, or accessory structure.

“Proximate properties” shall mean a legal parcel of land located within 1,000 feet of a vacant premises.

“Vacant” shall mean not legally occupied by human beings. Vacant status in and of itself does not constitute a blighted condition.

“Vacant lot” shall mean a legal parcel on which there are no permanent buildings.

C. The owner of a vacant premises or vacant lot with a blighted condition, or a condition otherwise adversely affecting the public health or safety, shall, upon notification of the owner by the City, rehabilitate the premises to remove the blighted condition.

D. Regardless whether or not a blighted condition exists, the property owner of a vacant premises or vacant lot shall maintain their premises with the following standards:

1. The exterior of every vacant premises or vacant lot shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition.

a. Every vacant premises and vacant lot shall be maintained free from weeds and plant growth in excess of 10 inches. “Weeds” shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided.

b. Accessory structures, including detached garages, fences and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair.

c. Every vacant lot in a nonresidential zone shall be enclosed with a six-foot-tall opaque fence erected along the property lines screening the lot from view. The adjoining public rights-of-way shall be buffered with landscaping to soften the fence, and shall be irrigated by an automatic irrigation system, at the expense of the owner. The City of Coronado Design Review Commission shall approve the proposed landscaping and fencing prior to installation.

d. Except as provided in other regulations, no inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored in any vacant building on any vacant premises or vacant lot, where it is open and visible to the public, and neither shall any vehicle be kept at any time in a state of major disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or dismantled.

2. The exterior of every vacant premises shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and sanitary, so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare.

a. All exterior finishes, including, but not limited to, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks and fences, shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood and other surfaces shall be protected from the elements by painting or other protective covering or treatment.

b. All exterior windows and skylights shall be kept in sound condition, good repair, clean and free of tape or other adhesives. All windows of a vacant premises in all nonresidential zones shall be painted, covered with opaque film, or in some other manner treated to prevent the public viewing of the interior of the premises. Community information or displays are permitted in lieu of window treatment. All window treatments, displays, or community information shall be approved by the Director of the Community Development Department.

3. Every vacant premises, and the interior of every vacant structure, shall be free from any accumulation of graffiti, rubbish and garbage.

a. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore to a clean surface condition any exterior surface of any vacant structure or building wantonly damaged, mutilated or defaced by marking, carving or graffiti.

b. All rubbish or garbage shall be disposed of in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such garbage in approved containers that are regularly emptied in an approved disposal facility.

E. If the owner of a vacant premises has been the recipient of three notice of violation actions for violations of the Coronado Municipal Code during any one period of vacancy, the owner must submit plans to abate the violation(s) to the Design Review Commission for approval as provided in CMC Title 80. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.830 Manufactured housing requirements.
Manufactured housing shall conform to the development standards for the zone in which the structure is located with the exception of architectural requirements concerning the manufactured home’s roof overhang, roofing materials, and siding materials as follows:

A. A minimum roof overhang shall be provided that is at least one-third the required side yard setback.

B. Roofing materials shall consist of composition shingle, asphalt or other material typically found on a wood frame house.

C. Exterior materials shall be of natural material including but not limited to wood, stucco, and siding. Prefabricated siding is prohibited. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.56.840 Undergrounding of utilities for residential zones.
A. The property owner shall underground all existing and future utilities to the site (except for utilities which are not possible to underground such as backflow valves and transformers) when new construction occurs or when improvements result in more than 50 percent of an existing dwelling being demolished and rebuilt or where the proposed gross floor area exceeds 150 percent of the existing building gross floor area. Said utilities shall be located on private property and shall be screened from public view at the direction of the City of Coronado.

B. Undergrounding Exceptions. Undergrounding of each separate utility shall not be required if any of the following site conditions exist:

1. Access to the utility source would require crossing private property where an existing utility easement is not present; or

2. The undergrounding of the utilities would require over 75 lineal feet of trenching in a public right-of-way or would require the crossing of a public street. (Ord. 2068 § 2 (Exh. A), 2017)

Chapter 86.58
OFF-STREET PARKING
Sections:

86.58.010    Purpose and intent.

86.58.020    General provisions.

86.58.030    Number of spaces required.

86.58.040    Access design.

86.58.050    Backing onto sidewalk or street.

86.58.060    Tandem parking.

86.58.070    Minimum size for spaces.

86.58.080    Valet parking.

86.58.090    Grading and drainage.

86.58.100    Maneuvering width.

86.58.110    Marking spaces.

86.58.120    Wheel stops.

86.58.130    Screening.

86.58.140    Lighting.

86.58.150    Spaces shall be unobstructed.

86.58.160    Landscaping.

86.58.170    Retention of required parking.

86.58.180    Separate nonresidential lots.

86.58.190    Location.

86.58.200    Mixed occupancies in a building.

86.58.210    Joint use.

86.58.220    Common facilities.

86.58.230    Parking plan required.

86.58.240    Reserved.

86.58.250    Provision of underground parking within the public right-of-way.

86.58.010 Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to provide for regulations governing the number of parking spaces required based on the zone classification and type of use, the design characteristics of such required off-street parking, including but not limited to the configuration of the size of such spaces or stalls, size and configuration of maneuvering spaces, fences or walls, lighting and landscaping. Refer to the Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan for the number of parking spaces required for commercial uses located in the Commercial Zone. Further, the City finds that on-street parking does not fulfill parking requirements and that off-street parking is needed to retain traffic capacities on streets and highways and that adequate, well designed off-street parking facilities assist business, lessen traffic congestion, help maintain property values and deter blight and deterioration. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.58.020 General provisions.
A. When any building is to be constructed or over 50 percent reconstructed at any one time or incrementally, no construction plan shall be approved nor any building permit issued unless the project includes off-street parking in accordance with this chapter.

B. When an existing nonresidential building is proposed to be structurally expanded or to have an expansion of floor area, for occupancy to be allowed, for construction plans to be approved and for a building permit or other entitlement to be issued for the proposed structural modification:

1. The structural or floor area expansion must not reduce existing parking on-site below that which is required for the use or uses on-site; and

2. Additional off-street parking required for the structural or floor area expansion by this chapter must be provided.

C. Additions, enlargements or structural alterations may be made to a residential building that is nonconforming due to residential off-street parking requirements; provided, that there are no means of providing the required number of spaces without removing a portion of the existing main building, excluding porches, carports, patio covers, roof overhangs, sills and other similar projecting architectural features. In the case of multiple-family dwellings and accessory dwelling units, such additions, enlargements or structural alterations shall not include or permit modifications which would increase the number of required off-street parking spaces. If a garage has been converted to living space, before any structural addition is added, this living space must be reconverted to a garage or replacement parking for the main dwelling shall be provided in accordance with this chapter. In no case shall the number of existing off-street parking spaces be reduced.

D. When an existing use of a property is proposed to be added to, changed or replaced by a new use, for occupancy to be allowed and for a building permit or other entitlement to be issued for the existing or proposed use:

1. Single-family Dwelling Buildings or Duplexes (New Construction). Required off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with CMC 86.58.030(D);

2. If possible, the existing number of off-street parking spaces located off-site and required for current and proposed uses on-site must be maintained; and

3. The proposed use must provide the off-street parking required for the use by this chapter, except that when a use is proposed to replace an existing use that is legal nonconforming in regard to the number of parking spaces provided, the proposed use need not provide additional parking if it has the same or less parking requirement as the existing use. (Ord. 2067 § 5 (Exh. A), 2017; Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.58.030 Number of spaces required.
A. Nonspecified Land Uses. Where the minimum number of parking spaces for a use is not specifically provided for herein, the minimum number of parking spaces for such use shall be established by the Planning Commission, and such determination shall be based upon the requirements for the most comparable uses herein described.

B. Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan. All development within the Commercial Zone shall provide the number of parking spaces required by CMC Title 88.

C. Tidelands Overlay Zone. All development within the Tidelands Overlay Zone shall provide the number of parking spaces required by this title, or the number of spaces required by California Department of Boating and Water Ways, or the San Diego Unified Port District, or the California Coastal Commission, whichever parking standard requires the greater number of parking spaces.

D. Dwellings.

1. Single-Family Dwelling Buildings or Duplexes (New Construction).

Lot Size or Shape

Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required Per Dwelling

4,000 sq. ft. or less

Two: One “covered and enclosed” plus one “open and unenclosed”

4,001 – 5,599 sq. ft.

Two: One “covered and enclosed” plus one either open or enclosed

5,600 sq. ft. and greater

Three: Two “covered and enclosed” plus one either open or enclosed

Less than 50 feet in width and either has no secondary street or alley access or fronts solely on an alley.

Two: One “covered and enclosed” plus one “open and unenclosed”

Open and unenclosed parking spaces shall be open on two or more sides and unenclosed with no fence, wall or gate separating the access to the parking space from the alley or street. Parking below grade shall qualify as open and unenclosed and gates or doors on driveways are permitted. If said unenclosed space is covered and the roof is attached to a building, it shall be integrated into the architecture of the adjoining building. Parking spaces adjoining and parallel to a street shall be screened from the street with material which is a minimum of 50 percent solid and six feet in height. Off-street parking which is on-grade and uncovered may be located in the side or rear yard setback.

Where three parking spaces are provided on one site with one uncovered, said uncovered space shall not be required to provide a side or rear yard setback. Driveways providing access to required parking within a front yard or tandem parking (maximum of two spaces) may be used for the uncovered third space, subject to compliance with CMC 86.58.040, Access design, and 86.58.050, Backing onto sidewalk or street.

2. Single-Family Dwelling Buildings or Duplexes (Existing Construction Built Prior to 1973). Two spaces per dwelling unit, one of which is to be a “covered and enclosed parking” space per dwelling unit.

3. For multiple-family dwellings, there shall be provided no less than two parking spaces for each dwelling unit. A minimum of 50 percent of the required parking spaces shall be “open and unenclosed” on two or more sides with no fence, wall or gate separating the access to said parking from the alley or street. Open parking above or below grade shall qualify as “open and unenclosed parking,” and gates or doors on common driveways are permitted. If said unenclosed space is covered and the roof is attached to a building it shall be integrated into the architecture of the adjoining building. Parking spaces adjoining and parallel to a street shall be screened from the street with material which is a minimum of 50 percent solid and six feet in height. Off-street parking which is on-grade and uncovered may be located in the side or rear yard setback.

4. Multiple-Family Dwellings, R-5 Zone. One and one-half spaces per dwelling unit.

5. For residential projects with senior housing, there shall be provided one parking space for each senior dwelling unit.

6. For residential projects with affordable housing, there shall be provided one and one-half spaces for each affordable dwelling unit.

E. Limited Residential Special Care Facilities in the Residential-Special Care Development Zone. One space per two habitable units.

F. Nursing Homes, Convalescent Homes or Other Than General Hospitals. One space for each three patient beds.

G. General Hospitals. One space per patient bed, one space per 300 square feet of gross floor area of medical or dental office space, plus one parking space per two employees, determined at the month, day and hour when the greatest number of employees are on duty.

H. Hotels or Motels. One space per two habitable or dwelling units; one space per two employees, determined at the month, day and hour when the greatest number of employees are on duty; 20 percent of the parking spaces required by this chapter for meeting halls; and 30 percent of the parking spaces required by this chapter for all other uses on the site (e.g., restaurants, bars, nightclubs, general commercial or retail use, etc.).

I. Business Office, Service, Professional or Retail Use. One space per 500 square feet of gross floor area, plus one parking space per two employees, determined at the month, day and hour when the greatest number of employees are on duty, with a minimum of five spaces required for banks and savings and loan associations.

J. Eating and Drinking Establishments, Fast Food and Formula Fast Food Restaurants.

1. One space for each three seats and one space for each 54 inches of clear bench space, excluding dance floors and assembly areas without fixed seats which shall be calculated separately as one space for each 50 square feet of floor area; plus one parking space per two employees determined at the month, day and hour when the greatest number of employees are on duty.

2. Fast food and formula fast food restaurants shall have parking requirements calculated by the above standard; however, a minimum of 10 parking spaces shall be provided for these uses. The change of ownership shall not, by itself, require the provision of additional parking.

a. For fast food restaurants, required parking shall be provided on site, or by parking allocation credits, joint use, common facilities or facilities on private property on the same block within 200 feet of the site.

b. For formula fast food restaurants, parking allocation credits may be applied to satisfy the parking requirement in excess of 10 parking spaces. However, the initial 10 spaces shall be parking spaces provided by means other than utilizing parking allocation credits, and shall be required when:

i. A new formula fast food restaurant is established;

ii. An existing formula fast food restaurant is relocated; or

iii. An existing formula fast food restaurant is physically expanded in a manner to increase the restaurant’s seating capacity.

K. Churches, Mortuaries, Funeral Homes, Theaters, Assembly Halls, Auditoriums, Meeting Halls. One space for each five fixed seats, one space for each 90 inches of clear bench space, and one space for each 50 square feet of floor area used for assembly purposes.

L. Service Stations. There shall be a minimum of five off-street parking spaces or one off-street parking space for each pump island and two off-street parking spaces for each service bay, whichever is greater; plus one parking space per two employees, determined at the month, day and hour when the greatest number of employees are on duty.

M. Massage Establishments. One parking space per employee, determined at the month, day and hour when the greatest number of employees are on duty, and one space for each 100 square feet of gross floor area.

N. Marinas, Yacht Clubs and Dry Boat Storage Yards. Three car parking spaces for every four boat slips and three car parking surfaces for every seven dry boat storage spaces for marinas, yacht clubs and for dry boat storage yards that contain boat launching facilities.

O. Schools and Classrooms. One parking space per two employees, determined at the month, day and hour when the greatest number of employees are on duty; plus, for high school or adult education classes, one parking space per five students, determined at the month, day and hour when the greatest number of students are enrolled.

P. Parking Lots or Structures. One parking space per two employees, determined at the month, day and hour when the greatest number of employees are on duty.

Q. Mixed Use Developments. Two parking spaces per dwelling, and that parking that would otherwise be required for the other uses on the site. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.58.040 Access design.
For new construction or major reconstruction projects for single- or two-family dwellings or duplexes, curb cuts, driveways, and ingress and egress to on-site parking from a street shall be prohibited except for those lots which do not adjoin an alley or are not accessible by vehicles from an alley due to the lot configuration or location of a main building, permanent accessory building, or swimming pool. Access to on-site parking should be functional and compatible with pedestrian sidewalk use. Curb cuts and driveways shall only be permitted if they serve required off-street parking. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.58.050 Backing onto sidewalk or street.
No parking area, except those required for single- or two-family dwellings, or duplexes on lots which do not adjoin an alley or are not accessible by vehicles from an alley due to the lot configuration or location of a main building, permanent accessory building, or swimming pool, may be located so as to require or encourage the backing of motor vehicles across or into any public sidewalk or streets. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.58.060 Tandem parking.
A. “Tandem parking” (front to back) with a maximum of two spaces in tandem configuration, for single- or two-family dwellings or duplexes, shall be permitted only on a lot that is less than 50 feet in width and either has no alley access or fronts solely on an alley, or for lots with a “gross lot area” of less than 3,500 square feet, or when it is not reasonably possible to otherwise provide the required off-street parking due to lot configuration or location of a main building, permanent accessory building, or swimming pool.

The following are exceptions to this requirement:

1. Tandem parking for single-family or duplex development shall be permitted when three off-street parking spaces are required in accordance with CMC 86.58.030(D)(1).

B. All spaces that are in tandem and are serving residential uses shall be designated to serve the same dwelling unit.

C. In all zones, the first tandem parking space closest to the adjacent street or alley shall be open on two or more sides and unenclosed with no fence, wall or gate separating the access to the parking space from the alley or street. Open underground parking in a tandem configuration shall qualify as open and unenclosed. If said unenclosed space is covered and the roof is attached to a building, it shall be integrated into the architecture of the adjoining building. Parking spaces adjoining and parallel to a street shall be screened from the street with material which is a minimum of 50 percent solid and six feet in height. Off-street parking which is on-grade and uncovered may be located in the side or rear yard setback.

D. Tandem parking for nonresidential uses may be permitted only as part of an approved valet parking plan. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.58.070 Minimum size for spaces.
A. Unless otherwise provided in this section, confined parking spaces shall be no less than nine feet wide and 18 feet long and unconfined spaces shall be no less than eight feet, six inches wide and 18 feet long.

B. Whether confined or unconfined, parking spaces:

1. With parking angles of less than 40 degrees from the maneuvering aisle may have a width of no less than eight feet.

2. Which are “covered and enclosed” and which serve a one- or two-family dwelling shall be no less than nine feet wide and 20 feet long except for “tandem parking” for two vehicles which shall be no less than nine feet wide and 18 feet long per space.

3. Which serve uses other than dwelling units may be designated, in an amount not to exceed 20 percent of such spaces, as compact car spaces and may be no less than seven and one-half feet wide and 15 feet long except for confined compact spaces which shall be no less than eight feet wide and 15 feet long.

4. Designated for valet parking shall be no less than seven feet wide and 18 feet long.

5. Which are parallel to the access road or drive which services the spaces shall be no less than 22 feet long for standard car spaces and 19 feet long for compact car spaces where authorized.

C. The dimensions contained in this section shall be measured from inside the required parking space. No portion of any structure, equipment, or projection such as but not limited to building support columns, mechanical equipment, or appliances shall be permitted to encroach into a required parking space.

D. Where parking spaces are located at the end of parking aisles which are terminated by landscaping, buildings, or other structures, such spaces shall be 10 feet wide to provide additional room for maneuvering. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.58.080 Valet parking.
Valet parking may be permitted subject to the following conditions:

A. All points of ingress shall be marked “valet parking only” or similar language to that effect, in a manner satisfactory to the Community Development Department. Such markings may include pavement markings or both.

B. Valet parking areas shall be separated from adjacent or adjoining self-parking areas.

C. Vehicle parking by any person other than a valet shall not be permitted. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.58.090 Grading and drainage.
All parking spaces and the primary accessway to such spaces shall be paved so as to provide a durable dust-free surface and shall be graded and drained so as to dispose of all surface water that may accumulate thereon. Drainage of surface water will not be permitted over a public sidewalk. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.58.100 Maneuvering width.
The maneuvering (aisle) width for parking spaces other than those provided for one- and two-family dwellings shall not be less than as follows:

Parking Angle
(in degrees)

Maneuvering Aisle Width
(in feet)

0

12

20

12

30

12

45

13.5

60

18.5

70

19

80

24

90

24

(Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.58.110 Marking spaces.
A. Marking.

1. The perimeter stall length of each off-street parking space provided for uses other than single-family dwelling buildings and duplexes shall be clearly outlined with double lines or striping on the surface of the parking facility in a permanent manner with paint, reflective tape or other means as deemed appropriate by the Department of Community Development to clearly identify the boundaries of each space. Said striping shall be four inches in width with six inches between the double stripes. The required parking space width shall be measured from the center of the double lines.

2. Privately marked parking spaces shall not be located on sidewalks, parkways, driveways, alleys or planted areas.

3. Parking provided for a use, other than specified dwelling units (such as commercial uses, guests, compact car or handicapped parking), or in excess of the parking requirements for the complex, shall be clearly marked.

4. Markings may be coded so long as the code is provided to the initial purchaser of the unit, and to the Department of Community Development.

5. Required off-street parking space or queue lane markings shall be maintained in a legible condition.

B. Assignment.

1. Each off-street parking space for a multiple-family dwelling unit shall be assigned to a specific dwelling unit or use, and clearly marked for such dwelling or use.

2. Each dwelling unit shall be assigned its proportionate share of the required parking for the complex. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.58.120 Wheel stops.
Each off-street parking space provided for uses other than single-family dwelling buildings and duplexes shall have a concrete parking bumper or wheel stop unless it would hinder vehicle or pedestrian movement or constitute a safety hazard. Each required bumper shall be six inches in height, permanently anchored and located in a manner acceptable to the Department of Community Development. Wheel stops are not required for parallel or zero-degree parking spaces. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.58.130 Screening.
Off-street parking areas for more than five vehicles shall be effectively screened on each side which adjoins premises in any R Zone or property used for institutional purposes by a fence or wall which shall not be more than six feet in height from the property line to a point equal to the required front yard of the adjoining R Zone. A three-and-one-half-foot-high fence or wall shall be provided along the property lines adjoining dedicated streets and/or alleys. The fences or walls shall be maintained with no advertising thereon. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.58.140 Lighting.
Lighting shall be arranged in a manner so as to reflect light away from adjoining residential or institutional uses and otherwise located in a manner acceptable to the Community Development Department. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.58.150 Spaces shall be unobstructed.
All required off-street parking spaces shall be maintained free and unobstructed, with adequate ingress and egress. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.58.160 Landscaping.
A. Off-street parking areas for more than five vehicles shall maintain a five-foot-wide landscaped strip along the property line adjoining any dedicated street.

B. Total landscaping within and adjoining the parking area shall amount to no less than 15 percent of the parking site area.

C. The landscaping and exterior lighting, if any, shall be subject to CMC Title 80, and lighting shall be designed and installed so as to confine the light’s direct rays to the site and all parking lot lights shall be directed away from property lines.

D. One 24-inch box tree (minimum size), per City specifications, shall be provided for every five parking spaces. Said trees shall be distributed throughout the parking spaces and so located to provide shade cover for the vehicles.

E. Any unused space resulting from the design of the parking area shall be used for landscape purposes.

F. All parking lot landscaped islands shall have a minimum inside dimension of four feet and shall be separated from vehicular areas by a six-inch-high, six-inch-wide concrete curb.

G. All landscaping areas shall be irrigated automatically and kept in a healthy condition free from weeds, debris and trash.

H. Projects which are primarily parking structures, that mask their primary use on street frontages at street level by commercial retail or similar uses, shall be required to maintain a minimum of three percent of the total parking site or lot area in landscaping.

I. Primarily residential projects in the Parking Overlay Zone shall be required to maintain no more than 25 percent of the total parking site or lot area in landscaping if the project includes excess alley accessible public parking spaces to number no less than five spaces or 10 percent of the total number of spaces required for the land use on the site (whichever is greater). (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.58.170 Retention of required parking.
Existing required off-street parking shall be retained and maintained for those land uses for which it is required. Parking spaces required for one land use may not be rented, leased, sold or otherwise encumbered for some other use. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.58.180 Separate nonresidential lots.
If a building, structure or improvement requiring parking is located upon a separately recorded lot from that upon which the required parking is provided, whether in the same or separate ownership, there shall be a recording in the Office of the San Diego County Recorder of a covenant by such owner or owners for the benefit of the City in the form first approved by the City, that such owner or owners will continue to maintain such parking space so long as the building, structure or improvement is maintained within the City. The covenant herein required must stipulate that the title to the right to use the lot or lots upon which the parking facilities are to be provided will be subservient to the title to the premises upon which the building is to be erected, and that the lot or lots are not and will not be made subject to any other covenant or contract for use without prior written consent of the City. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.58.190 Location.
Off-street parking facilities shall be located as hereinafter specified. Where a distance is specified, such distance shall be the walking distance measured from the nearest point of the building that such facility is required to serve.

A. For any type of dwelling, parking facilities shall be located on the same lot or building site as the building they are required to serve, except that in single-family zones, required parking may be provided on an adjoining lot if said parking space(s) is accessible by pedestrians from the lot it is required to serve and said pedestrian access, the required parking space(s), and the vehicle access area to said space is described within a recorded easement to the benefit of the property owner of the lot which the parking space(s) is serving and that said easement shall not be amended or revoked without City approval.

B. For hospitals, sanitariums, rest homes, asylums, and orphanages, parking facilities shall be located on the same lot or building site as the buildings they are required to serve.

C. Parking for commercial vehicles in Commercial Zones or the “P” Overlay Zone shall be located, when feasible, in a manner to reduce their visibility from public streets or sidewalks.

D. For uses other than those specified above, not over 200 feet from the buildings they are required to serve, all parking areas are to be located in the same block, and connected to the buildings they are to serve with a direct access way that does not cross a public street.

E. No off-street parking shall be permitted in any residential front yard area except as permitted by CMC 86.58.030(D)(1), number of spaces required, single-family dwelling, and subsection F of this section, location.

F. Where the front yard or side yard setback requirements of this title for single-family dwelling buildings on numbered streets (First through Tenth Streets) eliminates the possibility of providing the required off-street parking spaces outside of the required front or side yards or portions thereof, then such required off-street parking may be provided in such required front or side yards or portions thereof as long as it is “open and unenclosed” and uncovered.

G. No required off-street parking shall be permitted on a slope greater than 14 percent. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.58.200 Mixed occupancies in a building.
In the case of mixed uses in a building or on a lot, the total requirements for off-street parking facilities shall be the sum of the requirements for the various uses computed separately. Off-street parking facilities for one use shall not be considered as providing required parking facilities for any other use except as hereinafter specified for joint use. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.58.210 Joint use.
The City may, upon application by the owner or lessee of any property, authorize the joint use of parking facilities by the following uses or activities under the conditions specified herein:

A. Up to 50 percent of the parking facilities required by this chapter for a use considered to be primarily a daytime use may be provided by the parking facilities of a use considered to be primarily a nighttime use; up to 50 percent of the parking facilities of a use considered to be primarily a nighttime use may be provided by the parking facilities of a use considered to be primarily a daytime use, provided such reciprocal parking area shall be subject to conditions set forth in subsection C of this section.

B. The following uses are typical daytime uses: banks, business offices, retail stores, personal service shops, clothing or shoe repair or service shops, manufacturing or wholesale buildings and similar uses; the following uses are typical of nighttime and/or Sunday uses: auditoriums incidental to a public or parochial school, churches, dance halls, theaters, and bars.

C. Conditions Required for Joint Use.

1. The building or use for which application is being made for authority to utilize the existing off-street parking facilities provided by another building or use shall be located within 200 feet of such parking facility and located in accordance with CMC 86.58.190(D).

2. The applicant shall show that there is no substantial conflict in the principal operating hours of the building or uses for which the joint use of off-street parking facilities is proposed.

3. If the building, structure or improvement requiring parking space is in one ownership, and the required parking space provided in another ownership, practically or wholly, there shall be a recording in the Office of the San Diego County Recorder of a covenant by such owner or owners as prescribed by CMC 86.58.180. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.58.220 Common facilities.
Common facilities for parking may be provided in lieu of the individual requirements contained herein, but such facilities shall be approved by the City as to size, shape and relationship to business sites to be served, provided the total of such off-street parking spaces when used together shall not be less than the sum of the various uses computed separately. If the common facilities are located on more than one lot, a covenant for the preservation of the parking facilities must be filed in accordance with the provisions of CMC 86.58.180. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.58.230 Parking plan required.
A. The plan of a project’s proposed parking area shall be submitted to the Community Development Department for processing prior to the issuance of any permit for the project for which the parking area is intended. Each plan shall clearly indicate the proposed developments, including location, size, shape, design, curb cuts, internal traffic circulation, lighting, landscaping and other features and appurtenances of the proposed parking area.

B. The parking plan shall be reviewed by the Design Review Commission in accordance with CMC Title 80.

C. Unless otherwise provided, the Community Development Department shall determine whether the plan is in conformance with this title.

D. Parking plans for property within the C-R and H-M Zones, and parking plans for nonresidential development on property in Residential Zones, or parking plans that involve joint use or common use shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for review and recommendation to the City Council. Thereafter, the plan shall be submitted to the City Council, which, after a noticed public hearing (as provided for in CMC 86.02.120, Determination of use), will approve, disapprove or conditionally approve the plan. The City Council may refer the plan to the Traffic Operations Committee for review and recommendation. Any parking plan submitted for property within the C Zone shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission for final action unless appealed to the City Council. Plans required to be processed in accordance with this subsection shall be accompanied by a filing fee as required by resolution of the City Council.

E. The parking requirement for a hotel or motel facility may be reduced by the City during parking plan review by up to 20 percent if the hotel or motel is designed and operated in a manner that encourages the use of alternative modes of transportation to the private car. For example, the hotel or motel is sited to be in walking distance of most needed facilities and transit, complimentary limousine or shuttle service is provided customers to the airport, train station and other activity centers, complimentary transit tickets are provided to customers and employees, free use of bicycles is similarly provided, and telephones, faxes, computers with modems, and other business machines are readily available on site. For employees, commuter information, bicycle racks and shower and locker facilities must be provided. Finally, the development operator must maintain membership in the Coronado Transportation Management Association. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.58.240 Reserved.
(Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

86.58.250 Provision of underground parking within the public right-of-way.
Public parking may be provided within the public right-of-way below ground level under the following conditions:

A. A City of Coronado or Caltrans encroachment permit is obtained by the applicant;

B. Such underground facilities would not interfere with the provision or maintenance of public streets or utilities;

C. The parking spaces provided in the public right-of-way are in excess of the total number of spaces required for the land use, and cannot be utilized to provide off-street parking required for the property or adjacent property; and

D. The parking spaces shall be maintained for public use, or a like number of spaces elsewhere on the property shall be maintained for public use. (Ord. 2062 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

Chapter 86.60
SIGNS
Sections:

86.60.010    Purpose.

86.60.020    Definitions.

86.60.024    Definitions – Types of signs.

86.60.030    General regulations.

86.60.040    Prohibited signs.

86.60.050    Signs on public property.

86.60.060    Regulation by zone.

86.60.065    Signs serving uses requiring a special use permit.

86.60.070    Commercial signs for gas station.

86.60.075    Commercial signs for theaters and auditoriums.

86.60.080    Complex signs.

86.60.090    Off-premises sign.

86.60.100    Temporary signs.

86.60.105    Searchlight signs.

86.60.110    Real estate signs.

86.60.115    Movable commercial signs.

86.60.120    Signs on vehicles.

86.60.130    Abandoned signs.

86.60.140    Approval not required.

86.60.150    Approval required.

86.60.160    Application for approval.

86.60.180    Action by Design Review Commission.

86.60.190    Appeal.

86.60.195    Variance.

86.60.200    Enforcement.

86.60.210    Historic sign designation.

86.60.220    Historic alteration permit.

86.60.010 Purpose.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to reduce visual clutter, preserve the character and quality of the environment, achieve an aesthetically pleasing visual appearance for the community, and provide an adequate opportunity to erect signs. In so doing, this chapter intends to enhance the visual environment of the City, to eliminate traffic hazards caused by improper signs and to ensure that information is presented safely and effectively.

B. This chapter establishes a comprehensive system for the regulation of signs to promote the public safety, health, and welfare. It presents a set of reasonable, nonarbitrary and nondiscriminatory standards and procedures which are intended to facilitate the improvement and protection of the environment by prohibiting the misuse of signs.

C. It is the intention of this chapter to further the greater public interest in allowing a property owner to identify the owner’s property and the activities, services, and products available thereon rather than having the property owner use his allowable sign area to identify property, activities, services, and products located elsewhere. (Ord. 1710; Ord. 1657; Ord. 1431)

86.60.020 Definitions.
A. “Sign” shall mean any and all devices, fixtures, structures, construction, cloth, or backing which conveys a message in pictorial, symbolic, or worded form, placed for display to the outdoor public. The term “sign” shall not include church windows, religious symbols, noncommercial flags, or barber poles. Time and temperature devices will not be considered signs if there is no identification or advertising thereon.

B. “Sign area” is the entire area within a single, continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of a sign and not passing between or through any elements of such sign. Said perimeter shall include all elements and ornamentation forming an integral part of the design of the sign. In computing the area of all multiface signs, only the area of the largest surface viewable from any one direction at one time shall be included. Directional signs and signs indicating restrooms and telephones shall not be included in calculating sign area.

C. “Sign height” is the total distance between ground level below the base to the top of the highest sign element, including all structural elements and appendages.

D. “Sign structure” is a structure which supports or is capable of supporting a sign. A sign structure may be a single pole or may be designed as an integral part of the building, or any combination thereof.

86.60.024 Definitions – Types of signs.
A. “Balloon sign” is a sign painted on or affixed to a balloon which in turn is attached to a structure(s) or the ground.

B. “Bench sign” is a sign located on a bench or similar structure.

C. “Civic sign” is a sign serving a public or quasi-public purpose.

D. “Commercial sign” is a sign which serves a business.

E. “Construction sign” is a temporary sign erected on the premises on which construction is taking place, during the period of such construction, indicating the names of individuals or firms having a role or interest with respect to the design or construction of the project.

F. “Complex sign” is a sign which denotes the name of and/or lists the tenants or occupants of a residential, commercial or professional development.

G. “Directional sign” is a sign intended to promote safe and efficient vehicle and pedestrian movement.

H. “Flag sign” is a flexible material designed to hang or wave from a structure for the purpose of identifying or calling attention to commercial activities.

I. “Flashing sign” is characterized by illumination whose color, intensity or location is projected in an intermittent manner.

J. “Freestanding sign” is a sign located directly on the ground, or on any support other than a building, whether or not the principal purpose of such support is to display the sign.

K. “Illuminated sign” is a sign in which a source of light is used in order to make the message readable. The definition shall include internally and externally lighted signs.

L. “Multiface sign” is a sign displaying information on at least two surfaces, each having a different orientation.

M. “Moving sign” is a sign which either has a publicly visible portion that by design moves in relationship to the remainder of the sign, or in its entirety is designed to move in relationship to the sign structure.

N. “Off-premises sign” is a sign not located on the property it serves.

O. “Pole sign” is a freestanding sign having a pole(s) greater than five feet in length as its main source of support.

P. “Political sign” is a sign designed to influence the action of the voters, either for the passage or defeat of a measure appearing on the ballot at any State or local election, or which is designed to influence the action of the voters, either for the election or defeat of a candidate for nomination or election to any public office at any national, State, or local election, or designed to influence public opinion.

Q. “Projecting sign” is a sign which uses a building structure as its main source of support and projects more than three feet from the wall surface.

R. “Real estate sign” is a sign which presents a message concerning real property which may advertise:

1. That the property is for sale, lease or exchange by the owner or his or her agent.

2. Directions to the property.

3. The owner’s or agent’s name.

4. The owner’s or agent’s address and telephone number.

S. “Roof sign” is a sign placed upon, projecting from, or above the eaves of the roof, or the roof itself. A sign hanging from and below a roof eave is not a roof sign.

T. “Searchlight sign” shall mean an apparatus, usually on a swivel that projects a beam of light in order to attract attention to a site, and it shall also mean the beam of light so projected.

U. “Temporary sign” is a sign of an impermanent nature serving a specific event or purpose.

V. “Wall sign” is a sign which is in any manner affixed to any exterior wall of a building or structure and which projects not more than two feet from the building or structure and does not extend above the roof, parapet, building facade or any outmost edge of the building or structure.

W. “Window sign” is any sign secured to the inside or outside of any window and clearly visible from a public way. (Ord. 1954 § 25, 2003; Ord. 1816)

86.60.030 General regulations.
A. Signs shall be maintained in a good and safe structural condition. All exterior parts shall be painted, or coated, or made of rust inhibitive material. Signs shall be maintained in good appearance.

B. The supporting members of all signs shall be free of any bracing such as guy wires or cables. Supporting columns shall be designed as an architectural feature of the building.

C. Signs shall not be erected so as to obstruct any door or fire escape of any building, or to obstruct free passage over any public right-of-way.

D. No sign shall be erected so as to create a traffic hazard.

E. No sign shall be erected that would unreasonably obscure from public view existing conforming signs on adjacent properties or premises.

F. No sign shall be erected so as to block significant coastal or bay views or detract from the natural beauty of the coast.

G. The design of signs shall be subject to and comply with the design standards in CMC Title 80 applicable to signs and to CMC Title 88, Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan, for projects in the Commercial and R-4 Multiple-Family Residential Zones. (Ord. 2018 §§ 16, 17, 2010; Ord. 1954 § 26, 2003)

86.60.040 Prohibited signs.
It is unlawful for any person to erect or maintain within the City of Coronado one or more of the following signs:

A. Animated signs, including changing or blinking time and temperature displays.

B. Balloons.

C. Balloon signs.

D. Bench signs.

E. Flag signs, with the exception of banners advertising nonprofit special events of community-wide interest.

F. Formed plastic or injection-molded signs.

G. Freestanding pole signs.

H. Internally illuminated can signs with translucent copy and field.

I. Internally illuminated channel letter signs (reverse channel letter signs are permitted).

J. Movable freestanding signs with the exception of construction signs and real estate signs, and movable commercial signs conforming to CMC 86.60.115.

K. Paper, cloth or plastic streamers or bunting – except seasonal holiday decorations.

L. Roof signs.

M. Rotating, moving, emitting, or flashing signs.

N. Traffic sign replicas.

O. Vehicle signs. (Ord. 1954 § 27, 2003; Ord. 1854; Ord. 1831; Ord. 1710)

86.60.050 Signs on public property.
No person except an authorized agent of the City of Coronado or any other appropriate government agency shall paint, mark or write on, impress, attach, erect, post, or otherwise affix or maintain any sign to or upon any public property or public right-of-way. (Ord. 1710)

86.60.060 Regulation by zone.
A. Only signs for purposes consistent with the uses or activities authorized within the zone or for the particular lot may be erected or maintained.

B. The total sign area on a lot subject to R-1A or R-1B regulations shall not exceed six square feet.

C. The total sign area on a lot subject to R-3 regulations shall not exceed 12 square feet.

D. The total sign area on a lot subject to R-4,
R-5, P, R-PCD, or R-SCD Zone regulations shall not exceed 24 square feet.

E. For lots subject to the C-R or H-M regulations:

1. Commercial or nonresidential uses shall be allowed a maximum of one square foot per each lineal foot of the use’s street frontage. Sign area permitted may not exceed 80 square feet on one side of a building for a single use. A-frame or portable signs are not included in this total.

2. Total sign area per lot for a lot solely occupied by residential uses shall not exceed 12 square feet.

3. Total sign area for each dwelling on lots occupied both residential and nonresidential uses shall not exceed six square feet.

4. Sign height including freestanding signs shall not exceed the height of the tallest building on the lot. Signs applied to the surface of the building shall not exceed the height of the building, and in no case shall a sign exceed 40 feet in height. Freestanding signs shall not exceed a height of 12 feet, except freestanding signs serving hotels or motels in the H-M Zone which shall not exceed a height of 15 feet.

F. The total sign area for a lot subject to C-U or OS regulations shall not exceed 90 square feet on any street frontage. (Ord. 1954 § 28, 2003; Ord. 1710; Ord. 1675)

86.60.065 Signs serving uses requiring a special use permit.
Signs for those uses requiring a special use permit shall be governed by the special use permit. Only by variance may the sign(s) exceed those standards allowed in the zone where the use would normally be allowed by right. (Ord. 1710)

86.60.070 Commercial signs for gas station.
A. Signs for the inspection of air pollution control devices, lights and brakes shall be permitted only when attached to the service station building.

B. One sign identifying the operator of the premises and address of the building, and not exceeding six square feet in area is allowed.

C. Gasoline stations shall post the full service and/or self service prices (per gallon or per liter) of all grades of fuel that the station sells in a manner visible from all streets that the station fronts. The price sign text shall have the word “gasoline” or words “motor fuel,” the trade name or brand, and the grade designation of the motor vehicle fuel. Price numerals shall be at least six inches high. All other letters or numerals shall be no less than one-third the height of the price numerals. The price sign shall be no larger than 15 square feet per face (if the station is only full service or self service) and 17.5 square feet per face (if the station is both full service and self service). No more than one sign shall be permitted per gas pump island per street frontage. All price signs shall be removable, with use of signs required at all times when the station is conducting business.

86.60.075 Commercial signs for theaters and auditoriums.
Signs for theaters and auditoriums may be erected or maintained contrary to the other provisions of this chapter only upon the prior approval of the Design Review Commission upon a showing of special circumstances.

86.60.080 Complex signs.
Complex signs may be erected and maintained only upon the prior approval of the Design Review Commission upon a showing that the complex signs are compatible with the total sign program of the development.

86.60.090 Off-premises sign.
An off-premises sign may be erected or maintained only upon the prior approval of the Design Review Commission upon a showing of extreme hardship due to the unique location of the property which the sign serves. Except, without the approval of the Design Review Commission, an owner of real property or his or her agent may display or have displayed real estate signs:

A. On the real property of such owner; or

B. On real property owned by others with their consent. (Ord. 1816)

86.60.100 Temporary signs.
A. In any zone, temporary signs not exceeding 20 square feet may be erected and maintained for no longer than 30 days upon the prior approval of the Director of Community Development upon a showing of compliance with the general provisions and prohibited sign provisions of this chapter.

B. Design Review Commission approval is required for temporary signs exceeding a size of 20 square feet or a 30-day use period.

C. Temporary “banner” type flag signs advertising nonprofit and nonpolitical special events of community-wide interest may be erected and maintained in any zone for a period not to exceed seven days without City approval. Such signs cannot be relocated from place to place within the City in order to exceed the seven-day limit, nor can they be erected and maintained in place more than seven days in any 30-day period or 14 days during any 365-day period without the appropriate City approval.

D. The applicant shall remove said signs immediately after the event or approved use period. (Ord. 1710)

86.60.105 Searchlight signs.
Searchlight signs may be erected and maintained only upon the prior approval of the Design Review Commission upon a showing of compliance with the general regulations and prohibited sign provisions of this chapter.

86.60.110 Real estate signs.
Real estate signs shall not be illuminated signs, exceed an area of six square feet on any street frontage of a lot, or exceed a height of four feet in the R-1A or R-1B Zones. Such signs shall be located on the premises the sign serves, or may be permitted off-premises as described in CMC 86.60.090(A) and (B), and must be removed within 15 days of close of escrow, or the signing of a rental agreement or lease. Real estate signs are prohibited from all public rights-of-way. (Ord. 1816)

86.60.115 Movable commercial signs.
Movable commercial A-frame, H-frame, or easel type signs may be permitted for businesses to advertise menus, sale items, or other business promotions. These signs shall be designed to complement the decor of the business or building where they occur and shall comply with the following standards:

A. One movable, freestanding sign shall be permitted for each business.

B. All signs shall be located on private property and must allow sufficient access to doors/pathways and not impede pedestrian movement. The location on private property shall be verified and approved by the Department of Community Development.

C. The maximum allowable size of the sign and supporting structure shall not exceed 48 inches height, 30 inches width, and 36 inches depth. The maximum sign area shall not exceed 10 square feet. The square footage of these signs shall not be included within the allowable sign area permitted in CMC 86.60.060(E).

D. Signs shall not contain illumination.

E. Signs consisting only of plastic backgrounds and individual plastic interchangeable letters are prohibited.

F. The design and materials of all signs shall require approval by the Department of Community Development prior to fabrication.

G. Signs of unique design which deviate from these standards must obtain approval from the Design Review Commission. (Ord. 1854)

86.60.120 Signs on vehicles.
No person shall drive, operate, move in and along, or park on any street or on public or private property any truck, trailer, carriage, wagon, sled, or any other vehicle or portable structure on which is attached or maintained any sign unless:

A. The sign is painted on or otherwise affixed so as to not project from the usual profile of the vehicle.

B. The vehicle is not parked in a manner to circumvent the standards of this chapter for the amount or type of signing permissible on a site by either parking on the site or on public rights-of-way immediately adjoining the site in such a manner as to call attention to the sign or vehicle.

86.60.130 Abandoned signs.
No person shall allow any sign to remain on property owned, occupied or controlled by such person which advertises or identifies a business activity which has not been conducted on such property for a period of 90 days or more.

86.60.140 Approval not required.
If in compliance with the design, location, size and other regulations of this chapter, the following signs do not require design review by the City:

A. No more than three square feet of total, on-site, “window sign” sign area.

B. Signs not exceeding six square feet and serving on-site residential uses.

C. Signs on motor vehicles.

D. Political signs.

E. Real estate signs, both on-site and off-site, not exceeding six square feet total on any lot, not adversely affecting public safety, including traffic safety, and not in the public right-of-way.

F. Movable commercial signs. (Ord. 1854; Ord. 1831; Ord. 1816)

86.60.150 Approval required.
Unless otherwise provided, any person erecting, placing, changing color, moving, reconstructing, altering, or displaying any sign must first obtain Design Review Commission approval from the City of Coronado.

86.60.160 Application for approval.
The applicant shall submit to the Department of Community Development at least 12 working days prior to the regularly scheduled meeting of the Design Review Commission an application for design review on forms prescribed by the Department. The application shall include a sign plan with information proscribed by the Department. The applicant shall pay a filing fee as set by City Council resolution.

86.60.180 Action by Design Review Commission.
A. The Design Review Commission shall review the sign plan to ensure that the plan is within the specified standards set forth in CMC Title 80, Design Review, and CMC Title 88, Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan.

B. The Commission may approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove a sign plan. Conditional approval may include a requirement that the approval may be revoked and the sign removed upon the happening of a specified event. (Ord. 2018 §§ 10, 11, 2010; Ord. 1954 § 29, 2003)

86.60.190 Appeal.
A decision on an application shall be final 10 calendar days thereafter unless an appeal is filed with the City Clerk in accordance with Chapter 1.12 CMC. (Ord. 2025 § 43, 2011)

86.60.195 Variance.
Variances from standards or regulations set forth in this chapter may be granted by the Planning Commission pursuant to the process provided for in Chapter 86.52 CMC. The fee for sign variance requests for existing legal nonconforming signs will be waived. (Ord. 1710)

86.60.200 Enforcement.
A. Any sign which was lawfully erected prior to the effective date of this chapter and which never received Environment Design Review Commission approval as the sign(s) exists and which does not conform to the standards of this chapter shall be removed or modified so as to bring it into conformance with the standards of this chapter by December 31, 1988.

B. Any sign which was lawfully erected prior to the effective date of this chapter and did receive Environment Design Review Commission approval as it exists and which does not conform to the standards of this chapter shall be removed or modified so as to bring it into conformance with the standards of this chapter within 15 years of the date that the Design Review Commission approved said sign(s).

C. Any sign which is unlawfully erected at any time shall be subject to removal or modification so as to bring it into conformance with the standards of this chapter under the procedures contained in State law (see Section 5490 of the Business and Professions Code); except, any person who lawfully erects a sign on public property or on private property without the consent of the property owner who requests a sign be removed by a City official shall pay a removal and storage fee adopted by resolution of the City Council.

D. If any work is performed on a nonconforming sign which was previously approved by the Design Review Commission (other than required maintenance) involving a structural change in the sign display, such sign shall immediately lose its legal nonconforming status and shall be required to immediately conform to all the regulations within the zone at that time.

E. An owner whose sign is subject to the abatement periods specified in this section may apply to the City Council during such period for an extension. Upon a substantial showing by the owner that the owner has acted lawfully in developing his property and that a fair return on his financial investment in the subject sign requires the sign to exist beyond the established abatement period, the City Council may extend the abatement period for that sign to any time the Council deems appropriate to allow a fair, financial return.

F. An owner whose sign is subject to the abatement periods specified in this section and feels that the subject sign is historical may apply to the Historic Resource Commission during such period for a historic resource sign designation. This provision allows signs which are historical to continue to be used and maintained which would not otherwise be permitted by this title. The “historic resource” sign designation shall extend the abatement period for 10 years. At the end of this 10-year period the owner of the subject sign may apply to the Historic Resource Commission for an extension. (Ord. 1816; Ord. 1710)

86.60.210 Historic sign designation.
A. Any property owner may apply to the Historic Resource Commission for the designation of a sign on the individual’s property in accordance with Chapter 70.20 CMC.

B. Historic Resource Commission Action.

1. The Commission may approve, disapprove or conditionally approve an application for “historic resource” designation signs;

2. The decision of the Commission shall become final 10 days after unless a notice of appeal to the City Council is filed with the Secretary of the City Council; and

3. If the designation is approved or conditionally approved, the Secretary to the Commission shall cause a notice of designation to be recorded in the Office of the County Recorder. (Ord. 1710)

86.60.220 Historic alteration permit.
A historic alteration permit shall be required as per CMC Title 84 for the removal, demolition, or substantial alteration of any sign that has been designated as a historic resource, unless this sign is governed by an expired abatement period. (Ord. 2018 § 15, 2010)

Chapter 86.64
WP – WILDLIFE PRESERVE ZONE (MODIFYING OVERLAY ZONE)
Sections:

86.64.010    Purpose and intent.

86.64.020    Uses permitted.

86.64.030    Review.

86.64.040    Location.

86.64.010 Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of the WP Modifying Zone regulations contained in this chapter are to protect and preserve valuable and unique environmental resources for the enjoyment and benefit of present and future generations of Californians. This zone designation is advisory for those areas within the corporate boundaries of the City but not under the zoning jurisdiction of the City of Coronado. This zone is mandatory for those areas under direct jurisdiction of the City of Coronado. This modifying zone is to be superior to all other modifying zones. (Ord. 1481)

86.64.020 Uses permitted.
The following uses shall be allowed in the WP Modifying Zone:

A. Wildlife preserves.

B. Botanical gardens or conservation areas.

C. Archaeological, geological or paleontological excavations by recognized archaeologists, geologists or paleontologists and authorized by the City.

D. Off-road paved or unpaved walkway or bicycle path.

E. Salt evaporation ponds, subject to a special use permit.

F. Aquaculture, subject to a special use permit.

G. The YMCA Camp at its present site.

H. The military facilities and activities on the Naval Communication Station property west of State Scenic Highway 75.

I. Overhead or underground utility transmission/distribution facilities.

J. The following accessory uses in conjunction with one or more of the above primary uses:

1. Paved or unpaved parking facilities and access roads for those individuals who are utilizing the site for one of the designated primary uses or who maintain the site for one of the designated uses.

2. Small permanent information facility to primarily be used to inform the general public of the unique qualities of the site.

3. Signs intended to inform the general public of the qualities of the site, to protect individuals from harm or inconvenience, and to preserve and protect the habitat qualities of the site and the species that frequent the site.

4. Trash receptacles, seating facilities, drinking fountains, sunken viewing blinds, fences, bicycle racks or any other similar facility deemed necessary to successfully utilize the site in a primary designated use.

86.64.030 Review.
A. The Planning Commission and City Council shall review for approval or disapproval all proposed uses in the WP Modifying Zone for conformance with the purpose and intent of this zone.

B. The Design Review Commission shall review all proposed structures, signs or facilities within the WP Modifying Zone for conformance with the purpose and intent of this zone and for their visual impact on views from any public road or water way.

C. Appeal of a Planning Commission or Design Review Commission decision may be made in writing to the City Council within 15 days after such review.

86.64.040 Location.
The WP Modifying Zone shall include the following areas:

A. That area within the City of Coronado that is encompassed by the City of Imperial Beach; the Pacific Ocean; the southern boundary of Silver Strand State Beach; Highway 75; the boundary between the Coronado Cays residential development and the salt marsh established by the Coronado Cays Company; the southern shoreline of the Coronado Cays; latitude 32º 37'; and the municipal boundary line shared by the Cities of Coronado and San Diego in San Diego Bay.

B. Any other area so designated by the Planning Commission and the City Council after a noticed public hearing is held on the matter at least 10 days prior to such designation. (Ord. 1578)

Chapter 86.70
COASTAL PERMITS
Sections:

86.70.010    Purpose and intent.

86.70.020    City coastal permit authority.

86.70.030    Development defined.

86.70.040    Exemption of development categories from City coastal permit requirements.

86.70.045    Repealed.

86.70.050    Activities requiring a coastal permit.

86.70.052    Exempt categories of development.

86.70.060    Categorically exempt geographic areas.

86.70.070    Coastal Permit Administrator – Purpose.

86.70.080    Authority and duties of Coastal Permit Administrator.

86.70.090    Application and fee for coastal permit.

86.70.100    Application procedure – Hearing, notice.

86.70.110    Findings, decision and issuance of coastal permit.

86.70.120    Coastal permit relationship to building permit.

86.70.130    Coastal permit time limit and renewal.

86.70.135    Coastal permit amendment.

86.70.140    Coastal permit revocation.

86.70.150    Coastal permit revocation – Notice, appeal.

86.70.160    Procedure for open space easements and public access documents.

86.70.170    Reserved.

86.70.180    Coastal permit appeal procedure.

86.70.190    Coastal permit appeal – Hearing, notice.

86.70.200    Appeals to the California Coastal Commission.

86.70.210    Emergency temporary waiver of coastal permit.

86.70.010 Purpose and intent.
This chapter is enacted to specify the coastal permit process, and the circumstances to which the process applies in order to assure compliance to the California Coastal Act. This chapter recognizes that three areas of jurisdiction exist in the City:

A. Areas under sole City coastal permit authority;

B. Areas under City coastal permit authority, but appealable to the California Coastal Commission; and

C. Areas not under City coastal permit authority (i.e., Federal government military property, areas under San Diego Unified Port District coastal permit jurisdiction and areas that remain within California coastal permit authority). (Ord. 1588; Ord. 1562)

86.70.020 City coastal permit authority.
Federal government property and areas under San Diego Unified Port District coastal permit jurisdiction are not under City coastal permit authority.

86.70.030 Development defined.
For the purpose of this chapter, “development” means, on land, in or under water, the placement, erection, construction, reconstruction, demolition, or alteration of the size of any solid material, building, structure, road, pipe, conduit, siphon, telephone line, or electrical power transmission and distribution line; the discharge or disposal of any dredged material or of any gaseous, liquid, solid, or thermal waste; grading, removing, dredging, mining, or extraction of any materials; change in the density or intensity of use of land, including, but not limited to, subdivisions and other land divisions, including lot splits or the alteration of lot boundaries; change in the intensity of use of water, or of access thereto; and the removal of major vegetation or the harvesting of kelp. (Ord. 1588)

86.70.040 Exemption of development categories from City coastal permit requirements.
The City may permit any category of development, or any category of development within a specifically defined geographic area, that the City, by regulation, after public hearing, has described or identified and with respect to which the City has found that there is no potential for any significant adverse effect either individually or cumulatively on coastal resources or on public access to, or along, the coast. These categorical exemptions shall be approved by the California Coastal Commission and found that no potential for any adverse effect on coastal resources will occur either individually or cumulatively. (Ord. 1751; Ord. 1588)

86.70.045 Repealed.
Repealed by Ord. 1817.

86.70.050 Activities requiring a coastal permit.
A coastal permit is required from the City for all development in areas under City coastal permit authority that are not otherwise categorically exempt. (Ord. 1817; Ord. 1781)

86.70.052 Exempt categories of development.
The City, after public hearings, has identified the following categories of development as having no potential for any significant adverse effect, either individually or cumulatively, on coastal resources or on public access to, or along, the coast, and has therefore exempted these development categories from City coastal permit requirements (as per CMC 86.70.040):

A. Improvements to existing single-family dwelling buildings (in accordance with restrictions of Chapter 86.74 CMC);

B. Improvements to existing duplexes (in accordance with the restrictions of Chapter 86.74 CMC);

C. Repair or maintenance activities that do not result in an addition to, or enlargement or expansion of, the object of such repair or maintenance activities; provided, however, that if the City determines that certain extraordinary methods of repair and maintenance involve a risk of substantial adverse environmental impact, it shall prohibit the use of such methods; and provided, that the activities abide to the restrictions of Chapters 86.72, 86.74 and 86.76 CMC;

D. The installation, testing, and placement in service of the replacement of any necessary utility connection between an existing services facility and any development approved pursuant to this chapter (in 86.74 and 86.76 CMC);

E. Maintenance dredging of existing navigation channels or moving dredged material from such channels to a disposal area outside the coastal zone, pursuant to a permit from the United States Army Corps of Engineers;

F. The replacement of any structure other than a public works facility, destroyed by natural disaster; provided, that such replacement structure or facility shall conform to the applicable requirements of this title, shall be for the same use as the destroyed structure or facility, shall not exceed the floor area, height, or interior cubic volume of the destroyed structure or facility by more than 10 percent, and shall be sited in the same location on the affected property as the destroyed structure or facility;

G. Demolition of any building except visitor serving commercial uses; provided, however, that if the City determines that certain extraordinary methods of demolition involve a risk of substantial adverse environmental impact, it shall prohibit use of such methods;

H. Construction of a single-family dwelling building on a legal lot of record in conformance to all applicable requirements of this title;

I. Construction of a duplex on a legal lot of record in conformance to all applicable requirements of this title;

J. The removal of major vegetation on municipal property; and

K. Activities not requiring either an initial study under CEQA, an environmental assessment under NEPA, a Planning Commission or City Council interpretation, or issuance of a special use permit or variance; and provided the activities as reviewed within the policies of the Coastal Act shall not create a potential for any adverse effect either individually or cumulatively on coastal resources and the activities conform with all provisions of the LCP land use plan. (Ord. 1588)

86.70.060 Categorically exempt geographic areas.
A. Those uses or activities permitted for a particular zone by the Coronado Municipal Code which do not require a discretionary action on the part of the City (i.e., Planning Commission or City Council interpretation, issuance of a major or minor special use permit, or issuance of a variance to either the regulation of the amount of landscaping required or to any standard in Chapters 86.58, 86.64, 86.70, 86.72, 86.74, and 86.76 CMC) shall be exempt in that zone from the City coastal permit process for those areas that are neither under the California Coastal Commission appeal authority nor within the Coastal Commission’s direct permit jurisdiction. Changes to the list of land uses that may be allowed without a discretionary action shall require a local coastal program amendment.

B. The City, after public hearings (as per CMC 86.70.040), has identified the aforementioned uses and activities as categories of development within a specifically defined geographic area, that present no potential for any significant adverse effect, either individually or cumulatively, on coastal resources or on public access to, or along, the coast. (Ord. 1962 § 2, 2004; Ord. 1874; Ord. 1817; Ord. 1781; Ord. 1751)

86.70.070 Coastal Permit Administrator – Purpose.
In order to facilitate administration of the City of Coronado coastal permit process, the Director of Community Development (or his duly authorized agent) is hereby designated Coastal Permit Administrator.

86.70.080 Authority and duties of Coastal Permit Administrator.
The Coastal Permit Administrator shall administer, interpret and enforce the City of Coronado coastal permit process, and is authorized to undertake any action necessary and appropriate to perform these duties. The functions as set forth in this section are considered either ministerial or minor in nature, not requiring initial review by the City Council or any City Commission or Committee, and are indicative but not exhaustive of the Coastal Permit Administrator’s authority. The Coastal Permit Administrator may:

A. Delegate a portion of his duties to a representative;

B. Gather data, investigate circumstances or determine facts in order to determine whether a specific activity or project is under the purview of this chapter, or to assure compliance with this chapter or with conditions placed upon a City coastal permit;

C. Determine whether projects are categorically exempt from the City of Coronado coastal permit requirement per CMC 86.70.050 or 86.70.060;

D. Review coastal permits, as detailed in CMC 86.70.130;

E. Revoke a coastal permit, as detailed in CMC 86.70.140;

F. Require an applicant to provide a certification by a civil engineer that proposed activities meet specified criteria, as detailed in Chapters 86.72, 86.74 and 86.76 CMC;

G. Determine which civil engineers will provide certifications to the City under conditions detailed in Chapters 86.72, 86.74 and 86.76 CMC;

H. Determine whether a specified coastal permit application, or a civil engineer certification of fact, is complete and acceptable to the City;

I. Give public notice of a public hearing to review a coastal permit application or application appeal;

J. Develop coastal permit application forms and processing procedures;

K. Recommend to the City Council appropriate fees for the coastal permit process, or changes to that process;

L. Represent the City concerning coastal permit matters, coordinating City coastal permit activities with appropriate government agencies; and

M. Waive the City coastal permit appeal fee requirement for sites within the California Coastal Commission appeal jurisdiction. (Ord. 1751; Ord. 1588)

86.70.090 Application and fee for coastal permit.
An application for a coastal permit shall be submitted to the Department of Community Development on a form provided by the Coastal Permit Administrator for the purpose. In addition to whatever items the Coastal Permit Administrator deems necessary for the proper administration of this chapter, an application shall, at minimum, contain the following:

A. The applicant’s name, address and telephone number (if applicant has access to telephone);

B. The date the application is submitted;

C. The applicant’s signature;

D. A description of the proposed project or activity;

E. A description of the site;

F. A description of the area immediately adjacent to the site;

G. A plot plan of the site;

H. A filing fee and a public notice fee as required by resolution of the City Council; and

I. Envelopes (affixed with sufficient first class postage) addressed to each applicant, to all persons who have requested to be on a mailing list for the specific project, to all occupants and property owners of property within 100 feet of the perimeter of the project site, and to the California Coastal Commission. (Ord. 1586)

86.70.100 Application procedure – Hearing, notice.
A. Upon the filing of a complete coastal permit application, the Coastal Permit Administrator shall, in a timely manner, schedule a public hearing on the request before the Planning Commission, and provide public notice of the public hearing.

B. Public notice shall be provided at least 10 calendar days prior to the first coastal permit public hearing. Public notice shall consist of notice by first class mail to each applicant, to all persons who have requested to be on a mailing list for the specific project, to all occupants and property owners of property within 100 feet of the perimeter of the project site, and to the California Coastal Commission; and publication of a public notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Coronado. In the situation of a continued hearing, additional notice in conformance with the procedure for the original notice shall be mailed out (if not previously stated in the first notice provided, nor announced at the hearings as to a time certain). The public notice shall contain the following information:

1. A statement that the proposed project or activity requires a City coastal permit (as per CMC 86.70.050);

2. The date of filing of the application and the name of the applicant;

3. The number assigned to the application;

4. A description of the proposed development and its location;

5. The date, time and place at which the application will be heard by the Planning Commission or City Council;

6. A brief description of the general procedure of local government concerning the conduct of hearing and local actions*; and

7. The system for City and Coastal Commission appeals, including City fees required.*

*Note: Subsections (B)(6) and (7) of this section will not be required for the newspaper public hearing notice. (Ord. 1588)

86.70.110 Findings, decision and issuance of coastal permit.
After the required Planning Commission public hearing, the Planning Commission shall by resolution approve, deny or approve with conditions the City coastal permit application. This Planning Commission resolution shall incorporate findings of fact to explain and justify the Commission’s action. The Coastal Permit Administrator shall issue a coastal permit only after all City coastal permit appeal deadlines have expired for the project or activity. The coastal permit shall have noted on its face whether it was approved with conditions, and either the specific conditions or how the wording of the conditions may be obtained.

86.70.120 Coastal permit relationship to building permit.
If a coastal permit is required for a project or activity, building permits shall not be issued for the project or activity prior to issuance of the coastal permit.

86.70.130 Coastal permit time limit and renewal.
A. Unless renewed, a coastal permit shall expire after one year from the date of issuance.

B. The Coastal Permit Administrator, upon a written request from the applicant, may renew the coastal permit in three-month increments for an additional period not to exceed one year. Work must be initiated on the proposed project or the proposed activity must commence while the coastal permit is in effect. An ongoing activity may be issued a coastal permit for a duration longer than one year if the Planning Commission resolution incorporates a finding of the ongoing nature of the activity, and specifically states the duration of the coastal permit issued. (Ord. 1891; Ord. 1586)

86.70.135 Coastal permit amendment.
A City coastal permit may be amended at the request of the permittee. The amendment procedures and fees shall be identical to the City coastal permit process then in effect. (Ord. 1751)

86.70.140 Coastal permit revocation.
After written notice to the permittee with an opportunity to respond, the Coastal Permit Administrator may revoke a City coastal permit if the Administrator determines that:

A. The permit was originally acquired by the applicant via a fraudulent application; or

B. The applicant fails to comply with one or more of the conditions contained in the permit.

86.70.150 Coastal permit revocation – Notice, appeal.
If the Coastal Permit Administrator determines to revoke a City coastal permit, the administrator shall immediately notify the applicant in writing that the revocation will be effective 10 days after the Administrator’s action unless an appeal is filed with the Coronado Community Development Department prior thereto (as per CMC 86.70.180).

86.70.160 Procedure for open space easements and public access documents.
When the City of Coronado Planning Commission approves a coastal permit that is conditioned with the requirement that an accessway or open space/conservation easement be provided by the applicant, the City shall not issue the permit until the following processing steps are completed:

A. The City Council shall review, revise and accept the easement or land;

B. The Department of Community Development shall record the requisite legal documents; and

C. The Department of Community Development, upon recordation of the documents, shall forward a copy of the permit conditions, findings of approval, the legal documents pertaining to the public access and open space conditions, and a statement as to which private association, public agency or City department shall be responsible for the operation and maintenance of the accessway or open space/conservation area to the Executive Director of the California Coastal Commission. (Ord. 1588)

86.70.170 Reserved.
86.70.180 Coastal permit appeal procedure.
Actions taken in accordance with this chapter by the Coastal Permit Administrator may be appealed to the Planning Commission. Actions by the Planning Commission in accordance with this chapter, including a decision on an appeal from an action by the Coastal Permit Administrator, may be appealed to the City Council. An appeal must be filed in writing with the Coronado Community Development Department within 10 calendar days of the action which is the subject of the appeal. In addition to whatever items the Coastal Permit Administrator deems necessary for the proper administration of this chapter, an appeal shall, at a minimum, contain the following:

A. The appellant’s name, address and telephone number (if appellant has access to telephone);

B. The date the appeal is submitted;

C. The appellant’s signature;

D. Information sufficient to denote the City action under this chapter being appealed (e.g., name or address of project, City permit or file number, description of City action, name of coastal permit applicant, etc.);

E. The reason for the appeal;

F. The appeal fee; and

G. Envelopes (affixed with sufficient first class postage) addressed to the applicant, to appellant, to the California Coastal Commission, to all persons who have requested to be on a mailing list for the specific project, and to all occupants and property owners of property within 100 feet of the perimeter of the project site.

86.70.190 Coastal permit appeal – Hearing, notice.
Upon the timely filing of a complete appeal of an action taken in accordance with this chapter, the Coastal Permit Administrator shall schedule a public hearing for the next available meeting of the appropriate hearing body; and provide public notice with copies sent to the applicant, to appellant, to the California Coastal Commission, to all persons who have requested to be on a mailing list for the specific project, and to all occupants and property owners of property within 100 feet of the perimeter of the project site to include the following information:

A. A statement that the proposed project or activity requires a City coastal permit;

B. The date of filing of the appeal and the name of the appellant;

C. The number, if any, assigned to the City action being appealed;

D. A description of the proposed development and its location;

E. The date, time and place at which, the public hearing on the appeal shall occur;

F. A statement that all persons are welcome to comment on the matter at the public hearing or by mail prior to the public hearing. (Ord. 1586)

86.70.200 Appeals to the California Coastal Commission.
A. For those actions under California Coastal Commission direct or appeal jurisdiction, upon the taking of final action by the City of Coronado, the Coastal Permit Administrator shall notify the applicant of the action taken and provide an information sheet explaining the California Coastal Commission appeal process which shall include a statement to the effect that “Appeal to the California Coastal Commission could result in Coastal Commission denial of a City approved project or activity or new conditions being imposed on the project by the Coastal Commission. The Coastal Commission may not eliminate or modify conditions placed upon the permit by the City of Coronado nor can the California Coastal Commission grant permission for a project or activity denied by the City of Coronado.”

B. The City of Coronado Community Development Department shall make readily available to the public an information sheet explaining the California Coastal Commission appeal process.

86.70.210 Emergency temporary waiver of coastal permit.
Under certain emergency conditions detailed in CMC 86.76.030, the City Manager (or his duly appointed agent) may temporarily waive City coastal permit requirements in order to allow preventive or ameliorative activities necessary to adequately address the emergency situation. If emergency action involves areas subject to CMC 86.70.010(C), an emergency permit must be received from the appropriate government agency. (Ord. 1588)

Chapter 86.72
DIKING, DREDGING, FILLING AND DREDGE SPOILS DISPOSAL
Sections:

86.72.005    Definitions.

86.72.010    Diking, dredging, filling and dredge spoils disposal – Coastal permit required.

86.72.020    Diking, filling or dredging – When permitted.

86.72.030    Dredging and dredge spoils disposal regulated.

86.72.040    Diking, filling and dredging regulated.

86.72.050    Alteration of coastal wetlands in Wildlife Preserve Zone regulated.

86.72.005 Definitions.
A. “Estuaries” means coastal water bodies usually semi-enclosed by land, but which have open, partially obstructed, or intermittent exchange with the ocean and in which ocean water is at least occasionally diluted by fresh water runoff from the land. The salinity may be periodically increased above the open ocean by evaporation. In general, the boundary between “wetland” and “estuary” is the line of extreme low water.

B. “Open coastal waters” refers to the open ocean overlaying the continental shelf and its associated coastline, including bays, canals, etc. Salinities exceed 30 parts per 1,000 with little or no dilution except opposite mouths of estuaries.

C. “Wetlands” means lands within the coastal zone which may be covered periodically or permanently with shallow water and include salt water marshes, fresh water marshes, open or closed brackish water marshes, swamps, mudflats and fens. (Ord. 1588; Ord. 1531)

86.72.010 Diking, dredging, filling and dredge spoils disposal – Coastal permit required.
Diking, dredging, filling and dredge spoils disposal in open coastal waters and wetlands shall require City issuance of a coastal permit. The coastal permit shall only be issued after verification that the activities are necessary, appropriate and designed to minimize or mitigate resultant adverse environmental impact. The applicant, at the determination of the City Coastal Permit Administrator, shall provide a certification by a civil engineer acceptable to the City that the proposed activities meet these criteria. (Ord. 1588)

86.72.020 Diking, filling or dredging – When permitted.
A. The diking, filling, or dredging of open coastal waters and wetlands shall be permitted only where there is no feasible, less environmentally damaging alternatives and where feasible mitigation measures have been provided to minimize adverse environmental effects, and when limited to the following:

1. New or expanded port, energy, and coastal-dependent industrial or visitor serving facilities including commercial fishing facilities.

2. Maintaining existing, or restoring previously dredged, depths in existing navigational channels, turning basins, vessel berthing and mooring areas, and boat launching ramps, or moving dredged material from such sites to a disposal area outside the coastal zone, pursuant to a permit from the United States Army Corps of Engineers.

3. Repair or maintenance activities that do not result in an addition to, or enlargement or expansion of, the object of such repair or maintenance activities; provided, however, that if the City determines that certain extraordinary methods of repair and maintenance involve a risk of substantial adverse environmental impact, it shall, by regulation, prohibit the use of such methods.

4. In open coastal waters, other than wetlands, new or expanded boating facilities.

5. Incidental public service purposes, including, but not limited to, burying cables and pipes or inspection of piers and maintenance of existing intake and outfall lines.

6. Mineral extraction, including sand for restoring beaches, except in environmentally sensitive areas.

7. Restoration purposes.

8. Nature study, aquaculture, or similar resource-dependent activities.

B. The applicant, at the request of the City Coastal Permit Administrator, shall provide a certification by a civil engineer acceptable to the City that the proposed activities meet the above criteria.

86.72.030 Dredging and dredge spoils disposal – Regulated.
Dredging and dredge spoils disposal shall be planned and carried out to avoid significant disruption to marine and wildlife habitats and water circulation. Dredge spoils suitable for beach replenishment should be transported for such purposes to appropriate beaches or into suitable longshore current systems.

86.72.040 Diking, filling and dredging regulated.
A. Where feasible, diking, filling, dredging, and construction activities shall be timed to minimize their impact on the mating, nesting, or hatching of endangered birds, or the spawning of grunion. Diking, filling, or dredging in existing estuaries and wetlands shall maintain or enhance the functional capacity of the wetland or estuary.

B. Where any dike and fill development is permitted in wetlands in conformity with these policies, mitigation measures shall include, at a minimum, either acquisition of equivalent areas of equal or greater biological productivity or opening up equivalent areas to tidal action. If no appropriate restoration site is immediately available, an in-lieu fee sufficient to provide an area of equivalent productive value shall be paid to the City. Surface areas shall be dedicated to the City, or such replacement site shall be purchased by the City before the dike or fill development may proceed. Such mitigation measures shall not be required for temporary or short-term fill or diking; provided, that a bond or other evidence of financial responsibility is provided to assure that restoration will be accomplished in the shortest feasible time.

86.72.050 Alteration of coastal wetlands in Wildlife Preserve Zone regulated.
Any alteration of coastal wetlands in the Wildlife Preserve Zone shall be limited to very minor incidental public facilities, restorative measures, nature study and development in already developed parts of the bay, if otherwise in accordance with requirements of this chapter.

Chapter 86.74
WATERFRONT DEVELOPMENT
Sections:

86.74.010    Waterfront development.

86.74.020    Public sandy beaches.

86.74.030    Waterfront development setbacks.

86.74.040    Accessway standards.

86.74.050    Public access along the shore.

86.74.060    Public prescriptive rights.

86.74.070    Prohibitions for Glorietta Bay.

86.74.010 Waterfront development.
Development involving waterfront properties shall be required to satisfy the standards of this chapter. (Ord. 1532)

86.74.020 Public sandy beaches.
No new development shall occur on existing public sandy beach areas. An exception would be allowed for new or expanded permanent lifeguard facilities, restroom facilities, bikepaths or similar public recreation facilities, if it can be determined by the City that adverse impacts to public beaches are negligible or when public safety or health requires it; and provided, that no less environmentally damaging alternatives exist. This prohibition shall not be construed to restrict or regulate the maintenance, repair, rehabilitation or replacement of existing public facilities, or the activities of any governmental agency other than the City of Coronado on property under that agency’s jurisdiction.

86.74.030 Waterfront development setbacks.
A. Development setbacks shall be calculated from the parcel’s property line subject to the provisions of subsections B and C of this section, which may require a greater setback.

B. New development shall assure coastal stability and structural integrity, and neither create nor contribute significantly to erosion or geologic instability.

C. Permanent buildings, or other structures proposed for construction (excluding refurbishment, renovation or addition to existing structures that do not extend the structures seaward or bayward) shall be set back from an eroding beach or coastline a distance sufficient to assure that the development will not require mitigation measures to protect the development from the natural erosion process during the economic lifetime of the structures. The builder, at the request of the City Coastal Permit Administrator, shall provide a certification by a civil engineer acceptable to the City that the proposed construction site meets these criteria.

D. The City Coastal Permit Administrator may request through the City Council, the opinion of the Corps of Engineers, Scripps Oceanography Institute, or other qualified experts with regard to the possible erosion of beach area in the vicinity of the proposed construction in making a determination of required setbacks.

86.74.040 Accessway standards.
Unless otherwise provided in this title, the following pedestrian accessway standards shall apply to the provision of pathways to or along the City’s shoreline:

Accessways shall be at least four feet wide, with a preferred width of at least 10 feet. At least four feet of the accessway’s width shall be hard surfaced and shall have a maximum gradient of 70 percent (i.e., a seven-foot vertical drop for every 10 feet of horizontal distance). Gradients of greater than 12 percent shall require stairs. The preferred gradient for pedestrian accessways shall be 20 percent or less. Wheelchair ramps shall meet all Uniform Building Code standards. Minimum structure setback from an accessway (excluding fences, boundary walls or hedges) shall be five feet; preferred setback shall be at least 10 feet. Setbacks shall be determined and the path shall be designed to assure both a functional accesspath and the privacy and security of adjoining land owners. Not more than one access path to the shoreline shall be required for each 500 lineal feet of shoreline.

86.74.050 Public access along the shore.
Offers of dedication of easements to local or State agencies or private associations for public access along the shoreline (lateral access) shall be required in association with new development fronting on the ocean or bay except for repair and maintenance activities or replacement of structures destroyed by natural disaster. In addition, improvements to any structure or demolition and reconstruction of single-family residences would be exempted from lateral access easement requirements unless such improvements interfere with currently existing public views, block a public accessway, or causes further encroachment of the structure seaward or toward the edge of a bluff. Specifically, easements would be required:

A. Seaward of the toe of existing bluff or vegetation lines where new development is proposed on existing developed lots; and

B. Seaward of proposed new sea walls or other shoreline protective devices.

86.74.060 Public prescriptive rights.
A. No portion of this title shall be construed to permit private activities or development to encroach upon public prescriptive rights. A City coastal permit for private activities or development shall not be approved if such activities or development are likely to interfere with public prescriptive rights unless public access is required as a condition of permit approval. Depending upon circumstances, public access may be provided through the use of deed restrictions, grant of fee interest, grant of an easement, or an offer of dedication of either an easement or fee interest. Proposed developments shall be sited and designed in a manner which does not interfere with the area of use, or shall provide for an equivalent area of use on-site. In either situation, prior to issuance of a permit, applicants will be required to record offers of dedication or other suitable documents.

B. Where evidence of public prescriptive rights exist in association with proposed development, review procedures in accordance with the Attorney General’s “Implied Dedication and Prescriptive Rights Manual” shall be utilized by the City to further investigate the possibility of prescriptive rights of access in order to protect such rights. A City coastal permit shall not be issued until it is determined by the City Council, upon a public hearing, that public prescriptive rights will be substantially guaranteed by conditions to be placed upon the City coastal permit.

86.74.070 Prohibitions for Glorietta Bay.
No new public school buildings or buildings solely for private use as clubs, lodges or private assembly halls shall be constructed, placed or maintained on land adjacent to Glorietta Bay; nor shall new leases be given nor old leases be extended for such uses in this area.

Chapter 86.76
PROTECTION OF NATURAL OCEAN AND BAY PROCESSES
Sections:

86.76.010    Coastal permit required.

86.76.020    Repair and maintenance of ocean and bay shore improvements.

86.76.030    Maintenance and placement of ocean and bay shore improvements under emergency conditions.

86.76.040    Waterfront land – Permitted improvements.

86.76.010 Coastal permit required.
A. The construction or placement of any improvement which may significantly affect the natural erosion process resultant from the interaction of water bodies upon their shores, or cause significant adverse alteration of the bay or ocean environment shall require a coastal permit from the City. Without limitation, buildings, harbor channels, breakwaters, groins, piers, retaining walls, revetments, riprap, sea walls and similar items shall be governed by this chapter.

B. An improvement or activity requiring a coastal permit under this chapter shall only be allowed when it serves coastal dependent uses, protects existing structures, removes public hazards, or protects public beaches in danger of erosion.

C. In order for an improvement or activity requiring a coastal permit under this chapter to qualify for such a permit, the improvement or activity must be designed and constructed as follows:

1. To neither create nor contribute significantly to erosion or geologic instability;

2. To minimize their own breakdown and disintegration;

3. To minimize water pollution and the silting of coastal waterways;

4. To not result in a substantial or potentially substantial, adverse change in any of the physical conditions within the area affected by the coastal permit requiring activity including land, air, water, minerals, flora, fauna, ambient noises and objects of historic or aesthetic significance;

5. To not preclude the public’s right of access to (including without limitation) the ocean, bay or public beach where acquired through use, custom, legislative authorization, purchase, condemnation, judicial action, gift, bequeath or escheat;

6. To encourage or facilitate, where feasible, the phasing out or upgrading of marine structures causing water stagnation contributing to pollution problems or fish kills;

7. To minimize their intrusion into public vistas by being unobtrusive and aesthetically pleasing when viewed from public streets, walk or bicycle ways or waterways;

8. To minimize extensions or projections into the bay or ocean;

9. To facilitate public access where appropriate and feasible; and

10. To minimize or mitigate resultant adverse environmental impacts.

D. The applicant, at the determination of the Coastal Permit Administrator, shall provide a certification by a civil engineer acceptable to the City indicating that the proposed improvement or activity conforms to the above criteria. (Ord. 1533)

86.76.020 Repair and maintenance of ocean and bay shore improvements.
Repair and maintenance activities or ocean and bay shore improvements which require City issuance of a building permit, encroachment permit or City review of an initial study shall require City issuance of a coastal permit. The coastal permit shall only be issued after certification that the repair or maintenance activities are necessary, appropriate, and designed, when feasible, to minimize or mitigate resultant adverse environmental impacts. The applicant, at the request of the City Coastal Permit Administrator, shall provide a certification by a civil engineer acceptable to the City that the proposed activities meet these criteria.

86.76.030 Maintenance and placement of ocean and bay shore improvements under emergency conditions.
A. In the event that an emergency situation exists that is an immediate significant threat to life, health or property, the City Manager (or his duly appointed agent) is authorized to temporarily waive City coastal permit requirements to allow preventive or ameliorative activities (including filling) necessary to adequately address the emergency situation. However, such activities shall conform as much as practical to the criteria listed in CMC 86.76.010, and shall ultimately require issuance of a City coastal permit. Within 30 days of the commencement of the preventative or ameliorating activities, the property owner shall apply for a coastal permit or shall restore the property to the condition existing prior to the preventative or ameliorating activity by removing the product of such activity.

B. If a City coastal permit is not issued for the preventative or ameliorating emergency activities, then the property owner shall restore the property to the condition existing prior to the preventative or ameliorating activity by removing the product of such activity unless the owner obtains a City coastal permit for alternative ocean or bay shore improvements or activities.

86.76.040 Waterfront land – Permitted improvements.
For waterfront land recorded on Miscellaneous Map 121 (Rancho Peninsula), Record of Survey 563, 2372, and Map 2544 (Bay View Estates), Record of Surveys 5191, 6014 and 6958, retaining walls, revetments, riprap, sea walls and similar development shall be permitted, with a coastal permit, subject to all other standards of this chapter, with the provision that such improvements may be situated in a manner so that the improvements’ bayward faces may connect in a straight line the bayward faces of similar improvements on adjoining property.

Chapter 86.78
TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY
Sections:

86.78.010    Purpose and intent.

86.78.020    Definition – Transient occupancy.

86.78.030    Definition – Transient rental.

86.78.040    Definition – Transient time-share occupancy.

86.78.050    Definition – Time-share complex.

86.78.060    Transient rental regulations.

86.78.070    Transient time-share occupancy regulations.

86.78.080    Nonconforming time-share complexes.

86.78.010 Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to regulate various forms of transient occupancy within the City. (Ord. 1809)

86.78.020 Definition – Transient occupancy.
“Transient occupancy” means the right to use, occupy or possess, or the use, occupancy, or possession of, a dwelling unit or a habitable unit for a period of 25 consecutive calendar days or less. (Ord. 1495)

86.78.030 Definition – Transient rental.
“Transient rental” means the renting, letting, subletting, leasing or subleasing of a dwelling unit or a habitable unit for “transient occupancy.” (Ord. 1495)

86.78.040 Definition – Transient time-share occupancy.
“Transient time-share occupancy” means “transient occupancy” when conveyed with consideration through any arrangement where the use, occupancy, or possession of real property circulates among purchasers of intervals of ownership according to a fixed or floating time schedule on a periodic basis for a specific period of time during any given year, regardless of the name used to describe the method of use, occupancy, or possession. (Ord. 1495)

86.78.050 Definition – Time-share complex.
“Time-share complex” is a building or group of buildings containing one or more habitable units with such dwelling units as may be allowed by this code, whose ownership or right to use facilities are conveyed to multiple individuals for “transient time-share occupancy.”

86.78.060 Transient rental regulations.
A. No dwelling or habitable unit in any Residential Zone (except as specified in subsection B of this section) shall be used as a transient rental.

B. Dwelling or habitable units within R-4 Zone motels, or that constitute lodging houses within the “P” Overlay Zone may be utilized as transient rentals. (Ord. 1788; Ord. 1495)

86.78.070 Transient time-share occupancy regulations.
A. For all zones, no dwelling unit or habitable unit shall be established for, or converted to, transient, time-share occupancy use.

B. For all zones, no person shall make a dwelling unit or habitable unit subject to an arrangement which creates a transient, time-share occupancy right.

86.78.080 Nonconforming time-share complexes.
Nonconforming time-share complexes may be reconstructed so long as neither the number of dwelling units or habitable units for each complex nor the number of bedrooms for each unit is increased, the height of a structure is not increased, existing building profiles are maintained, and the number and size of existing parking spaces is not reduced.

Chapter 86.80
PROHIBITION OF COMMERCIAL MARIJUANA ACTIVITY USES
Sections:

86.80.010    Legislative findings and statement of purpose.

86.80.020    Definitions.

86.80.030    Prohibited activities.

86.80.010 Legislative findings and statement of purpose.
A. On November 8, 2016, the State voters approved the Adult Use of Marijuana Act, also identified as Proposition 64 (“Prop 64”). Prop 64 legalized adult nonmedical use of marijuana and established a State licensing scheme for nonmedical marijuana facilities largely patterned on the MCRS Act, and generally: (1) allows adults 21 years and older to possess up to one ounce of marijuana and to cultivate up to six plants for personal use; (2) regulates and taxes the production, manufacture, and sale of marijuana for adult use; (3) allows local regulation and taxation of marijuana; (4) prohibits smoking marijuana in places where smoking tobacco is prohibited; and (5) rewrites criminal penalties so as to reduce the most common marijuana felonies to misdemeanors and allow prior offenders to petition for reduced charges. Prop 64, similar to the MCRS Act, allows cities and counties to prohibit the establishment of nonmedical facilities and licenses that are provided under Prop 64, providing for minimal personal use exceptions.

B. The City Council finds that the State is not authorized to issue licenses for commercial marijuana activities within the city because Business and Professions Code Section 26055(e) provides that the State may not issue a state license for any commercial marijuana activities within a city that prohibits such activities. (Ord. 2071 § 3, 2017)

86.80.020 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

A. “Commercial marijuana activity” shall have the same meaning as CMC 36.20.020(B).

B. “Marijuana” or “cannabis” shall have the same meaning as CMC 36.20.020(E).

C. “Marijuana dispensary” or “marijuana dispensaries” shall have the same meaning as CMC 36.20.020(G).

D. “Medical marijuana collective” or “cooperative or collective” shall have the same meaning as CMC 36.20.020(H). (Ord. 2071 § 3, 2017)

86.80.030 Prohibited activities.
A. It is unlawful for any person or business to engage in commercial marijuana activities of any type in any and all zones and in any and all specific plan areas. No person shall establish, operate, conduct, or allow a commercial marijuana activity anywhere within the City.

B. It is unlawful to establish or operate a marijuana dispensary, medical marijuana collective, or any other business establishment associated with any type of commercial marijuana activity within the City.

C. This section is meant to prohibit all commercial or medical marijuana activities in the City except where the City is preempted by Federal or State law from enacting a prohibition on any such activity. Accordingly, the City shall not issue any permit, license, or other entitlement for any commercial or medical marijuana activity for which a State license is required under any State law, and no person shall otherwise establish or conduct such activities in the City, except where the City is preempted by Federal or State law from enacting a prohibition on any such activity for which the use permit, variance, building permit, or any other entitlement, license, or permit is sought. (Ord. 2071 § 3, 2017)

Title 88
ORANGE AVENUE CORRIDOR SPECIFIC PLAN
Chapters:

88.02    Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan

Chapter 88.02
ORANGE AVENUE CORRIDOR SPECIFIC PLAN
Sections:

88.02.010    Purpose and intent.

88.02.020    Properties designated.

88.02.010 Purpose and intent.
By Ordinance No. 1951 of the City Council of the City of Coronado, as amended by Ordinance No. 1962, there is established the Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan (the “Specific Plan”). The Specific Plan will guide development for the next 20 years and provides a policy and regulatory bridge between the City’s General Plan and individual, project-level development. The Specific Plan includes policies that will serve as guidance to decision makers and contains the regulatory development standards and design criteria intended to maintain Coronado’s village character. The Specific Plan may be amended by the City Council, by ordinance, from time to time as deemed necessary. (Ord. 1962 § 3, 2004; Ord. 1953 § 1, 2003)

88.02.020 Properties designated.
Properties zoned C (Commercial), R-4 (Multiple-Family) Residential, C-U (Civic Use), C-U (Civic Use) Overlay, and OS (Open Space) are located in the Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan. (Ord. 1953 § 1, 2003)

Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan
Table of Contents

Chapter I – INTRODUCTION

A. PROJECT AREA

B. BACKGROUND

C. LAND USE DESCRIPTION

D. PURPOSE AND INTENT OF THE SPECIFIC PLAN

E. ORGANIZATION OF THE SPECIFIC PLAN

F. STATUTORY AUTHORITY OF THE SPECIFIC PLAN

Chapter II – PLANNING AND DESIGN FRAMEWORK

A. PUBLIC OUTREACH AND COMMUNITY INPUT

B. SPECIFIC PLAN POLICY FRAMEWORK

Chapter III – GENERAL PROVISIONS

A. INTRODUCTION

B. REVIEW OF PROJECTS

C. NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES

D. SPECIAL USE PERMITS

Chapter IV – COMMERCIAL ZONE (C) REGULATIONS

A. PURPOSE

B. LAND USES AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS

C. TABLE OF USES

D. PERMITTED USES

E. SPECIAL USE PERMITS

F. PROHIBITED USES

G. FORMULA BUSINESS

H. FORMULA FAST FOOD

I. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

J. OFF-STREET PARKING

K. LANDSCAPING

L. DESIGN STANDARDS

M. SIGN REGULATIONS

Chapter V – R-4 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE

A. PURPOSE AND INTENT

B. LAND USES

Chapter VI – COMMERCIAL ZONEDESIGN CRITERIA

A. INTRODUCTION

B. SITE PLANNING AND DESIGN

C. STOREFRONT DESIGN

D. BUILDING CRITERIA

E. LANDSCAPE / HARDSCAPE DESIGN

F. LIGHTING

G. PARKING, CIRCULATION, AND ACCESS

H. STRUCTURED PARKING

I. SIGNS AND ADVERTISING

J. PUBLIC SPACES

K. ROLE MODEL BUILDINGS

Chapter VII – R-4 MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE DESIGN CRITERIA

A. INTRODUCTION

B. RESIDENTIAL CHARACTER AND STYLE

C. ARCHITECTURAL CRITERIA

D. SIGNS AND SYMBOLS

E. PUBLIC SAFETY THROUGH DESIGN

F. CONTEXT/GENERAL PROJECT CONSIDERATIONS

G. SITE PLANNING

Chapter VIII – MOBILITY, WAYFINDING AND PARKING

A. INTRODUCTION

B. VEHICULAR CIRCULATION

C. TRANSIT

D. BICYCLING/PEDESTRIAN CIRCULATION

E. WAYFINDING

F. PARKING

Chapter IX – INFRASTRUCTURE

A. INTRODUCTION

B. WATER SERVICE

C. WASTEWATER SERVICE

D. STORM DRAINAGE

E. SOLID WASTE

F. ENERGY

APPENDIX 1 – GLOSSARY OF TERMS

APPENDIX 2 – LIST OF LOCATIONS FOR PHOTOGRAPHS FOUND IN THE ORANGE AVENUE CORRIDOR SPECIFIC PLAN

APPENDIX 3 – GENERAL PLAN CONSISTENCY ANALYSIS

APPENDIX 4 – MARKET STUDY SUMMARY

LIST OF FIGURES

Figure I-1    CORONADO’S REGIONAL SETTING

Figure I-2    LIMITED VICINITY MAP

Figure I-3    PROJECT AREA MAP

Figure I-4    UPTOWN COMMERCIAL AREA

Figure I-5    DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL AREA

Figure I-6    GENERALIZED EXISTING LAND USE

Figure III-1    SPECIFIC PLAN ZONING MAP

Figure VI-1    SITE PLANNING AND DESIGN DIAGRAM

Figure VI-2    TRADITIONAL STOREFRONT APPEARANCE ACHIEVED WITH CONTEMPORARY MATERIALS

Figure VI-3    RECESSED ENTRY DETAIL

Figure VI-4    AWNING DETAIL

Figure VI-5    WINDOW DETAILS

Figure VI-6    ENHANCED FACADE DETAIL

Figure VI-7    ROOF DETAIL

Figure VI-8    SIGN PROHIBITIONS

Figure VI-9    UNDESIRABLE SIGN COMPOSITION

Figure VII-1    VISUAL SCREENING OF UTILITIES

Figure VII-2    TRASH ENCLOSURES

Figure VIII-2    TRAFFIC FLOWS IN DOWNTOWN CORONADO FOR THE YEAR 2000

Figure VIII-1    ROADWAY CLASSIFICATIONS

Figure VIII-3    THE CORONADO SHUTTLE (ROUTE 904)

Figure VIII-4    EXISTING TRANSIT ROUTES SERVING CORONADO

Figure VIII-5    CONCEPTUAL DIRECTIONAL SIGNAGE

Figure VIII-6    CONCEPTUAL BEACH PARKING SIGNAGE

Figure VIII-7    CONCEPTUAL STREET SIGNAGE

Figure VIII-8    PARKING STUDY AREA

Figure VIII-9    PARKING STUDY SUB-AREAS

Figure VIII-10    ON-STREET PARKING INVENTORY BEFORE 6 PM

Figure VIII-11    OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES

Figure VIII-12    BLOCK ID NUMBERS

Figure IX-1    WASTEWATER SYSTEM

Figure IX-2    STORM DRAINAGE SUBAREAS

Figure IX-3    STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM

LIST OF TABLES

Table IV-1    COMMERCIAL ZONE USES

Table IV-2    GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

Table IV-3    GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS

Table V-1    ALLOWABLE FLOOR AREA RATIO

Table VIII-1    OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES

Chapter I
INTRODUCTION
The Specific Plan Area is primarily comprised of the Orange Avenue corridor that stretches from First Street in the north and continues to Adella Avenue in the south. Two distinct commercial areas are included in the Specific Plan -- the Downtown area south of Eighth Street and the Uptown area at the north end of Orange Avenue, adjacent to the Ferry Landing. The Orange Avenue Corridor also includes the multi-family residential area and civic and open space uses along Orange Avenue.

This chapter describes the Specific Plan project area and existing land uses, provides background information, addresses the purpose and intent of the Plan and lays out the document’s organization.

A. PROJECT AREA
Coronado, which means “crowned one” in Spanish, is located in San Diego County across San Diego Bay from downtown San Diego. The City is bounded by the Pacific Ocean on the west, San Diego Bay on the east and northeast, a small crescent-shaped portion of the Naval Air Station North Island (within the City of San Diego) on the northwest, and the City of Imperial Beach on the south. Coronado is located at the northern end of the Silver Strand, a long narrow strip of land that connects Coronado to the rest of San Diego County (Figure I-1.)

Historically, access to Coronado was either by ferry from San Diego or by driving up from the south. In 1969 the San Diego-Coronado Bay Bridge was opened, which offered convenient access between the two cities. The Bridge spans approximately 2.3 miles across the San Diego Bay and provides one of the only two automobile access routes to the City. The other route is through State Route 75 (SR-75), also known as Silver Strand Boulevard, accessed from the City of Imperial Beach. The highway’s route runs up the Silver Strand to Orange Avenue, follows Orange Avenue to Third and Fourth Streets (one-way egress and ingress, respectively for the Bridge), and continues easterly to the Bridge’s now defunct toll plaza, where the route crosses the bridge and ends where it meets Interstate 5 (see Figure I-2.)

The Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan project area (see Figure I-3) stretches from First Street in the north and continues to Adella Avenue in the south. In addition to Orange Avenue, the project area also includes some blocks adjacent to Orange Avenue at both its north and south ends. Two commercial areas are included in the Specific Plan -- the southern Downtown area and the northern Uptown area (adjacent to the historic Ferry Landing.) The Orange Avenue Corridor also encompasses a multi-family residential area and civic and open space uses along Orange Avenue, such as Spreckels Park, the Library and the police station.



Figure I-1 Regional Setting



Figure I-2 Limited Vicinity Map



Figure I-3 Project Area Map

 

B. BACKGROUND
Coronado’s distinctive peninsular location and historic development have resulted in a community that is unique, intriguing and inviting. The development of Coronado dates to 1886 when Elisha S. Babcock and H.L. Story, the joint owners of the entire Coronado peninsula, formed the Coronado Beach Company, subdivided a portion of their holdings, cleared the land, graded streets and conducted Coronado’s first land auctions. The next year Babcock and Story built the Hotel Del Coronado with money generated by the land sales. In 1888 the Hotel Del opened for business, ushering in the tradition of luxury beachside resort hospitality, and in 1890 the City of Coronado was incorporated.

Coronado’s admirable physical environment, combined with the historic charm of the Hotel Del Coronado, has contributed to a destination resort and residential community. The wealth of many of Coronado’s early residents permitted commercial, civic and residential development of the quality that surpasses most cities of similar size. This strong architectural heritage is one of present-day Coronado’s defining characteristics. Moreover, the City’s strong tourist industry, combined with multiple naval installations, historically reinforced a strong, diverse commercial district. Due to compact urban design, commercial and civic facilities are easily accessible to pedestrians and bicyclists from most parts of the City.

Coronado’s citizenry and government responded to these trends in the community’s quality of life in several ways, including establishment of a Downtown Task Force and Coronado MainStreet Ltd., Orange Avenue Corridor Design Guidelines, revised parking and signage provisions in the Zoning Code, Unified Transportation Plan, Transportation Management Association and Business Area Development Plan. These efforts have resulted in the Downtown Streetscape project, median landscaping, preservation/restoration of the historic Spreckels Building, opening of the Lamb’s Players Theatre, and the Orange-Adella Enhancement Project. Other related planned projects include a new City Hall and recreation center along Glorietta Bay and the proposed Hotel Del Coronado expansion and improvement plans.

Downtown Coronado’s renaissance has been highly successful, as evidenced by the Year 2000 Great American MainStreet Award and the Year 2003 Dozen Distinctive Destinations Award from the National Trust for Historic Preservation. Some challenges still remain and new issues have arisen, including:

•    Growing concern about the downtown evolving into a tourist-serving district, and the desire for expanded retail opportunities for residents

•    Availability of convenient parking

•    Continued expansion of discounted retail on North Island

•    Ability of local businesses to compete with corporate establishments

•    Recent closure of the City’s only movie theatre

•    Prospect of increasing traffic volumes

•    Need for improved aesthetic, land use, pedestrian/bicycle and vehicle connections

These challenges are either not addressed by existing planning documents, or the existing provisions are written as guidelines and lack implementation mechanisms.

In 2002, the City’s commitment to preserve and enhance Downtown Coronado continued with the City’s decision to develop a specific plan for the Orange Avenue Corridor.

C. LAND USE DESCRIPTION
The Orange Avenue Corridor project area includes four basic land uses – commercial (retail, restaurants, motels, office and services), multi-family residential, and civic / open space – which are described below and shown on Figure I-6, Generalized Existing Land Use.

C.1.    Commercial

The commercial areas of the Orange Avenue Corridor contain primarily retail shops, restaurants, motels, offices, and personal and business services.

Commercial along the Orange Avenue Corridor is concentrated into two main areas, one that is north of Second Street and one that is south of Eighth Street. The intervening blocks from Second Street to Eighth Street are dominated by dense rental housing, condominiums, and small hotels/motels.

Uptown Commercial Area. The commercial area north of Second Street (Figure I-4) is primarily restaurant anchored, including eating and drinking establishments and an Albertsons grocery store. The north area’s retail mix includes approximately 39,000 SF of tourist-serving uses located at Coronado Ferry Landing, a tourist-oriented specialty retail center.



Figure I-4: Uptown Commercial Area

Although the Ferry Landing is outside the Specific Plan boundary, its size and proximity influence the Specific Plan area.

Within the Uptown commercial area, there are also some mixed use projects, with residential units above ground floor commercial uses.

Downtown Commercial Area. Most of the Plan area’s retail space is located along Orange Avenue, south of Eighth Street extending to the Hotel Del Coronado (Figure I-5.) The area is comprised of dense storefronts, generally narrow and deep in configuration, occupied by local-serving retail/commercial users. A Von’s grocery store and the vacant Village Theatre are located in the northern block of this area. The Downtown retail segment is dominated by the following categories:

•    

Eating Places

•    

Personal Services

•    

Business Services

•    

Tourist Serving



Figure I-5: Downtown Commercial Area

The true core of the Coronado’s retail market lies in the area between Tenth St. and the Hotel Del Coronado. This area is characterized by a curving streetscape accented by unique architecture with historic character. Small retail centers, totaling more than 94,000 square feet (SF) of retail space, are located on Orange Avenue between the southern terminus of C Avenue and the Hotel Del Coronado. The retail mix in the core is similar to that found throughout the remainder of the Orange Avenue corridor but introduces modest amounts of apparel, books, housewares, jewelry, and specialty retail shops.

The retail mix is slanted toward eating and drinking and business/personal service uses. Other retail categories are not well represented. Local residents appear willing to support business and personal service providers but exhibit price sensitivity on purchases of general merchandise and comparison goods, preferring to shop outside the City for these items.

Coronado’s approximately 60,000 SF of office space is concentrated in the extreme southern portion of the Downtown area, south of 10th Street. Slightly over 56,000 SF of office space is concentrated in three primary locations: California Plaza (33,000 SF), Coronado Plaza (9,500 SF), and El Dorado Square (13,800 SF.) Coronado’s office inventory also includes small amounts of second-story space that lacks amenities such as air conditioning, e.g., the Winchester Building and the Spreckels Building. There have been no new office buildings built in Coronado since the late 1970’s and early 1980s when California Plaza and El Dorado Square were constructed.

The City of Coronado is recognized as a world-class resort destination with the Hotel Del Coronado as its anchor, just outside the southern boundary of the Specific Plan area. Several of Coronado’s other lodging properties are located along Orange Avenue between Second and Eighth Streets, within the Specific Plan’s Multi-Family Residential area. The Downtown commercial area also has some hotels and motels, including La Avenida Inn and the El Cordova, which are within predominantly retail blocks.

C.2.    Multi-Family Residential

The majority of housing stock within the Specific Plan area is concentrated between Second and Eighth Streets. It consists primarily of for-sale condominiums and rental properties in various multi-unit configurations, although there are some single-family detached units. Housing products vary widely with respect to age, style, density, and street orientation.



Photo 1: Condominium Building on Orange Ave

C.3.    Civic and Open Space

On Orange Avenue between Sixth and Eighth Streets there are important civic and open space uses, including Spreckels Park, the Coronado Public Library, the Senior Citizens Center, and the City Police Department.

Photo 2: Spreckels Park



Photo 3: Coronado Public Library



Figure I-6 Generalized Existing Land Use

 

D. PURPOSE AND INTENT OF THE SPECIFIC PLAN
The Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan provides a policy and regulatory bridge between the City of Coronado General Plan and individual, project-level development. The Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan includes policies that will serve as guidance to decision makers, and the regulatory development standards and design criteria intended to maintain Coronado’s “village” character. It also includes a number of non-regulatory recommendations to other bodies to address parking and mobility.

City staff, the Planning Commission and the Design Review Commission will use the Plan as part of the project review and evaluation process. The design criteria regulations inform property owners, developers, and design consultants as to what is required, expected and wanted for project design. Once adopted, the Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan’s regulations for zoning, development standards and design criteria, along with Municipal Code changes, will provide the legal development requirements for the Specific Plan area.

The Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan should not be considered an inflexible document. Rather, it has been developed to provide as much flexibility as allowed by State law. It should also be noted that this Specific Plan reflects a vision to be implemented over a 20-year period, and therefore, may be amended over time to reflect the City’s most current vision for the area.

E. ORGANIZATION OF THE SPECIFIC PLAN
The Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan contains various chapters that present background information; policy direction; and zoning, land use, and design criteria regulations. The Specific Plan is organized into ten chapters, as described below:

Chapter 1: Introduction

This Chapter provides an overview of the Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan, including intent and purpose of the plan, some background information and authority of the document.

Chapter 2: Planning Framework

This Chapter provides the policy foundation for the Specific Plan document. The Specific Plan planning framework describes public outreach activities, “Planning Factors”, and Specific Plan Goals and Objectives related to the development and implementation of the Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan.

Chapters 3, 4 and 5: Zoning Regulations

These Chapters respectively provide the general zoning provisions for all properties within the Specific Plan area; zoning regulations for the Commercial Zone; and zoning regulations for the R-4 Multiple Family Residential Zone.

Chapters 6 and 7: Design Criteria

Chapters 6 and 7 provide the regulatory design criteria for site planning, storefront design, buildings, landscape/hardscape, signs and public spaces that are applicable to properties within the Specific Plan area.

Chapter 8: Mobility, Wayfinding and Parking

This non-regulatory Chapter presents information on vehicular circulation, transit, bicycles, pedestrians, wayfinding and parking conditions within the Specific Plan area. It also includes recommendations directed to possible future conditions.

Chapter 9: Infrastructure

This non-regulatory Chapter summarizes the public utilities, infrastructure and services that are present and planned for the Specific Plan area. Specific services that are addressed include potable water, sewer, storm water drainage, and solid waste.

Chapter 10: Appendices

This Chapter provides background material related to the Specific Plan update process, including an analysis of General Plan consistency, a summary of the Market Analysis Report, a list of photograph locations, and a Glossary of Specific Plan terminology.

F. STATUTORY AUTHORITY OF THE SPECIFIC PLAN
The Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan is established through the authority granted to the City of Coronado by California Government Code, Title 7, Division 1, Chapter 3, Article 8, Sections 65450 through 65457 (specific plans).

As expressed in California law, Specific Plans may be adopted either by ordinance or by resolution. This allows jurisdictions to choose whether their specific plans will be policy driven (adopted by resolution) or regulatory in nature (adopted by ordinance). The Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan is a regulatory document that will be adopted by ordinance. The City’s Zoning Ordinance will provide supplemental zoning regulation where referenced by the Specific Plan.

As set forth in the Government Code, Section 65451, a Specific Plan must contain text and diagrams to address the following:

•    

The distribution, location and extent of the uses of land within the area covered by the plan.

•    

The proposed distribution, location, extent and intensity of major components of public and private transportation, sewage, water, drainage, solid waste disposal, energy and other essential facilities proposed to be located within the area covered by the Specific Plan and needed to support the land uses described in the plan.

•    

Standards and criteria by which development will proceed, and standards for the conservation, development and utilization of natural resources, where applicable.

•    

A program of implementation measures, including regulations, programs, public works projects, and financing measures necessary to carry out the above information.

•    

The Specific Plan shall include a statement of the relationship of the Specific Plan to the General Plan.

Chapter II
PLANNING AND DESIGN FRAMEWORK
This chapter provides an overview of the public outreach activities and policy framework that has influenced the development of the Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan. In addition, this chapter sets out the Planning Factors, Goals, and Objectives that form the foundation of the Specific Plan’s development standards, design criteria, and provisions.

A. PUBLIC OUTREACH AND COMMUNITY INPUT
Preparation of the Specific Plan included a comprehensive public participation process. The public was involved to accurately identify concerns, generate ideas, and clarify and resolve issues. Following are brief descriptions of the community involvement and outreach components:

A.1.    Publicity Program

A publicity campaign was carried out in order to effectively inform the public and to involve a diverse group of people in the process. The effort concentrated on distributing written information through community newsletters that were inserted into the Coronado Eagle and by maintaining a project website linked to City of Coronado’s website. The website included the Downtown Specific Plan Committee agendas and minutes, the Consultants’ Initial Memorandum of Findings, and reports on demographics and market demand, parking, and mobility. Additionally, the local community newspaper, the Coronado Eagle, published several articles on the Specific Plan process, while the public access television channel filmed and broadcasted one of the community workshops.

A.2.    Community Workshops

Saturday Workshop – March 23, 2002

Two public workshops were held on March 23, 2002 at the City Library to provide community members with the opportunity to contribute their input and to learn about what occurred throughout the consultants’ first week in Coronado (called “Immersion Week”.) The information gathered by the consultant team during Immersion Week activities and the observations made during the Downtown Walks were presented to the public. Interactive exercises were conducted in an effort to determine which issues were most important. Approximately 45 people attended the workshops.

Saturday Workshop – June 1, 2002

An additional informal workshop was held to solicit community input on desired land uses, building height, parking, a civic plaza and to maintain project momentum. The workshop was attended by approximately 32 persons.

Evening Workshop – June 24, 2003

A public workshop was held in the evening at the City Library to answer any questions regarding the Draft Specific Plan and to hear community response to the Plan. Comments were recorded to take back to the Specific Plan Committee for consideration at their July 24 meeting. Approximately 65 people attended the workshop.

A.3.    One-on-One Interviews

Over the course of two days (March 21 and 22, 2002) during Immersion Week, approximately 36 short interviews were conducted with community members representing various interests, including teens. Several key questions were asked of those being interviewed. These questions and the summarized responses are listed below:

•    “What are Coronado’s strongest assets?”

•    

Village atmosphere -- small building scale, diverse storefronts, and façade variety.

•    

Community feel, pedestrian friendly, outdoor dining, and a safe walking downtown.

•    

Landscaped medians.

•    

Inviting, lively, and interactive atmosphere -- outdoor dining, pedestrians on street, opportunities for community to interact with each other.

•    

Orange Avenue’s “Main Street” atmosphere / a gathering place / the “Boardwalk” of Coronado – everything is physically close.

•    

Hotel Del Coronado as a tourist draw, small shops that are easy accessible by walking or biking.

•    

Unique look of small businesses.

•    

Eclectic architecture styles.

•    

Buildings like El Cordova, Hotel Del Coronado, and the Spreckels Building

•    “What should be removed from Orange Avenue?”

•    

Non-retail uses from Orange Avenue, as it creates gaps between shops and is a detriment to a viable shopping district.

•    

Vacant lots and buildings.

•    

Relocate real estate offices and liquor stores from Orange Avenue to the side streets.

•    

North of the Library is more residential, but it is not an inviting area until the Ferry Landing; buildings are not kept up as they are further south.

•    

Rundown buildings and stretches of Orange Avenue that don’t fit, e.g., shop appearance or type of goods sold.

•    

Replace the old movie theater with a new one.

•    

Mixed use, as vertical mixed uses are not working, especially ground floor retail with condominiums on top.

•    “What should be added to Orange Avenue?”

•    

Redevelop the entire Von’s block with an entertainment center, incorporating the existing facade: arcade for kids, food court, bring back existing businesses, create an anchor tenant, underground parking.

•    

Increase the community’s appreciation of downtown; tourists appreciate it!

•    

Create an arts and crafts “mall” in the Petco or Cora Mart building to attract out-of-towners.

•    

Fix up the older buildings while retaining the streetscape harmony.

•    

More parking.

•    

A place for kids aged 12 – 14 years old to hang out, as shown in TV shows (Saved by the Bell or Lizzie Mac).

•    

Better maintenance and more frequent trash pickups.

A.4.    Downtown Walks

On March 20, 2002, the consultant team took an afternoon guided walk with the Director of Coronado MainStreet Ltd and City Staff, and another early evening walk with local law enforcement agents. These were organized in order to identify unique features, note different land uses, record any visual observations and opportunities, and to identify areas or features that cause real or perceived public safety concerns.

A.5.    City Council/Planning Commission Workshops

Kick-off Dinner (March 30, 2002)

At a publicly noticed special meeting, the Consultants met informally with the City Council in conjunction with the Design Review and Planning Commissions, the Specific Plan Committee, City staff, and other officials representing Downtown interests. This was an opportunity for local leaders to discuss their “visions” and concerns for the area in a relaxed atmosphere.

City Council / Planning Commission Workshops

Separate workshops were held in June, 2002 with these bodies and a joint workshop in June, 2003. The purpose of the first workshop was to identify broad-based issues relevant to the Plan, discuss preliminary findings, and to receive direction. The second workshop was held to review the Draft Plan.

A.6.    Specific Plan Committee Workshops

A Specific Plan Committee (hereafter referred to as the Committee), consisting of 11 dedicated community members appointed by the City Council, contributed their unique backgrounds and perspectives toward creation of the Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan. Over the course of nearly 16 months, the consultants met numerous times with this group to provide information, discuss options, and receive the Committee’s input regarding various goals and issues for the Specific Plan. The decisions and direction provided by the Committee were then used to develop the draft Specific Plan. The Committee also met three times independently of the consultants. Listed below is a very brief summary of the Specific Plan Committee meetings.

•    

March 4, 2002 The Kickoff meeting topics included, “What Is a Specific Plan?”, Work Program and Schedule, and the Role of the Committee

•    

April 18, 2002 The Committee provided input to Mark Brodeur of the RRM Design Group on mixed use, zoning to restrict certain uses or to limit the quantity of certain uses, and building heights in the commercial areas.

•    

May 16, 2002 Gerry Trimble of Keyser Marston Associates summarized the initial findings regarding demographics and market demand for Coronado. The Committee provided input regarding the Urban Design Studio’s memorandum report, “A Direction for Downtown Coronado.”

•    

July 25, 2002 Gerry Trimble of Keyser Marston Associates presented initial findings regarding the Village Theater and Cora Mart sites and Alan Hoffman of The Mission Group presented initial data on the Parking Study.

•    

August 15 and 22, 2002 The Committee discussed and provided input to the Consultants on land uses and development standards for the commercial areas.

•    

September 12, 2002 The discussion of development standards continued, including mixed use and density.

•    

September 19, 2002 The Committee met independently of consultants and further discussed uses in the commercial zones.

•    

October 10, 2002 Alan Hoffman of The Mission Group presented various parking strategies and received input from the Committee; Danielle Putnam of RBF Consulting’s Urban Design Studio presented a supply/demand parking analysis for existing and future conditions; and the draft design criteria for the Commercial Zone were reviewed.

•    

October 31, 2002 The Committee discussed and provided input on design criteria for the R-4 Multiple Family Residential Zone and reviewed preliminary “wayfinding” signage concepts.

•    

November 14, 2002 The Committee met independently of consultants to discuss development standards in the R 4 Multiple Family Residential Zone.

•    

November 21, 2002 Alan Hoffman of The Mission Group presented highlights of a Mobility Study and received Committee input. The Committee reviewed and provided feedback on draft goals and implementation strategies for the Specific Plan.

•    

December 19, 2002 The Preliminary Draft Specific Plan was presented to the DSPC for input and comment.

•    

January – June, 2003 Over the course of eight meetings (dates are listed below), the Committee was presented additional information and input on the inter-related topics of land use; parking standards; building height, mass and bulk; signage; and the special use permit process. Following extensive and thorough discussion of these topics, the Committee directed the consultants to make revisions to the Preliminary Draft Specific Plan and release it for public review.

– January 23, 2003

– February 6 and 20, 2003

– March 6, 10, and 20, 2003

– April 17, 2003

– June 5, 2003

•    

July 24, 2003 The Committee reviewed comments on the Draft Specific Plan made at the June 24 public workshop and June 25 Design Review Commission meeting. The Committee directed plan revisions to be prepared for the public hearing.

A.7.    Public Hearings

Public Hearings As required by state and local laws, public hearings with the Planning Commission and the City Council were held. These hearings provided additional opportunities for the community to offer input on the Specific Plan.

B. SPECIFIC PLAN POLICY FRAMEWORK
The Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan policy framework provides the primary policy guidance for the Specific Plan. All future development and redevelopment within the Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan shall be consistent with and take guidance from the Goals and Objectives as expressed in this Section.

The Policy Framework for the Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan is organized as follows:

•    

Specific Plan Planning Factors: Identifies the opportunities and constraints that influence and contribute to the successful implementation of the Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan.

•    

Specific Plan Goals: Provides the broad goals that future development and redevelopment in the Specific Plan area shall implement.

•    

Specific Plan Objectives: Provides more explicit policy statements that implement the Specific Plan’s Goals.

B.1    Specific Plan “Planning Factors”

This section describes those factors that influence and contribute to the successful implementation of the Orange Avenue Specific Plan, as they form the policy foundation of the Specific Plan. Planning Factors express issues, concerns, and the positive and negative attributes that contribute to the ultimate policy actions of this Specific Plan. The Planning Factors draw from community input; market analysis, mobility and parking studies; and observations by the planning consultant team. The Planning Factors are listed below, and are grouped into the following categories:

•    

Policy

•    

Land Use & Urban Design

•    

Parking

•    

Economic / Marketing

•    

Traffic / Circulation

Policy Planning Factors

•    

Develop a Community-Based Plan: The Specific Plan area stretches along Orange Avenue, and includes the southern commercial area referred to as “downtown” by residents; the northern commercial area adjacent to the Ferry Landing; and the multi-family-zoned residential area in between. Coronado residents, merchants, and property owners all have various feelings about how these different areas should be preserved or how they should change. Change is an inevitable part of a city’s evolution, but that does not mean it should proceed in an uncontrolled manner. A community that directs its future can keep and enhance what is valued, while encouraging and allowing changes that will contribute to the community’s vision.

•    

Establish Predictable/Understandable Criteria and Standards: The existing Orange Avenue Design Guidelines (revised 1991) are well written and cite good examples of design, but are non-specific and not regulatory. This means that development proposals can ignore them. Developers’ and designers’ efforts to interpret such guidelines are sometimes different from the understanding of City staff, Design Review Commissions, or decision makers. This uncertainty ultimately harms the City because developers, property owners and lenders perceive that it may be too risky to attempt improvements or projects that may benefit the community.

Land Use & Urban Design Planning Factors

•    

Mixed Use: Mixed use development (defined for this Specific Plan as residential above commercial) is a controversial topic in Coronado’s Commercial Zone. Concerns regarding mixed use include: (1) may create additional traffic; (2) increased development intensity; (3) marginal commercial uses; and (4) privacy issues. Residential development provides customers for adjacent commercial uses, but commercial uses sometimes have characteristics that create problems for residents, such as noise or unpleasant odors. It is perceived that mixed use developers in the commercial zoned areas profit from the residential units, while the additional commercial square footage may not be needed. Also, there is concern that currently viable commercial properties will convert to mainly residential use (condominiums) and slowly eliminate existing downtown businesses.

•    

“White Elephant” Lots and Buildings: Vacant buildings, such as the Cora Mart and the Village Theater, present unattractive gaps in Coronado’s urban fabric, influence the appearance of adjacent buildings, and do not add to the community’s economic vitality.

    

The Village Theater holds special memories for most of Coronado’s long-time residents and has nostalgic symbolism as the community’s indoor gathering space. It is where families went to the movies together, teenagers had their first dates, and children experienced their first afternoon matinees free of parental supervision. Emotionally, residents don’t like seeing the theatre inactive. Other functional buildings are also “white elephants” in that they do not contribute to the streetscape’s strong pedestrian environment, such as the Petco store and the Bank of America building.



Photo 4: Village Theater

•    

Protect Points of Community Pride: The community has specific unique features that it strongly identifies with and wants to protect, such as the landscaped medians on Orange Avenue.



Photo 5: Landscaped Median

•    

Existing Zoning Doesn’t Create the Desired Scale: In general, the community wants to maintain the low-rise, one- and two-story human scale development currently in the commercial zones; however, the current zoning allows buildings that are taller (3-story) and bulkier than most buildings currently found on Orange Avenue.

•    

Create a Central Civic Space: Most successful downtowns have a significant public open space that brings citizens together to celebrate community. To attract people downtown, activities need to be scheduled in a comfortable and central location. Coronado has Spreckels Park for outdoor cultural activities, but an urban space much closer to Downtown’s commercial area is needed. As stated in the Business Area Development Plan, a focal point such as an enhanced Rotary Park would complement and balance the Hotel Del Coronado’s future entry garden area (corner of Orange and R.H. Dana Place) and Adella Plaza. A central outdoor space would also give strolling visitors a significant destination and provide a place for residents to informally gather.

•    

Better “Wayfinding” Is Needed: There is a term in urban design called “wayfinding.” That is, urban design efforts must help people find their way to a place and within the place. Many people unfamiliar with Downtown Coronado do not know how to get there after disembarking from the Ferry, driving off the Bridge or coming up the Strand. They also are uncertain where to go once they are Downtown. Signage for parking (surface and underground), directional signage, and downtown directories and kiosks are lacking and needed.

Parking Planning Factors

•    

Parking Requirements Impact Intensity of Development: To satisfy parking requirements for new development, or for redevelopment greater than the building’s original square footage, relatively large lots are required. This is because the parking must be put underground or within a structure, where it is more difficult to accommodate the cars’ turning movements. The result is that smaller lots are difficult to redevelop and may simply deteriorate over time, or lot consolidations create projects that are bigger than what the community wants.

•    

Location of Public Parking: Public parking located in the right-of-way along city streets is desirable for reasons of convenience and pedestrian safety. Community members are concerned about the visual effects of parking structures.



Photo 6: On-street parking

•    

Vacant Land for Surface Parking Lots is Limited: Vacant land that could be used for surface parking in the Downtown commercial area is virtually non-existent. A few existing buildings have surface parking lots on Orange Avenue, such as La Avenida and Petco.

Demographic / Economic Planning Factors

•    

Small Population Base and Isolated Geography: Coronado’s population base is relatively small in comparison to other cities in the region. The City’s ability to compete for retail sales in a trade area beyond Coronado is hampered by is physical separation from San Diego/South Bay proper which, in turn, limits the City’s potential to attract a broad range of national retail tenants. The City’s population growth is stagnant and, at least with respect to retail sales potential, the enlisted and retired military personnel are considered absent because they primarily utilize on-base retail as opposed to Orange Avenue retailers.

•    

High Incomes: Household and per capita incomes in Coronado are very strong, as compared with comparable incomes for the San Diego region. These factors indicate that Coronado residents have above-average amounts of disposable income to spend on goods and services.

•    

Strong Military Presence: Coronado is home to two major military installations, the Naval Amphibious Base (NAB) and Naval Air Station North Island (NASNI.) The base-related workforce is estimated at approximately 35,000, inclusive of enlisted, officers, and civilian workers. Although the military bases provide top-quality on-base retail and services to enlisted and retired military personnel, spill-over demand from the military for services is a positive economic generator for the City.

•    

Exporting Retail Sales Potential: The City is exporting the vast majority of its retail sales potential out of the City. The most recent figures available indicate that Coronado is retaining only 35% of its sales potential. This is due in large part to the presence of the Navy Exchange at North Island Naval Air Station (NASNI) and an abundance of established discount retailers and super-regional malls on the mainland.

•    

Retail Sales Competition: The Navy Exchange at NASNI offers approximately 100,000 square feet of shopping comparable to a Wal-Mart or Target, inclusive of a food court and other amenities. Adjacent to the NASNI Exchange is a 48,000 SF Commissary. The NASNI Exchange offers a standard discount of approximately 17% before sales tax and the Commissary offers a 30% discount. Neither Exchanges nor Commissaries are subject to state or local sales tax regimes. Four regional malls offering nearly five million square feet of anchor stores and in-line space are located within seven miles (or within 25 minutes drive) of Downtown Coronado.

•    

Don’t Compete: The Orange Avenue retail corridor should not attempt to compete with the Navy Exchange at North Island Naval Air Station (NASNI) to recapture General Merchandise sales. The scale of the Exchange and the deep discounts offered to active-duty and retired military personnel residing in Coronado cannot be overcome by the local business district.

•    

Develop Unique Retail: The City should encourage businesses that contribute to create a unique retail environment oriented to one-of-a-kind upscale retail.

•    

Village Theater: It is thought that a single-screen theater can be supported by the local non-military population despite the presence of first-run movies at NASNI. However, finding an operator for a single screen movie theater may be difficult and expensive.

•    

Office Demand: Overall, the office market is healthy with relatively low vacancy throughout. There may be moderate demand for suites larger than 1,000 SF to serve tenants wishing to expand; however, this segment is dominated by real estate agents and financial service firms and is not considered a deep pool of prospective tenants. There is not a significant demand for new office buildings within the Plan area but the City should consider facilitating periodic infusions of office space in mixed-use buildings as warranted by market conditions.

•    

Lack of Assemblage Opportunities: There are few vacant sites within the boundaries of the Plan area that can be combined to form larger development opportunities. Moreover, existing parcels tend to be narrow and deep, fronted by Orange Avenue and backed by multi-unit residential properties.

•    

Disagreement Between City and Business: Many business and property owners expressed the opinion that the City is overly restrictive and un-supportive of the business community. Fair and consistent policies must be established and followed in order to overcome the skepticism regarding the objectives of City government.

B.2.    Specific Plan Vision

The overall vision for the Specific Plan area is to maintain a small town “village” atmosphere for commercial, residential, and civic land uses in a pedestrian-friendly environment that provides a balance between resident and visitor needs.

B.3.    Goals, Objectives and Implementation Strategies / Actions

The following goals and objectives for the Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan provide the foundation of the regulatory framework that is implemented through the zoning regulations, development standards, and design criteria. These goals and objectives are intended to complement the analysis of future proposals and design concepts to determine if they are supportive of the spirit and intent of this plan. The implementation strategies support the goals and objectives. Used in conjunction with the development standards and design criteria, they will guide decision makers to determine whether a project will be a contribution or detriment to the desired future of Coronado.

“Goals” and “Objectives” help work toward the “vision” by pointing us in the right direction.

“Implementation Strategies” and “Actions” are specific and measurable. They direct the City in specific ways to reach its goals. This includes not only the goals stated in the Specific Plan, but also the broader goals of the Coronado General Plan (refer to General Plan Consistency discussion in Appendix 3.)

Land Use

GOAL (LU-1): A land use pattern that provides a variety of uses within a pedestrian-friendly environment.

LU-1 OBJECTIVES:

•    

Encourage infill development on small sites and remodeling of existing buildings not likely to be replaced in the near future to make them more pedestrian-oriented and visually distinctive.

•    

Consider expansion of Rotary Park to serve as a large urban community gathering space.

LU-1 IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGIES / ACTIONS:

•    

Limit certain uses that contribute minimally to the pedestrian environment to locations on side streets or the upper stories along Orange Avenue.

GOAL (LU-2): A vibrant Commercial Zone that is visually attractive and compatible with the pedestrian scale small-town “village” atmosphere of Coronado.

LU-2 OBJECTIVES:

•    

Encourage sensitive design that is compatible with the varied architecture, low-rise heights, and narrow storefronts of Downtown.

•    

Create a strong sense of identity for the Commercial Zone through use of banners, distinctive street signage, and enhancement of the landscaped medians.

•    

Establish a comprehensive “wayfinding” system of informational and directional signs to direct vehicular and other travelers to the Commercial Zone and parking facilities.

LU-2 IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGIES / ACTIONS:

•    

Create appropriate development standards and design criteria that promote a high quality image for Downtown.

•    

Retrofit and rehabilitate existing buildings so that they reflect the spirit of Coronado’s past and are compatible with the expressed design criteria for new development.

•    

Continue sidewalk and streetscape improvements in commercial areas.

Mobility / Parking

GOAL (M/P-1): A level of mobility (walking, bicycles, transit and auto) that furthers economic development, convenience, safety, and choice for residents, visitors, and the business community.

GOAL (M/P-2): Parking supply balanced to support the viability of Commercial Zone businesses while minimizing impacts on adjacent residential neighborhoods.

M/P-1 and M/P-2 OBJECTIVES:

•    

Enhance the usability of transit stops.

•    

Maximize on-street parking.

•    

Continue to pursue parking agreements with commercial owners of underutilized parking garages.

M/P-1 and M/P-2 IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGIES / ACTIONS:

•    

Reduce the number of auto trips and congestion on Orange Avenue through better management of parking supply, public transit improvements, and consideration of roadway improvements.

•    

Consider alternatives to on-site parking that allow businesses to satisfy the parking requirements, such as valet parking and shared parking.

•    

Evaluate the need for additional short-term parking spaces on Orange Avenue.

•    

Convert free parking in Isabella’s south median to variable priced metered parking.

•    

Evaluate the need for additional bike racks in the Specific Plan’s commercial areas.

•    

Use Wayfinding signage to direct vehicles to appropriate convenient parking for their specific destination or activity, e.g., beach, shopping.

Economic Development

GOAL (ED-1): An economically sound environment for merchants and property owners, well-balanced in its appeal to both local residents and visitors.

ED-1 OBJECTIVES:

•    

Encourage a unique retail environment oriented to one-of-a-kind upscale retail.

•    

Continue a well-coordinated and funded maintenance program for Downtown sidewalks, streets, and landscaping.

•    

Maintain and expand the pedestrian-oriented retail environment.

•    

Promote retention of existing businesses and recruitment of new businesses that are wanted in Coronado.

•    

Retain local retail merchants and attract new retail merchants whose uniqueness will: (a) add to downtown’s ability to offer both merchandise and ambiance that is difficult to duplicate in most shopping centers and other downtowns, (b) help to establish and maintain Downtown Coronado as a significant destination retail location, and (c) serve the retail needs of local residents.

ED-1 IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGIES / ACTIONS:

•    

Revive the Village Theater to serve as an anchor for Downtown.

•    

Exert local leadership authority to outside governmental agencies when beneficial to the economic climate of Coronado.

•    

Develop funding mechanisms, where appropriate and feasible, to implement public improvements and business-improvement activities.

•    

Implement a business recruitment and retention plan.

•    

Develop specific criteria to measure the effectiveness of the Plan over time, such as 5-year increments.

Chapter III
GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. INTRODUCTION
A.1.    Purpose

The following administrative regulations are general and apply to all properties within the Downtown Coronado Specific Plan area. These general provisions will be in addition to the General Provisions set forth in the Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 86.02). The provisions of the City of Coronado Zoning Ordinance Chapter 86.22 (Central Commercial Zone), Chapter 86.26 (Limited Commercial Zone), and Chapter 86.16 (R-4 Multiple Family Residential Zone) are null and superceded by the provisions of this Specific Plan.

A.2.    Relationship to the City of Coronado Municipal Code

Development standards and criteria contained in this Specific Plan will supplement or replace those of the City of Coronado’s Zoning Ordinance. Whenever the regulations contained herein conflict with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, the regulations of the Specific Plan shall apply. Any development standards or land use regulations not specifically covered herein shall be subject to the regulations, standards, and specifications of the City of Coronado Municipal Code.

A.3.    Definitions

Words, phrases and terms not specifically defined herein shall have the same definition as provided in the Zoning Ordinance.

When used in this Specific Plan, the term “Director” shall mean the Director of Community Development or an appointed representative.

When used in this Specific Plan, the term “Department” shall mean the Community Development Department.

When used in this Specific Plan, the term “Commission” shall mean The City of Coronado Planning Commission.

A.4.    Interpretations

The Director shall have the responsibility to interpret the provisions of this Specific Plan. All such interpretations shall be in written form and shall be permanently maintained. Any person may request that such interpretation be reviewed by the Planning Commission.

A.5.    Amendments

The Specific Plan, including the Land Use Map, may be amended by the same procedure as it was originally adopted. Each amendment shall include all sections or portions of the Specific Plan that are affected by the change. An Amendment may be initiated by the City Council, Planning Commission or private property owner. Any amendment requested by a property owner may be subject to the fee schedule adopted by the City Council.

A.6.    Severability

If any regulation, condition, program or portion thereof of this Specific Plan is held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of the competent jurisdiction, the portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and the invalidity of such provision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions.

A.7.    Establishment and Maintenance of the Land Use Districts

Per the adoption of the Downtown Coronado Specific Plan, the following districts will supercede those set forth in the Zoning Ordinance. See Figure III-1 for the Specific Plan’s zoning districts.

Commercial Zone (C)

The Commercial Zone is comprised of the districts formerly designated Central Commercial (C-C) Chapter 86.22 and Limited Commercial (L-C) Chapter 86.26. This Specific Plan provides development standards and design criteria for the Commercial Zone.

R-4 Multiple Family Residential Zone (R-4)

The R-4 Multiple Family Residential Zone (formerly Chapter 86.16 in City Municipal Code) has been incorporated into this Specific Plan. This Specific Plan provides development standards and design criteria for the R-4 Zone.

Civic Use Zone (CU)

The Civic Use Zone will remain as addressed in the City of Coronado Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 86.36). Any development in this zone shall respond to the Commercial Zone Design Criteria.

Civic Use Overlay Zone

The Civic Use Overlay zone is addressed in the City of Coronado Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 86.37). Any development in this zone shall respond to the design criteria of the underlying zone.

Open Space Zone (OS)

The Open Space Zone will remain as addressed in the City of Coronado Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 86.38). Any development in this Zone shall respond to the Commercial Zone Design Criteria.



Figure III-1 Specific Plan Zoning Map

B. REVIEW OF PROJECTS
B.1.    Purpose

The review of the development proposals within the Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan area will be the same as a project anywhere else in the City. It is not the intent of this Specific Plan to suggest a new or modified development review process from what the City’s Community Development Department currently uses or what they may use in the future. For consistency, development proposed within the Specific Plan Area shall follow the review and approval process outlined in the City’s Zoning Ordinance, unless specifically detailed here. Therefore, all projects within the Specific Plan area are subject to review and approval in compliance with the provisions herein and the Zoning Ordinance.

B.2.    Reference to Design Criteria

In reviewing projects/improvements subject to any approval, City Staff shall refer to the appropriate Design Criteria in this Specific Plan (or any others that may be adopted by the City) in order to provide guidance to applicants seeking to comply with the requirements of this Specific Plan. Additionally, the Design Criteria serve as adopted criteria for the review of development proposals in compliance with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.

The Design Criteria are to be used by property owners, developers, architects, landscape architects, designers and others involved in the planning and design of a project in the Specific Plan area. The Design Criteria communicate the City’s desired qualities and characteristics of development and are intended to promote quality design that is compatible with Coronado’s vision.

The City’s Design Review Commission will use the Design Criteria and Title 80 Design Review Ordinance during project review of development proposals in the Specific Plan area.

(Ord. 2018 §§ 24, 25, 2010)

C. NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
C.1.    Purpose

This Section is enacted to accomplish the regulation and eventual elimination of nonconforming uses and structural nonconformities.

C.2.    Regulations

Where at the time of adoption of the Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan, a lawful use of land or structure exists, which otherwise would not be permitted by the regulations established by the Specific Plan, such use or structure may be continued indefinitely subject to the following:

a.    Any use which was lawfully established prior to the adoption of the Specific Plan and made nonconforming by such plan shall be allowed to remain without prejudice (grandfathered). If such use ceases to exist and the property remains vacant for more than one hundred twenty (120) days, any use proposed on that property shall now be a complying use.

b.    No nonconforming use shall in any way be physically expanded except as provided for in Chapter 86.50 of the Zoning Ordinance.

c.    All other issues of nonconformance shall be consistent with Chapter 86.50 of the Zoning Ordinance.

D. SPECIAL USE PERMITS
D.1.    Purpose

Special Use Permits allow for the necessary imposition of special conditions on the creation and maintenance of designated uses that involve special site or design requirements, operation characteristics, or potential adverse effects on surrounding areas. The following provisions are applicable for uses within the Specific Plan area:

a.    No Major Special Use Permits will be required for uses in the Commercial Zone of the Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan. Commercial Zone uses will be subject only to the Minor Special Use Permit granted by the Planning Commission, and subject to an appeal to the City Council.

b.    All Minor Special Use Permits are subject to the provisions set forth in Chapter 86.55 (Special Use Permits) of the Coronado Zoning Ordinance.

Chapter IV
COMMERCIAL ZONE (C) REGULATIONS
A. PURPOSE
The Commercial Zone provides for medium-intensity commercial uses that serve community-wide and visitor needs in a pedestrian-friendly environment. The Zone provides for the highest quality building design. Allowed uses include commercial retail, business offices, restaurants and sidewalk cafes, entertainment, microbreweries, business and personal services, and civic facilities.

Prohibited uses include vehicle sales with open on-site storage, drive-thru restaurants, adult entertainment and any uses detrimental to developing a pedestrian-friendly family-oriented environment that is appealing to both residents and visitors.

Regulations in this Zone promote attractive commercial and civic structures and well-designed parking, with human scale and a pedestrian-friendly character, including efficient internal access, ingress and egress, and amenities such as plazas, courtyards, and attractive streetscapes. Also see Chapter VI Commercial Zone Design Criteria.

B. LAND USES AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
The following section describes those land uses that are permitted, allowed with a Minor Special Use Permit, or prohibited in the Commercial Zone (C). Where a use is not listed, the City or designee shall be responsible to make a determination of use as outlined in Chapter 86.02.120 of the Zoning Ordinance. Unless the proposed use is determined to be similar to a listed use, it shall be prohibited.

Permitted Uses are uses that are permitted by right within the Commercial Zone (C). Permitted uses shall obtain design review approval and a business license, and a certificate of occupancy, prior to commencement of the use.

Special Uses by Permit are uses that may be established and maintained as provided for in the Zoning Ordinance (Minor SUP only), prior to commencement of the use or issuance of a building permit.

Prohibited Uses are uses that are not permitted in the Commercial Zone (C).

C. TABLE OF USES
The following table summarizes those land uses that are permitted, special use permitted, or prohibited in the Commercial Zone (C). Where a use is not listed, the City or designee shall be responsible to make a determination of use as outlined in Chapter 86.02.120 of the Zoning Ordinance. This table is provided for convenience to determine whether a use is permitted by right or by special use permit or prohibited. Any use that is a Formula Business or Formula Fast Food restaurant shall refer to this document’s Chapter IV, Sections G and H. Following this table is a comprehensive list of uses by category.

Table IV-1 COMMERCIAL ZONE USES 

Use

Permitted

Minor SUP

Prohibited

Location Criteria

Comment

Community Services, Education, Cultural and Religious

 

 

 

 

 

Ambulance service

 

X

 

3

 

Child care

 

X

 

4

 

Churches

 

X

 

4

 

Civic facilities

X

 

 

4

 

Community service facilities, teen center, clubs, lodges, halls

 

X

 

3

 

Emergency shelters

X

 

 

3

 

Court or jail facilities

 

 

X

 

 

Education institution

X

 

 

4

 

Government offices

X

 

 

4

 

Health care facilities

 

X

 

4

Includes 24-hour medical facility

Museums

X

 

 

1

 

Post Office

X

 

 

1

 

Transit center

X

 

 

4

 

Eating and Drinking Establishments

 

 

 

 

 

Alcohol service in conjunction with restaurant

X

 

 

1

 

Bakery

X

 

 

1

Must be less than 5,000 sq. ft.

Coffeehouse/café

X

 

 

1

 

Delicatessen/sandwich shop

X

 

 

1

 

Ice cream/yogurt shop

X

 

 

1

 

Night club/bar lounge

 

X

 

1

 

Restaurant, drive-thru

 

 

X

 

 

Restaurant, fast food

X

 

 

1

 

Restaurant, formula fast food

 

X

 

5

 

Restaurant, formula full service

 

X

 

1

 

Restaurant, full service

X

 

 

1

 

Light Industrial/Repair Services

 

 

 

 

 

Assembly, light (small appliances, bicycles, computer assembly)

X

 

 

4

 

Distribution without retail sales

 

 

X

 

 

Home improvement center (includes home furnishings and repair)

X

 

 

1

If less than 5,000 sq. ft.

Manufacturing, light (cabinets, clothing, instruments, pharmaceutics, food preparation, signs)

 

X

 

3

 

Laboratory (medical, optical)

X

 

 

2

 

Repair (appliances, electronic equipment, plumbing/electrical shops)

X

 

 

1

 

Storage facilities (indoor storage for household items, office files, self-storage, etc.)

 

 

X

 

 

Light Treatment (non-toxic coating/plating)

 

 

X

 

 

Wholesaling (household goods, office supplies, electronic components)

 

 

X

 

 

Welding, Machine and Sheet Metal shops

 

 

X

 

 

Mixed Use

 

 

X

 

Residential above commercial use

Personal and Professional Service Uses

 

 

 

 

 

Bank, credit union, financial institution

X

 

 

1

Drive-thru access onto Orange Avenue prohibited

Body Art/Tattoo/Piercing Salon/Massage parlors/Pawn Shops

 

 

X

 

 

Card Rooms

 

 

X

 

 

Check cashing establishments

 

 

X

 

 

Funeral parlors and mortuaries

 

 

X

 

 

Handyman and Trade Services

X

 

 

1

(electrician, plumber, general contractor and similar)

Hotel/Motel

 

X

 

1

 

Massage establishment

 

 

X

 

Except as outlined in Chapter 86.56 of the zoning ordinance

Office, professional

X

 

 

4

Excludes real estate

Office, real estate

X

 

 

1

 

Personal service

X

 

 

1

(barber, beauty, day spa, dry cleaning, tailor, pet grooming, travel agency, nail shop)

Photocopying service

X

 

 

1

 

Prediction of worldly events

 

 

X

 

Except as outlined in Chapter 86.56 of the zoning ordinance

Veterinary hospital

 

X

 

1

 

Recreation/Entertainment

 

 

 

 

 

Adult video/DVD rentals/sales

 

 

X

 

Except as outlined in Chapter 86.56 of the zoning ordinance

Sports Facility

 

X

 

 

 

Billiard parlor

 

X

 

4

 

Dance, Gymnastic, health, Martial Arts or similar type facilities

X

 

 

1

 

Internet provider, arcade,

X

 

 

4

 

Live or movie theatre (no adult theatres)

 

X

 

1

 

Video/DVD rentals/sales

X

 

 

1

 

Retail Commercial

 

 

 

 

 

Art Galleries and Photo Studio

X

 

 

1

*

Building Material Sales, indoor

 

X

 

1

*

Clothing and Shoe Stores

X

 

 

1

*

Convenience stores

X

 

 

1

*

Drugstore or Pharmacy

X

 

 

1

*

Flower/Gift Shop

X

 

 

1

*

Formula Business

 

X

 

1

See additional regulations in Chapter IV, G.

Grocery store

X

 

 

1

*

Handicraft-type Industry (sculpture, furniture, stained glass, etc.)

X

 

 

1

*

Hardware store

X

 

 

1

*

Kennel/Retail sale of cats and dogs

 

 

X

 

*

Liquor store

X

 

 

1

*

Office supplies/equipment

X

 

 

1

*

Pet Supply

X

 

 

1

*

Retail Plant Nursery

X

 

 

1

*

Retail Stores, general merchandise

X

 

 

1

*

Specialty food shops

X

 

 

1

*

Sporting goods, bike, surf, skate and similar type sales and rentals

X

 

 

1

*

Transportation and Utilities

 

 

 

 

 

Public Parking Lot/Facility

 

X

 

1

Cannot front adjacent sidewalk

Parking structure

 

X

 

1

Cannot front adjacent sidewalk

Pedi-Cabs/Horsedrawn carriages

 

X

 

1

 

Public Utility/Services (uses and structures including, but not limited to reservoirs, tanks, pumping stations, telephone exchanges, power and transformer stations or facilities, but not including distribution lines)

 

X

 

1

 

Telecommunication Facilities including antenna towers, mast, panels, and similar structures

 

X

 

2

 

Transmitters, Radio/Television

 

X

 

2

 

Vehicle Related Uses

 

 

 

 

 

Auto/Motorcycle Sales/Leasing Showroom

 

X

 

1

When conducted entirely indoors without outdoor storage of vehicles

Auto Rental Lot with onsite outdoor car storage

 

 

X

 

 

Auto Rental Office

 

X

 

1

No onsite storage of rental vehicles

Automobile Parts Sales

X

 

 

1

 

Automobile Parts Sales

 

X

 

1

(With installation)

Automobile Service Station

 

X

 

1

With or without convenience store

Car wash, full service or self service

 

X

 

3

 

* Permitted retail commercial uses listed above that are greater than 5,000 square feet or have a floor area ratio of 1.8 or greater require a Minor Special Use Permit

Location Criteria

1 = Location anywhere in Commercial Zone

2 = Location restricted from ground floor anywhere in the Commercial Zone

3 = Location restricted from Orange Avenue in the Commercial Zone

4 = Location restricted from ground floor along Orange Avenue

5 = Location restricted from street corner locations except where the immediate prior use was a Formula Fast Food Restaurant

(Ord. 2040 § 4 (Att. A), 2014; Ord. 2015 § 19, 2010)

D. PERMITTED USES
D.1.    Community Services, Education, Cultural and Religious

a.    Civic Facilities (restricted from ground floor along Orange Avenue)

b.    Education Institution, (restricted from ground floor along Orange Avenue)

c.    Government offices (restricted from ground floor along Orange Avenue)

d.    Museums

e.    Post office

f.    Transit Center (restricted from ground floor along Orange Avenue)

g.    Emergency shelters (restricted from Orange Avenue in the C Zone) (Ord. 2040 § 3, 2014)

D.2.    Eating and Drinking Establishments

a.    Alcohol service in conjunction with restaurant

b.    Bakery – less than 5,000 square feet

c.    Coffeehouse/Cafe

d.    Delicatessen/Sandwich Shop

e.    Ice Cream/Yogurt Shop

f.    Restaurants, fast food – without Drive-thrus/Non-Formula Franchise (See Section H. Formula Fast Food in this chapter of the Specific Plan)

g.    Restaurant, full service (may include outdoor dining on public or private property)

D.3.    Light Industrial/Repair Services

a.    Assembly, light (small appliances, bicycles) (restricted from ground floor along Orange Avenue)

b.    Home improvement center (includes home furnishings and repair less than 5,000 square feet)

c.    Laboratory (medical, optical)

d.    Repair (appliances, electronic equipment, plumbing/electrical shop)

D.4.    Personal and Professional Service Uses

a.    Bank, Credit Union, and Financial Institution without drive-thru access onto Orange Avenue

b.    Handyman Services (electrician, plumber, general contractor and similar)

c.    Office, Professional (when above the ground floor or not fronting Orange Avenue)

d.    Office, real estate

e.    Personal Service (i.e. Barber, beauty, dry cleaning, and nail shop; tailor shop, pet grooming, travel agency)

f.    Photocopying services

D.5.    Recreation/Entertainment

a.    Dance, Gymnastic, health, martial Arts, or similar type of facilities

b.    Internet provider, arcade

c.    Video/DVD rentals/sales (no adult rentals/sales)

D.6.    Retail Commercial

a.    Art Galleries and Photo Studio (less than 5,000 sq. ft.)

b.    Clothing or Shoe Stores (less than 5,000 sq. ft.)

c.    Convenience store (less than 5,000 sq. ft.)

d.    Drugstore or Pharmacy (less than 5,000 sq. ft.)

e.    Flower/Gift Shop (less than 5,000 sq. ft.)

f.    Grocery Store (less than 5,000 sq. ft.)

g.    Handicraft-type Industry (furniture, sculpture, stained glass, etc), (less than 5,000 sq. ft.)

h.    Hardware store (less than 5,000 sq. ft.)

i.    Liquor Store (less than 5,000 sq. ft.)

j.    Office Supplies/Equipment (less than 5,000 sq. ft.)

k.    Pet Supply (less than 5,000 sq. ft.)

l.    Plant Nursery (less than 5,000 sq. ft.)

m.    Retail Stores, general merchandise, (less than 5,000 sq. ft.)

n.    Specialty Food Sales (less than 5,000 sq. ft.)

o.    Sporting Goods, Bike, Surf, Skate and similar type Sales and Rentals (less than 5,000 sq. ft.)

D.7.    Vehicle Related Uses

a.    Automobile parts sales

E. SPECIAL USE PERMITS
These uses are allowed in the Commercial Zone with a Minor Special Use Permit and Coastal Permit. No Major Special Use Permits will be required for Commercial Zone uses. Minor Special Use Permits and Coastal Permits will be granted by the Planning Commission, and subject to an appeal to the City Council. The Special Use Permit process is outlined in Chapter 86.55 of the City Zoning Ordinance. This Chapter also identifies specific design standards for automobile car wash, auto sales facilities, and veterinarian hospital uses. The Coastal Permit process is outlined in Chapter 86.70 of the Zoning Ordinance.

MINOR SPECIAL USE PERMITS:

E.1.    Community Services, Education, Cultural and Religious

a.    Ambulance Service (restricted from Orange Avenue in the C Zone)

b.    Child Care (restricted from ground floor along Orange Avenue)

c.    Churches (restricted from ground floor along Orange Avenue)

d.    Community service facilities, teen center, clubs, lodges, halls (restricted from Orange Ave in the C Zone)

e.    Health Care facility including 24 hour medical facilities (restricted from ground floor along Orange Avenue)

f.    Repealed by Ord. 2040. (Ord. 2040 § 2, 2014; Ord. 2015 § 18, 2010)

E.2.    Eating and Drinking Establishments

a.    Night club/Bar lounge

b.    Restaurant, Formula Fast Food (restricted from street corner locations except where immediate prior use was of same use)

c.    Restaurant Formula, Full Service

E.3.    Light Industrial/Repair Services

a.    Manufacturing, light (cabinets, clothing, instruments, pharmaceutics, food preparation, signs) (restricted from Orange Avenue in the C Zone)

E.4.    Personal and Professional Service Uses

a.    Hotels / Motels

b.    Veterinary hospitals

E.5.    Recreation/Entertainment

a.    Billiard parlor (restricted from ground floor fronting on Orange Avenue)

b.    Sports Facility

c.    Live or movie theatre (no adult theatres)

E.6.    Retail Commercial

a.    All Commercial uses listed in Section D. (Permitted Uses) that exceed 5,000 sq. ft. or have a floor area ratio of 1.8 or greater

b.    Formula Retail (see Section G. Formula Retail in this chapter of the Specific Plan)

c.    Building materials sales, indoor (any size)

E.7.    Transportation

a.    Parking Structure, when not fronting the adjacent sidewalk

b.    Pedi-Cabs

c.    Public Parking Lot/Facility (cannot front adjacent sidewalk)

d.    Public Utility/Services (uses and structures including, but not limited to reservoirs, tanks, pumping stations, telephone exchanges, power and transformer stations or facilities, but not including distribution lines)

e.    Telecommunication Facilities including antenna towers, mast, panels, and similar structures (restricted from ground floor in C Zone)

f.    Transmitters, Radio/Television (restricted from ground floor in C Zone)

E.8.    Vehicle Related Uses

a.    Auto/Motorcycle Sales/Leasing Showroom

b.    Auto Rental Office (without onsite storage of rental vehicles)

c.    Automobile Parts sales (without installation)

d.    Automobile Service Station (with or without convenience store)

e.    Car wash, full or self service

F. PROHIBITED USES
F.1.    Community Services, Education, Cultural and Religious

a.    Court or jail facilities

F.2.    Eating & Drinking Establishments

a.    Restaurant with drive-thru

F.3.    Light Industrial/Repair Service

a.    Distribution facilities, without retail sales

b.    Storage facilities (household items, office files, indoor self-serve storage)

c.    Light Treatment (non-toxic coating/ plating)

d.    Welding, Machine and Sheet Metal shops

e.    Wholesaling (household goods, office supplies, electronic components)

F.4.    Mixed Use (residential above commercial)

F.5.    Personal and Professional Service Uses

a.    Body Art/Tattoo/Piercing Salon/ Massage Parlors/Pawn Shop

b.    Card Rooms

c.    Check Cashing Establishments

d.    Funeral parlors and mortuaries

e.    Massage Establishment (except as outlined in Chapter 86.56 of the Zoning Ordinance)

f.    Prediction of Worldly Events (except as outlined in Chapter 86.56 of the Zoning Ordinance)

F.6.    Recreation/Entertainment

a.    Adult video/DVD rentals/Sales (except as outlined in Chapter 86.56 of the Zoning Ordinance)

F.7.    Retail Commercial

a.    Kennel/Retail sale of cats and dogs

F.8.    Vehicle Related Uses

a.    Auto Rental Lot with onsite outdoor car storage

G. FORMULA BUSINESS
G.1.    Purpose

The purpose of the standards in this Section is to regulate the location and operation of formula business establishments in order to maintain the City’s unique village character, the diversity and vitality of the community’s commercial districts, and the quality of life of Coronado residents. It is presumed that establishing or preserving an appropriate and balanced mix of local, regional, and national-based businesses and small, medium or large-sized businesses will more effectively serve to achieve this purpose as a strategy to maintain the economic health of the community’s business districts and the small-scale eclectic ambiance.

G.2.    Definition

Formula Business is defined as any type of commercial business establishment that uses a trademark, logo, service mark or other mutually identifying name or symbol that is shared by fifteen or more commercial businesses (other than a “formula fast food restaurant”) and which maintains any standardized (“formula”) array of services and/or merchandise, decor, business method, architecture, layout, uniform, or similar, standardized feature.

G.3.    Regulations

b.    A Formula Business establishment may be allowed in the Commercial Zone with a Minor Special Use Permit (Minor SUP);

c.    The cumulative expansion of a Formula Business establishment by 500 or more square feet of floor area shall require a Minor SUP amendment or a Minor SUP if the establishment does not already have a Minor SUP;

d.    A Formula Business establishment (except for grocery stores, banks, saving and loans, full service restaurants and theaters) shall not have a street level frontage of greater than 50 linear feet on any street;

e.    A Formula Business establishment shall fully comply with all applicable regulations of this Specific Plan including Design Review; and

f.    Change of ownership of an existing Formula Business establishment shall not, by itself, require obtaining a Minor SUP or Minor SUP amendment, as applicable.

G.4.    Required Findings for Approval

a.    The Formula Business establishment will be compatible with existing surrounding uses, and has been designed and will be operated in a non-obtrusive manner to preserve the community’s character and ambiance;

b.    Approval of the Formula Business establishment will be consistent with the policies and standards of the Specific Plan, General Plan and the Local Coastal Program, and that the proposed intensity of uses on the site is appropriate given the uses permitted on the site and on adjoining sites by these documents;

c.    Approval of the Formula Business establishment will contribute to an appropriate balance of local, regional or national-based businesses in the community;

d.    Approval of the Formula Business establishment will contribute to an appropriate balance of small, medium and large-sized businesses in the community.

H. FORMULA FAST FOOD
H.1.    Purpose

The purpose of the standards in this Section is to regulate the number, location and operation of formula fast food restaurants in order to maintain the City’s unique village character, the vitality of our commercial districts, and the quality of life of Coronado residents.

H.2.    Definition

Formula Fast Food Restaurant is defined as any “fast food restaurant” having both of the following characteristics: (a) uses trademark, logo, service mark or other mutually identifying name or symbol that is shared by fifteen or more restaurants; and (b) serves a prescribed (“formula”) menu that is substantially the same as fifteen or more restaurants that shares its trademark, logo, service mark or other mutually identifying name or symbol.

H.3.    Regulations

a.    The Formula Fast Food Restaurant shall fully comply with all applicable regulations in this Specific Plan and the City’s Zoning Code.

b.    The regulations in this Section shall be used by the Planning Commission in reviewing an application or amendment for a Minor Special Use Permit (SUP) concerning a Formula Fast Food Restaurant, and by staff when reviewing a building permit application, an application for occupancy or a Design Review or Planning Commission application.

c.    A Formula Fast Food Restaurant may only be established on a site after obtaining a Minor Special Use Permit from the City for the operation of that use on said site. Similarly, a Formula Fast Food Restaurant may only relocate or physically expand in a manner to increase its seating capacity after obtaining a Minor Special Use Permit or Minor SUP amendment as applicable.

d.    Change of ownership shall not, by itself, require obtaining a Minor Special Use Permit or Minor SUP amendment as applicable.

H.4.    Establishment or Relocation

A Formula Fast Food Restaurant may only be established or relocated:

a.    On a site that is not located on a street corner; except such a restaurant may be located on a street corner where the immediate prior use was a Formula Fast Food Restaurant;

b.    Where it would not result in two or more Formula Fast Food Restaurants operating on that site (i.e., two or more Formula Fast Food Restaurant business entities requiring separate business licenses, or displaying in a manner visible from public property separate business trademarks, logos, service marks or other mutually identifying names or symbols, for the daily or weekly conducting of business on the same site);

c.    When it would not result in Formula Fast Food Restaurants operating at more than 10 sites under the jurisdiction of this Ordinance; and

d.    So long as the Planning Commission finds that establishing or relocating the Formula Fast Food Restaurant will not increase the intensity of use on the site to a level that will adversely impact:

i.    Land uses in the area;

ii.    Pedestrian or motor vehicle traffic; or

iii.    The public welfare.

H.5.    Physical Expansion

An existing Formula Fast Food Restaurant may only be physically expanded in a manner to increase seating capacity:

a.    Onto a site other than a corner;

b.    Where it would not result in two or more Formula Fast Food Restaurants operating on that site (i.e., two or more Formula Fast Food Restaurant business entities requiring separate business licenses, or displaying in a manner visible from public property separate business trademarks, logos, service marks or other mutually identifying names or symbols, for the daily or weekly conducting of business on the same site); and

c.    So long as the Planning Commission finds that physically expanding the Formula Fast Food Restaurant will not increase the intensity of use on the site to a level that will adversely impact:

i.    Land uses in the area;

ii.    Pedestrian or motor vehicle traffic; or

iii.    The public welfare.

H.6.    Trash

The Formula Fast Food Restaurant will operate in accordance with a “Trash Disposal Plan,” approved by the Planning Commission. The Plan shall address litter control, trash collection, on-site storage, and pick-up on a regular basis. The Plan shall include proof of a contract with the City disposal contractor, and specify that such a contract shall be maintained as a requirement for the issuance and retention of the Minor Special Use Permit.

H.7.    Design Review

Establishment or exterior alteration of a Formula Fast Food Restaurant is subject to the Design Review Ordinance.

I. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
I.1.    General Development Standards

This section establishes other general requirements, site development standards and land use regulations that apply to all projects in the Commercial Zone (C). Any standards not specifically covered by this Specific Plan are subject to the regulations of the Zoning Ordinance. See Chapters 86.04, 86.56, and 86.58.

Table IV-2: General Development Standards

Minimum Building Site Area

3,500 square feet

Minimum Building Site Width

25 feet

Maximum Building Height

32 feet/2 stories

Minimum Yard Setbacks

Front yard

Side yard

Rear yard

 

No minimum

No minimum

No minimum

Parking Requirements

See Section J. Off-Street Parking in this Chapter of the Specific Plan.

Landscaping Requirements

See Section K. Landscaping in this Chapter of the Specific Plan.

I.2    Emergency Shelters Development Standards

An emergency shelter shall be subject to the applicable zoning regulations of this title, as follows:

a.    Development standards applicable to the Commercial Zone in which the emergency shelter is located.

b.    Parking requirements based upon Chapter 86.58 CMC.

c.    All waiting and intake areas shall be located completely within the building.

d.    The emergency shelter shall provide on-site management during all hours of operation.

e.    Exterior lighting and security shall be provided during hours that the emergency shelter is in operation to ensure that the use will not be detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of persons residing or working in the vicinity. (Ord. 2040 § 5, 2014)

J. OFF-STREET PARKING
J.1.    Purpose

It is the purpose of this Section to provide for regulations governing the number of parking spaces required based on the type of use in the Commercial Zone. No other Chapter shall be used to determine or exempt the number of parking spaces required through this section.

J.2.    Regulations

a.    No parking is required for first floor uses on small parcels less than or equal to 7,000 square feet, except for eating and drinking establishments and in conformance with Chapter IV, Section J.2.f.

b.    First floor uses on large parcels greater than 7,000 square feet or having more than 65 lineal feet of street frontage are required to provide one (1) parking space per each 500 square feet of floor area, except for eating and drinking establishments.

c.    Eating and drinking establishments on any floor are required to provide one (1) parking space per every 100 square feet of floor area. Formula Fast Food restaurants are required to provide a minimum of 10 parking spaces, regardless of floor area.

d.    New construction of second floor uses on any size parcel are required to provide one (1) parking space per each 500 square feet of floor area.

e.    Any use (except for eating and drinking establishments) that provides underground parking is allowed to park that use at one (1) space per each 600 square feet.

f.    Irrespective of any other requirements of this section, existing parking spaces must be maintained to a requirement of at least one space per each 500 square feet of existing building floor area. “Existing” refers to parking spaces and floor area present at the time this Section takes effect.

g.    An existing eating and drinking establishment may be replaced with a new eating and drinking establishment in the same existing building and no new parking shall be required; existing onsite parking must be maintained.

h.    An eating and drinking establishment with outdoor dining may be established or expanded in the commercial area and have a total of eighteen seats without providing required parking. (This exemption does not apply to Formula Fast Food restaurants).

i.    Tandem parking is permitted for business valet and employee parking only and may not be stacked deeper than two cars.

K. LANDSCAPING
K.1.    Regulations

a.    A minimum of five percent of the total site area of new developments shall be landscaped. Required parking spaces shall not be considered as a portion of the required landscaping.

b.    When new construction occurs resulting in the addition of over 500 square feet of floor area, or when property is improved or renovated with a building permit valuation for the improvement or renovation of 50,000 dollars or more, the developer, property owner or tenant of said site shall plant one or more street trees in the public right-of-way adjacent to said property, if space is available. All shade trees shall have a minimum 4-inch diameter trunk (measured 4 feet 6 inches above the root crown) and palm trees shall have a minimum 6 foot brown trunk. The specific number of trees, species, location, irrigation system, and planting methods shall be at the direction of the City of Coronado in accordance with City specifications and the City’s approved street tree list. Irrigation of said tree(s) shall be the responsibility of the adjoining property owner.

c.    When an approved City Streetscape Enhancement Plan is being implemented by the City, there shall be no requirement for street trees.

d.    See Section 86.56.800 for additional landscape standards and Section 86.58 of the Zoning Ordinance for landscape requirements pertaining to off-street parking areas.

L. DESIGN STANDARDS
L.1.    General Design Standards

This section establishes general design requirements that shall apply to all projects in the Commercial Zone (C). Any standards not specifically covered by this Specific Plan are subject to the regulations of the City of Coronado Zoning Ordinance. All projects will be subject to Title 80 Design Review Ordinance.

Table IV-3: General Design Standards

Maximum Bay Width

50 feet (smaller bays are encouraged)

Parking Structure Ground Floor

On Orange Avenue, any parking structure shall employ an active use on the ground floor. In no case shall parking spaces front any street or sidewalk

Maximum Front Yard Setback

15 feet and area shall be hardscaped plaza

Maximum Bulkhead Height

24 inches

Maximum Solid to Open Ratio – Ground Floor facing Orange Avenue

30% solid wall

70% windows and openings

(Ord. 2018 §§ 26, 27, 2010)

M. SIGN REGULATIONS
Signs in the Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan area, including temporary signs, shall be erected, constructed, altered, and maintained in accordance with Chapter 86.60 of the Zoning Ordinance except as contained herein.

The purpose of the sign regulations in this subsection is to provide the means for adequate identification of buildings and businesses by regulating and controlling the design, size, and location of all signs within the Commercial Zone (C). These regulations do not apply to service stations, commercial signs for theaters and auditoriums, or to any other zoning district.

The intent of these regulations is to establish specific standards for all exterior signage that will ensure continuity, consistency, and harmony with the pedestrian quality of Orange Avenue.

M.1.    Compliance Required

No person shall erect, re-erect, construct, enlarge, alter, move, improve, remove, convert, or equip any sign or sign structure or cause or permit the same to be done contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of these sign regulations.

M.2.    Uncertainty of Sign Regulations

If a situation arises that is not covered by these sign regulations or if there is ambiguity as to these regulations or the type of permit required, the zoning administrator shall provide written interpretation after consulting the Zoning Ordinance.

M.3.    General Sign Standards

a.    In the C Zone, the maximum allowable sign area for commercial uses is 1 square foot per each lineal foot of the use’s street frontage. Sign area permitted may not exceed eighty (80) square feet on one side of a building for a single use. A-frame or portable signs are not included in this total.

b.    No flags or pennants of any type may be utilized to draw attention to any use or structure on a permanent basis. Colored flags/banners which contain writing, insignias, or logos, may be displayed 2 times per year for periods not to exceed 30 days. This does not preclude the display of national, state, or local government flags or other flags, pennants, or banners that are part of an authorized and organized City, Coronado MainStreet Ltd, or Chamber of Commerce sponsored effort.

c.    The area of a wall sign or logo with individual letters shall be measured by a rectangle around the outside of the lettering and/or the pictorial symbol.

d.    Design Review Commission approval is required prior to the placing, erecting, moving, or reconstructing of any sign within the C Zone unless expressly exempted.

M.4.    Prohibited Signs in C Zone

•    

Bench Signs

•    

Freestanding pole signs

•    

Roof signs

•    

Animated signs, including changing or blinking time and temperature displays

•    

Rotating, moving, emitting, or flashing signs

•    

Balloon signs

•    

Balloons

•    

Internally illuminated channel letter signs, (reverse channel letter signs are permitted.)

•    

Internally illuminated can signs with translucent copy and field. (Can signs with opaque “field” are permitted.)

•    

Paper, cloth, or plastic streamers or bunting – except seasonal holiday decorations

•    

Formed plastic or injection-molded signs

•    

Traffic sign replicas

•    

Vehicle signs

•    

Any sign not expressly “Permitted” in this Specific Plan.

M.5.    Sign Standards for Permitted Signs

a.    Wall-Mounted Signs

To be located not higher than the lowest of the following:

•    

25 feet above grade

•    

Bottom of the sill line of the second floor window

b.    Monument Signs

In the C Zone, a maximum of one double-face sign per street frontage is permitted if said street frontage is over 100 feet. Height of sign shall not exceed 6 feet above grade. Width shall not exceed 4 feet. Each tenant placard shall not exceed 12" high. Sign may only be indirectly illuminated. Internal illumination is prohibited.

c.    Permanent Window Signs

On ground floor level, coverage shall not exceed 25 percent of the total window and door area visible from the exterior of the building; on second level, coverage shall not exceed 25 percent per window.

d.    Awning Signs

On ground floor level, 20 percent maximum coverage is allowed for signage on the total exterior surface area of each awning. On second level, coverage shall not exceed 10 percent of the total exterior surface area of each awning. Internal illumination prohibited.

e.    Projecting Signs

One per business allowed; maximum size may not exceed 6 square feet and shall not extend more than 3 feet from the wall surface. No internal illumination allowed. Projecting signs shall only be attached to buildings, not to poles or other signs. Projecting signs may encroach into the public right-of-way a maximum of 3 feet subject to the approval of the Director. Theater marquees are exempt from this requirement.

f.    Under Canopy Signs

One non-illuminated per business allowed under a canopy, roof, covered walkway, or porch; maximum size of 4 square feet per door entrance; minimum of 7’ vertical clearance shall be required from walking grade to the bottom of the sign.

g.    A-frame/Sandwich Board Sign

One A-frame or sandwich board sign allowed per business, and shall be located on private property. The maximum allowable size of the sign and supporting structure shall not exceed 48" height, 30" width, and 36" depth. The maximum sign area shall not exceed 10 square feet. This total is not included in the overall total allowable signage requirement per business. No illumination is allowed. The sign shall only be present during regular business hours.

h.    Temporary Signs

Temporary signs shall abide by the provisions of Chapter 86.60 of the City’s Zoning Ordinance regulating temporary signs. Hand lettered, paper signs, or notices over 1 square foot are prohibited.

i.    Menu Boards

One menu board, up to 2 square feet in area, is allowed for each restaurant or other eating establishment. Menu boards may contain only the name of the establishment and the food available inside. The menu board must be located on a wall adjacent to the main customer entrance, and must be constructed of high-quality permanent materials that are well maintained.

j.    Multi-tenant Project Signs

Any project that proposes to provide space for more than one tenant shall indicate the size and approximate location of all signs to be erected on the property at the time of initial application. Signs shall be shown on elevation drawings with accurate dimensions provided. The Zoning Administrator may also require the following information:

•    

Method of illumination

•    

Sign materials and colors

•    

Method of attachment

k.    Exceptions

The Zoning Administrator may waive or modify any of the provisions of this subsection if the sign has significant historic or graphic character that adds to the Zone’s ambiance.

Chapter V
R-4 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE
A. PURPOSE AND INTENT
The purpose and intent of this Chapter is to provide regulations that provide for high quality, multiple family dwelling unit structures in an intensely developed residential environment with a minimum gross lot size of one thousand ninety (1,090) square feet per dwelling unit or a minimum three thousand and five hundred (3,500) square foot lot or building site. The density is forty (40) dwelling units per acre.

B. LAND USES
B.1.    Permitted and Accessory Uses

The following principal uses shall be allowed in the R-4 zone:

a.    Multiple dwelling structures on a minimum three thousand five hundred (3,500) square foot lot or building site; (Ord. 1559)

b.    Single family dwelling buildings or duplexes of a permanent character, permanently located on a minimum three thousand, five hundred (3,500) square foot lot or building site; (Ord. 1559, 1765, 1756)

c.    Uses permitted with a Minor or Major Special Use Permit per Chapter 86.55.170; (Ord. 1910)

d.    The following accessory uses are allowed in conjunction with the uses specified in subsection a above:

1.    Incidental home occupations subject to the provisions of Chapter 20.08; (Ord. 2022)

2.    Accessory buildings subject to the provisions of Chapter 86.56;

e.    Residential care facility, supportive housing, and transitional housing;

f.    Repealed by Ord. 2040. (Ord. 2040 §§ 12, 13, 2014; Ord. 2015 § 10, 2010)

B.2.    Height Regulations

a.    Multiple family dwellings or nonresidential main buildings shall not contain more than three stories and shall comply with the following: (Ord. 1981)

1.    Main buildings with a flat roof (inclusive of parapets and false mansards), or sloped roof of less than 2:12 shall not exceed a maximum of 33’ in height; (Ord. 1981)

2.    Main buildings with a sloped roof of 2:12 and greater shall not exceed a maximum 35’ in height; (Ord. 1981)

b.    Single-family dwellings or duplexes. Main buildings shall not contain more than two stories and shall comply with the following: (Ord. 1981)

1.    Main buildings with a flat, false mansard, or sloped roof with a pitch of less than 3:12 shall not exceed a maximum of 22 feet in height except for parapet walls which shall not exceed 25 feet in height;

2.    Main buildings with a sloped roof of 3:12 and greater but less than 6:12 shall not exceed a maximum of 27 feet, six inches in height;

3.    Main buildings with a sloped roof of 6:12 or greater shall not exceed a maximum of 30 feet in height. That portion of the roof exceeding 27 feet, six inches shall be limited to a maximum of 15 percent of the entire building roof plan area.

c.    Accessory buildings shall not contain more than one story and shall comply with the following: (Ord. 1981)

1.    Accessory buildings with a flat, false mansard, or sloped roof with a pitch of less than 3:12 shall not exceed a maximum of 11 feet in height except for parapet walls which shall not exceed 14 feet in height;

2.    Accessory buildings with a sloped roof of 3:12 and greater but less than 6:12 shall not exceed a maximum of 14 feet, four inches in height;

3.    Accessory buildings with a sloped roof of 6:12 or greater shall not exceed a maximum of 15 feet, seven inches in height. That portion of the roof exceeding 14 feet, four inches shall be limited to a maximum of 15 percent of the entire buildings roof plan area.

B.3.    Front Yard Required

There shall be a front yard of not less than twenty-five feet. (Ord. 1981)

B.4.    Rear Yard Required

A.    For multiple family dwellings or nonresidential buildings, there shall be a rear yard setback of not less than five feet for the first story of the building; not less than ten feet for the second story of the building; and not less than fifteen feet for the third story of the building. (Ord. 1981)

B.    For single family and duplex development, there shall be a rear yard of not less than ten percent of the depth of the lot, provided, however, such rear yard setback need not exceed ten feet. There shall be a minimum setback of five feet from any rear property line for accessory buildings and for covered parking that is attached to the main building. That portion of the covered parking which is in the required rear yard and is attached to the main building, shall comply with the allowable height for accessory buildings. (Ord. 1981)

B.5.    Side Yard Required

The minimum side yards shall be required as set forth in Sections B.6 and B.7 of the Zoning Ordinance.

B.6.    Interior or Corner Lots

a.    There shall be a side yard of not less than ten percent of the width of the lot, provided, however, that such side yard shall not be less than three feet and need not exceed five feet in width. (Ord. 1817)

b.    Where a single family dwelling building or duplex development is proposed for two or more lots having contiguous interior lot lines, one side yard of each lot may be reduced to a zero setback upon site plan approval. The remaining side yard shall not be less than twenty percent of the width of the lot, provided, however, that such side yard shall not be less than six feet and need not exceed ten feet in width. All side street lot lines and interior lot lines adjoining property not part of the development shall not be permitted to have such a reduced side yard. (Ord. 1559)

B.7.    Reversed Corner Lots

a.    There shall be a side yard on the side street lot line of a reversed corner lot of not less than fifty percent of the front yards required by this title on the first five building sites on the block face that are adjoining or adjacent to the rear lot line of the reversed corner lot. The remaining side yard and the rear yard shall not be less than ten percent of the width or depth of the lot, respectively, provided, however, that such side yard width or rear yard depth shall not be less than three feet and need not exceed five feet. The front yard shall be as provided in Section B.3.

b.    Where a single family dwelling building or duplex development is proposed for two or more lots having contiguous interior lot lines, the reduced side yards as provided for under Section B.6 shall apply only to the interior lot line of a reversed corner lot. The side yard on the side street lot line shall be increased by the width of the setback required for the interior lot line prior to reduction.

c.    Reversed corner lots having one side lot line on a street and the remaining side lot line on a street or alley shall maintain a setback on the side street lot line of not less than ten percent of the width of the lot and no less than twenty-five feet. Section 86.56.630 (Exceptions, Average Front Yard Setback Rule) may be applied to the setback on the side street lot line. The remaining side yard and the rear and front yards, shall be not less than ten percent of the width (for the side yard) or depth (for the front and rear yards) of the lot respectively, provided, however, that such side yard width or front, or rear yard depth shall be not less than three feet and need not exceed five feet. (Ord. 1675)

B.8.    Lot Area per Family

Each multiple dwelling structure hereafter erected or structurally altered shall have a minimum total gross lot area of one thousand ninety square feet per dwelling unit on a minimum three thousand five hundred square-foot lot or building site. (Ord. 1559)

B.9.    Maximum Structural Coverage Allowed

a.    The total structural coverage of multiple dwelling or nonresidential development shall not exceed sixty percent of gross lot area. (Ord. 1981)

b.    The total structural coverage of single-family dwelling building or duplex development shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of gross lot area. (Ord. 1756)

B.10.    Off-Street Parking Required

For multiple dwellings, there shall be provided no less than two parking spaces for each dwelling unit. Other parking standards shall be met in accordance with Chapter 86.58.

B.11.    Design Review Required

Design review is required in conformance with this Code. Pre-design meetings are recommended with a Design Review Commission subcommittee prior to formal Design Review submittal. (Ord. 1981)

B.12.    Development Landscaping Required

a.    A minimum of twenty-five percent of the total site area of new residential developments and fifteen percent of the total site of new non-residential developments shall be landscaped. Required parking spaces shall not be considered as a portion of the required landscaping. (Ord 1870)

b.    When new construction or additions over 500 square feet in size are constructed, the property owner shall plant a street tree in the public right-of-way adjacent to said property, if space is available. All shade trees shall have a minimum 2 inch diameter trunk (measured 4 feet 6 inches above the root crown) and palm trees shall have a minimum 6 foot brown trunk. The tree species and planting shall be at the direction of the City of Coronado in accordance with City specifications and the City’s approved street tree list. Irrigation of said tree shall be the responsibility of the adjoining property owner. (Ord. 1586, 1834)

c.    See Section 86.56.800 for additional landscape standards and Chapter 86.56 of the Zoning Ordinance for landscape requirements pertaining to off-street parking areas.

B.13.    Floor Area Ratio

a.    All multiple dwelling or nonresidential development shall not exceed a Floor Area Ratio of 1.60 (160%).

b.    Single-family or duplex development shall not exceed a floor area ratio (FAR) of .54 (54%) except that the FAR may be cumulatively increased up to a maximum of .75 (75%) if the development is designed:

1.    With a different front elevation compared to all other development on both the subject block face and the block face immediately across the street from the front of the subject property if new construction, replacement, or 50% or more reconstructed or restored; and

2.    In accordance with the following Allowable FAR Table when one or more of the ADDITIONAL FEATURES listed below are incorporated into the project:

Table V-1: Allowable Floor Area Ratio

No. of Additional Features

Allowable FAR (%)

1

55

2

56

3

57

4

58

5

60

6

62

7

64

8

66

9

68

10

70

11

72

12

75

ADDITIONAL FEATURES:

1.    A shade tree with no less than a 4 inch diameter trunk (measured 4 feet 6 inches above the root crown) planted in the required front yard and an automatic irrigation system, consistent with water conservation laws, for all landscaping in the front yard, including the adjoining public property.

2.    Plans drawn and signed by a California licensed building designer or architect.

3.    An addition designed to be compatible to, and to retain, the architectural style of the original dwelling.

4.    All roofs which have a slope of 2:12 or greater with eaves of at least 12 inches for the entire roof perimeter.

5.    A variation of roof lines visible from all adjoining street rights-of-way.

6.    A dwelling and garage with all facades being of a different color, style, and texture, and all visible roofs being of a different color, as compared to the dwellings and garages of the adjoining next door neighbors.

7.    A roof with a pitch of 6:12 or greater for at least 50% of the length of the roof.

8.    Preservation, restoration, or replication of historical or architectural elements and design of the original dwelling if an addition to a dwelling designated historic by the City of Coronado, State of California, or the Federal Government.

9.    A raised, covered, and unenclosed front porch which projects out at least 6 feet from the dwelling and has a width of at least 70% of the width of the dwelling. The front and side walls of said porch shall be open except for required guard rails.

10.    All windows along both side facades offset at least 12 inches (edge to edge) from windows of immediately adjoining dwellings. Windows with a sill height of 66 inches or more above the floor are not required to be offset.

11.    A front second story facade setback a minimum of 8 feet from the dominant first story facade.

12.    A 25 foot required front yard setback where the average front yard setback of the block face is 23 feet or less.

13.    A front yard setback which is at least 20% greater than the minimum required front yard setback for 40% or more of the front facade width. Porches, architectural features, and other permitted projections shall be allowed to project the standard distance from the normal required front yard setback line.

14.    A maximum structural coverage of 45% with normal exceptions permitted.

15.    Approval from the Environmental Design Review Commission.

16.    A garage with the vehicle entry door turned 90 degrees or more from the street. This shall only be permitted for required off-street parking in fully enclosed garages and on lots which do not have alley access.

17.    A courtyard along the side facade, open to the sideyard, of at least 15 feet in width (parallel to the side property line), and a minimum depth of 30% of the lot width from the normal setback line. Said courtyard shall be open to the sky, except for architectural features which may project into the courtyard up to a maximum of 10% of the lot width. Said courtyard shall not be open to the front or rear yards.

18.    One side yard setback above the first story which is at least 33% greater than the minimum required side yard setback.

19.    One side yard setback at the first story which is at least 33% greater than the minimum required side yard setback when item number 18 is implemented at the second story on the same side.

20.    An increased side yard setback above 15 feet in height which slopes away from the vertical plane by at least 45 degrees for a minimum of 50% of the side facade length, continuous from the front facade. Dormers shall be permitted to encroach into the 45 degree setback, provided that they shall be setback a minimum of 5 feet from the property line, shall not exceed a total width of 25% of the length of the roof abutting the sideyard, that each dormer shall not exceed a width of 8 feet, and that there shall be a minimum of 4 feet between each dormer.

21.    A second increased side yard setback in accordance with item no. 20 for the entire length of the second or opposite side yard.

22.    Two or more attached dwellings and covered parking constructed with a zero side yard setback on two or more lots having contiguous interior lot lines. The remaining side yards shall not be less than twenty percent of the width of the lot, provided, however, that such side yard shall not be less than six feet and need not exceed ten feet in width. All side street lot lines and interior lot lines adjoining property not part of the development, shall not be permitted to have such a reduced side yard. (Ord. 1649, 1756, 1865)

B.14.    Facade Treatment

a.    For single family and duplex development, the side facades of all stories of main buildings and carriage houses shall incorporate design components to provide relief and visual and architectural interest and variety. Such components may consist of façade plane offsets, vertical and/or horizontal articulation of the façade, architectural projections, recessed windows, varied texture and materials, and similar design features. Long uninterrupted exterior walls shall be avoided. The façade treatment shall not encroach into the required side yards except as permitted elsewhere in the Municipal Code. (Ord. 1981)

b.    For multiple family and non-residential development, the front and side facades of main buildings shall incorporate design components to assure visual interest and relief. Such components may consist of architectural projections, balconies, façade plane offsets and similar design features. (Ord. 1981)

c.    For multiple family and non-residential development, façade plane offsets are permitted to extend to the ground, contain floor area and extend or project into a required side yard setback for a distance of not more than one-third of the required side yard setback width subject to the following: (Ord. 1981)

1.    No single façade plane offset shall exceed a maximum of 20’ in length.

2.    That building volume encroaching into the required setback shall be reduced by 25% in a reciprocal fashion behind the setback line on the same side of the building.

3.    The cumulative total linear distance of façade plane offsets and architectural projections into required side yards, measured at their widest point, along a given side façade shall not exceed 28 feet.

B.15.    Additional Development Standards

See Chapter 86.04, Chapter 86.56 and Chapter 86.58 of the Municipal Code for additional standards.

Chapter VI
COMMERCIAL ZONE DESIGN CRITERIA
A. INTRODUCTION
This chapter discusses the purpose and applicability of the Commercial Zone design criteria. Design criteria for site planning, storefront design, buildings, landscape/hardscape, signs and public spaces within the Commercial Zone are given and their application to commercial properties is discussed. Following this discussion is a review of Coronado’s “role model buildings” taken directly from the 1985 Coronado Design Guidelines for the Orange Avenue Corridor (revised in 1999.)

Photo 7: Lamb’s Players Theater

A.1.    Purpose

The purpose of the design criteria is to protect the special identity of the commercial areas of Coronado. The criteria are intended to:

•    Improve the quality of physical changes

•    Protect the architectural character

•    Act as a basis for objective decision-making

•    Increase public awareness of architectural quality

•    Prevent incompatible new construction

•    Require that all alterations and signage be presented to the Design Review Commission

Photo 8: Adella Pedestrian Plaza

These design criteria acknowledge the prevailing built environment and existing development patterns within Coronado’s commercial areas, especially Downtown. The criteria, therefore, do not seek to impose an overriding style, a limited color palette or an artificial theme. Instead, they are meant to promote the positive design characteristics currently existing throughout the Downtown.

It is not the intent of these design criteria to eliminate design freedom or discourage innovative design. These criteria are less quantitative than the mandatory development standards and may be interpreted with some flexibility in the application to specific projects. The design criteria complement the mandatory development standards contained in this Specific Plan by providing good examples of appropriate design solutions and by providing design interpretations of the various mandatory regulations.

A.2.    Interpretation

To aid in the interpretation of these criteria, a development applicant should understand the meaning of “shall,” “permitted” and “not permitted.”

Criteria that employ the word “shall” are intended to be applied as stated. An alternative measure may be considered, however, if it meets or exceeds the intent of the criteria.

Criteria using the words “permitted” and “not permitted” are mandatory and are much like zoning regulations in that they must be followed or a variance can be sought.

A.3.    Applicability

The provisions of this section are applicable to all development within the Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan area.

It is required by the City of Coronado that the Design Review Committee approve all projects including new construction, additions, exterior alterations or landscaping. Prior to review by the Design Review Committee, projects should adhere to these design criteria as applicable. It is important to note, however, that these criteria do not affect existing buildings that are not proposed for new construction, exterior alterations, landscaping or changes in parking lot layout. In other words, the criteria are not retroactive.

The design criteria will be applied during the City’s Development Approval process (applicant shall request the criteria and be provided with them during pre-application conferences). This procedure is meant to encourage the highest level of design quality while providing the flexibility necessary to encourage creativity in response to existing site conditions.



Photo 9: Storefront details add interest for pedestrians

A.4.    Organization

The design criteria are organized into the following sections:

a.    Introduction provides an overview of the purpose, interpretation, application, exemption, organization and other aspects of the design criteria.

b.    Site Planning and Design includes criteria for building and parking location and design in relationship to the street (its street edge condition).

c.    Storefront Design provides criteria that promote quality design for the ground floor of new infill buildings and rehabilitation of existing buildings.

d.    Building Criteria presents architectural criteria applicable to commercial projects within the Specific Plan’s commercial areas.

e.    Landscaping/Hardscape Design provides a basic landscape design framework that is to be used in conjunction with new development, and as a helpful tool for property owners interested in upgrading the landscaping of existing development.



Photo 10: Maintain Downtown as a friendly place for pedestrians, bicyclists and motor vehicles

f.    Parking, Circulation and Access provides design criteria for parking areas, circulation and access.

g.    Structured Parking includes criteria specific to design of parking structures.

h.    Signage and Advertising sets forth general and specific criteria to enhance the image of commercial areas and improve the effectiveness of signage for businesses.

i.    Public Spaces includes criteria associated with plazas, courtyards and public art within the commercial areas.

B. SITE PLANNING AND DESIGN
B.1.    Relationship to Street

A project’s relationship to the street (its street edge condition) is determined by setback requirements and by which type of “edge conditions” are appropriate for that particular location. This section provides guidance for physical site design and configuration.



Photo 11: Wide sidewalks maximize the opportunity to provide outdoor dining mixed with pedestrian spaces offering vegetation, paving materials and awnings

a.    Provide corner “cut-offs” for buildings located at prominent intersections.

b.    Place the ground-level front elevation of the building at the front property line and at the sidewalk edge to maintain the continuity of the “street wall,” especially along Orange Avenue.

c.    Avoid large setbacks from the sidewalk edge unless it is to provide space for small outdoor dining and shopping areas, landscaping and other pedestrian oriented uses.

d.    Create continuous pedestrian activity by minimizing gaps between buildings.

e.    Avoid parking lots that interrupt commercial space.

f.    Avoid blank walls and other “dead” spaces at the ground level.

g.    Create pedestrian paseos to parking lots at the rear of buildings.



Figure VI-1: Site Planning and Design Diagram

 

C. STOREFRONT DESIGN


Photo 12: Use of transom windows, awnings and outdoor seating make this an attractive neighborhood eatery

C.1.    Introduction

Although the storefront is only one of the architectural features of the facade, it is the most important visual element for protection of the pedestrian atmosphere. Traditionally, the storefront had few decorative elements other than those details that were often repeated across the face of the building, integrating the storefront into the character of the facade. The rest of the storefront was designed in a simple manner, in order to not compete with the displayed items but rather to clearly project the product or service being offered inside.

The storefronts along Orange Avenue have experienced the greatest amount of change and hold the greatest potential for creative alterations affecting both the character of the building and the streetscape. When existing buildings of quality undergo changes of use, they should maintain their original exterior design character while undergoing interior renovations. In the case of renovation of nondescript buildings these Design Criteria for new buildings should be followed, so that these more ordinary structures begin to contribute life and interest to the village environment.

Photo 13: Storefronts with decorative cornice

To promote quality design for new infill buildings and the rehabilitation of existing buildings, the following specific storefront and facade criteria are presented.



Figure VI-2: Traditional Storefront Appearance Achieved with Contemporary Materials

C.2.    Entries/Doorways

Commercial storefront entries are typically recessed and/or sheltered by a covered arcade structure, canopy or awning. This provides more area for display space, provides a sheltered transition to the interior of the store, and emphasizes the entrance. Recessed entries with second floor overhangs should be retained and are strongly encouraged in new storefront construction along Orange Avenue.



Photo 14: Recessed entryway

The following criteria shall be considered:

a.    All entries must be level with the sidewalk and may not include ramps or steps leading into the storefront.

b.    Storefronts shall be of a scale and nature compatible with neighboring buildings.

Figure VI-3: Recessed entry detail

C.3.    Facade Treatment

a.    The use of light, subdued or neutral colors and natural building materials, such as brick and terracotta, are encouraged as the base color.

Photo 15: Attractive brick building façade

C.4.    Awnings and Canopies

Awnings and canopies can play a special role in bringing visual harmony to Downtown Coronado. The addition of an appropriate awning can create a pleasant transition between unrelated upper facades and storefronts. Canopies are different than awnings in many ways. A canopy is usually permanently affixed to the building, flat and made of solid materials. These are referred to as brow canopies.



Photo 16: Awning color and shape relate to the window’s proportions

The following criteria shall be considered:

a.    Awnings should be simple in color, containing a maximum of three colors. Lettering and trim utilizing other colors is permitted but is considered as a sign area (see Section I, Signs and Advertising for awning signage guidelines).

Figure VI-4: Awning detail

b.    Awning shape should relate to the window or door opening. Barrel shaped awnings shall be used to complement arched windows while rectangular or square awnings should be used on rectangular windows.

c.    When there are several businesses in one building, awnings of the same color should be used with simple signs on the valance flap that may vary in type, style and color to differentiate the individual businesses within the building.

d.    Awnings shall be replaced when they are in a damaged/deteriorated state.

e.    Aluminum canopies generally detract from the historic character of buildings in Coronado and should not be erected.

f.    Internally illuminated translucent awnings are prohibited.

C.5.    Door Design

Traditionally the storefront door was more than just a door. Tall in proportion, its design reflected its commercial importance. Its construction made it substantial and inviting to the customer. Storefront doors within the Specific Plan commercial area should have a similar role. The following general criteria should guide the design of doors:

a.    Accentuate the door with simple details such as a handsome brass door pull, brass kick-plate or an attractive painted sign.

b.    Retail shop doors should contain a high percentage of glass (minimum of 50%) to allow views of the store contents.

C.6.    Display Window Design

The use of display windows as an architectural element is of critical importance to the storefront’s design. Windows create a visual rhythm of building openings, as well as a visual image of the retail interior. The following general design criteria should guide the design of display windows:

a.    The use of clear glass on the first floor is strongly encouraged. Reflective, highly tinted, opaque or otherwise obscure glass is prohibited from building frontages on all floors.

b.    Storefront windows should be as large as possible and generally no closer than 18 inches from the ground (bulkhead height). By limiting the bulkhead height, views of storefront displays and retail interior are maximized. Maximum bulkhead heights for new construction should in general be no more than 24 inches high.

Figure VI-5: Window details

c.    Introducing or changing the location or size of windows or other openings that alter the architectural rhythm, alignment or character of the original building is strongly discouraged.

d.    To add relief to the wall surface, glass should be inset a minimum of 3" from the exterior wall surface. Windows that punctuate facades and provide access to light and air flow are encouraged as they give buildings much of their character.

C.7.    Storefront Accessories

The following design criteria should be considered for storefront accessories:

a.    Permanent security bars and window air conditioning units on the first floor are prohibited.

b.    Mechanical appurtenances attached to building facades should be enclosed by a housing that is in proportion with the building’s architecture and painted a color consistent with the facade colors.

c.    Where transom windows exist, every effort should be made to retain this storefront feature.

Photo 17: Transom windows with awning below

d.    The use of air conditioning units placed in individual windows and window transom areas are prohibited.

e.    If security grills are necessary, they should be placed inside the building behind the window display area.



Photo 18: Air conditioning unit in upper floor window.

D. BUILDING CRITERIA
As in many older towns and cities, Downtown Coronado serves not only as the heart of the community, but also as its strongest visual image. These visual impressions affect the way residents and visitors feel about the city and are often an indication of the community’s economic vitality.



Photo 19: Spreckels Building exhibits classic storefront and second floor detailing

The General Building design criteria presented here are intended to promote good design in order to create a quality image for Coronado’s commercial areas, maintain investment; and sustain the economic vitality in general. The following general design criteria are applicable to all buildings found within the Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan area.

D.1.    Building Scale

Scale is the size relationship between a building and its adjacent structures. The scale of new buildings shall be generally consistent with existing buildings in the immediate area.

Photo 20: El Cordova shops are scaled to the pedestrian

a.    Building heights shall relate to adjacent sites to allow:

•    Maximum sun;

•    Maximum ventilation;

•    Protection from prevailing winds;

•    Enhancement of public views; and

•    Minimal obstruction of views from adjoining structures.

b.    Special attention should be paid to ground-level landscaping and architectural detailing of multi-story buildings, to soften the impact of large buildings on the pedestrian.

Figure VI-6: Enhanced facade detail

D.2.    Exterior Walls

a.    Avoid blank walls at the ground floor level by utilizing windows, recesses, reveals, changes in materials and canopies to create visual interest.

b.    Additions to existing buildings shall be integrated with the existing structure. New additions should match the original structure in terms of scale, window and door styles and openings, roof lines, materials and color, unless the existing building is in complete non-compliance with these criteria.

c.    Exterior wall materials which are strongly discouraged include the following:

•    Plywood;

•    Unenhanced concrete or concrete block;

•    Reflective mirrored windows; and,

•    Corrugated metal or fiberglass siding.

D.3.    Wall Articulation

a.    Long, blank, unarticulated street wall facades are not permitted and shall be divided into a series of structural bays (e.g. characterized by masonry piers that frame window and door elements). Storefronts should preserve the existing Coronado village rhythm by keeping the 20-30 foot wide facades.

b.    Wall facades shall be “broken” by vertical and horizontal articulation. This can be achieved in a number of ways including:

•    Dividing the facade into a series of display windows;

•    Constructing the facade with decorative tile along bulkheads;

•    Providing traditional recessed entries;

•    Careful sizing, placement and overall design of signage; and

•    Providing consistent door and window reveals.

•    Placement of balconies, awnings and canopies; and

•    Sculpted, carved or penetrated wall surface defined by recesses and reveals.

c.    New or converted buildings must respect and follow the linear street wall of Orange Avenue, avoiding awkward or incompatible juxtapositions.

D.4.    Roofs

a.    Mansard roofs are strongly discouraged on freestanding buildings. Mansards should maintain the same roof pitch as surrounding structures. Steeply-pitched mansard “eyebrows” that appear “tacked” onto a building are very strongly discouraged.

b.    Mechanical equipment shall be screened with a solid material that matches the architectural style and materials of the building without giving the appearance of being added on.

Figure VI-7: Roof detail

c.    Encouraged roof materials include:

•    Standing seam metal roofs

•    Tile roofs

•    High definition composition roofs

•    Decorative roof parapets which screen a flat roof

•    Lightweight synthetic materials

•    Slate and stone roofs

d.    The following roof materials are discouraged:

•    Corrugated metal or fiberglass

•    High contrast or brightly colored (blue, orange, red) roofs

•    Crushed white rock

D.5.    Color

Color can dramatically affect the appearance of buildings and should be carefully considered in relation to the overall design of the building. Color can also affect the apparent scale and proportion of buildings by highlighting architectural elements such as doors and windows.

a.    Minimize the number of colors on the building’s exterior in order to maintain a cohesive appearance with minimum visual distraction.

b.    Bright neon paint colors and large areas of intense white color are not desirable.

c.    The color palette chosen for a building shall generally be compatible with the colors of adjacent buildings in the Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan Area. Unique color schemes may be permitted and are subject to design review on a case-by-case basis.

E. LANDSCAPE / HARDSCAPE DESIGN
E.1.    Introduction

Landscaping in Coronado’s commercial areas should achieve three specific ends: 1) beautify the area and create a pedestrian oasis; 2) soften commercial development; and, 3) unify the area as a pleasant environment for residents and visitors alike. These three ends will be accomplished by a recognizable use of repeated planting treatments. Consistency and continuity within the street right-of-way and building setback areas are extremely important.



Photo 21: Potted plants and paving detail



Photo 22: Setbacks and lush landscaping create a pedestrian oasis at Adella Plaza

New development in the Commercial Zone shall refer to the following landscape criteria, and the regulations of the Zoning Ordinance for aesthetic purposes and to help reduce stormwater runoff, improve air quality, and reduce the heat island effect

E.2.    General Landscape Design Criteria

All new development shall follow these general landscape criteria when landscape is part of project design.

a.    Save existing mature trees where possible.

b.    When feasible use specimen boxed trees (minimum 36" box) for immediate effect and accent. Palms shall be a minimum 10 feet brown trunk height, when used along a street right-of-way.

c.    Emphasize use of low maintenance and drought tolerant plant species in public and commercial areas, especially in large landscaped areas.

d.    Use boxed and potted plants in containers, especially to enhance sidewalk shops.

e.    Give preference to ground covers that require very low maintenance.

f.    Vines and climbing plants on buildings and perimeter garden and building walls may be used.

g.    The use of materials such as crushed rock, redwood bark chips, pebbles, and stone or masonry slabs are discouraged in place of live plant materials in landscaped areas.

Photo 23: Potted plants and brick paving

h.    Use colorful plantings or accents in planter boxes and at focal points.

i.    Landscaping shall not obstruct the sightlines of motorists or pedestrians, especially at pedestrian crosswalks.

j.    Trees and shrubbery maintenance shall be located so that they do not interfere with the effectiveness of parking lot or street lighting or public signs.

k.    Landscape screening materials shall be large enough at planting to provide effective screening and be capable of growing to the height and density desired within three to four years.

l.    All plantings shall be kept healthy, with all planting areas free of weeds and debris.

m.    Trees shall be a minimum 24-inch box size at time of planting.

n.    Shrubs shall be a minimum 5-gallon size at time of planting.

F. LIGHTING
Lighting can be used to create a festive atmosphere in Coronado and can bring life to the street scene by encouraging nighttime pedestrian use. The following criteria are intended to guide Commercial Zone lighting so that it creates a pleasant and safe village atmosphere without producing excess “flooding” of light.

F.1.    General Lighting Criteria

a.    All lighting fixtures shall be finished in such a manner as to withstand the effects of salt air.

b.    Lighting materials should be constructed of low-maintenance materials.

F.2.    Lighting of Buildings

a.    Lighting fixtures should be in scale with buildings and attractively designed to complement the architecture of the project and improve visual identification of businesses.

b.    Wall mounted lights should be utilized to the greatest extent possible to minimize the total number of freestanding light poles.

Photo 24: An architecturally compatible wall-mounted light

c.    Nighttime external window lighting or soft interior business lighting is strongly encouraged to enhance the pedestrian experience and increase security.

d.    Adequate security lighting must be provided for all on-site parking areas and pedestrian ways.

F.3.    Lighting of Public Spaces

a.    Plazas, including all entrances and exits, should be illuminated 1/2 hour after sunset to 1/2 hour before sunrise to facilitate natural surveillance opportunities and to discourage illegitimate activities.

b.    Lighting should be designed to help define order and further develop the design concept of the space in a manner that appears welcoming to pedestrians.

c.    Lighting should be directed toward walls, landscaping or the ground, and should neither create glare nor be obtrusive to neighboring property.

Photo 25: Ground level walkway lighting

d.    Ground level walkway lighting in passageways and courtyards is encouraged, as well as illuminated landscaping, and fountains.

G. PARKING, CIRCULATION, AND ACCESS
a.    Shared driveways that provide access to more than one site are encouraged in order to reduce the number of driveway entries along Coronado’s secondary commercial streets.

b.    Rear parking areas should be separated from buildings by either a raised concrete walkway or landscaped strip. Parking stalls directly abutting buildings are not desirable.



Photo 26: Street parking along Orange Avenue adds to the pedestrian atmosphere

c.    Locate parking lot entries on side streets or alleys in order to minimize pedestrian/vehicular conflicts along Orange Avenue. Curb cuts on Orange Avenue are strongly discouraged.

d.    Parking areas should be designed so that pedestrians walk parallel to moving cars. Minimize the need for the pedestrian to cross parking aisles and landscaped areas.

H. STRUCTURED PARKING
a.    Parking structures shall be designed to fit in with the existing urban fabric in Coronado’s Commercial Zone.

b.    Activities such as shops, offices or other commercial space are required to be incorporated along the ground level of structured parking.

c.    Curb cuts on Orange Avenue are strongly discouraged.

 

I. SIGNS AND ADVERTISING
I.1.    Introduction

Signs in Downtown Coronado typically advertise a place of business or provide directions and information. An effective sign and graphics system functions not as a separate entity but as an integral part of the built environment. Carefully planned signage communicates essential information while ordering and enhancing the architectural character of Downtown.

Photo 27: Attractive signage

Appropriate sign locations are:

•    Horizontally above first floor doors and windows;

•    On awning flaps or similar structures such as trellises;

•    Adjacent to building entrances, wall mounted;

•    At the rooftop cornice when building has one primary business to display;

•    Pedestrian level windows along a storefront.

A sign’s use of color, its size, shape, placement and selection of lettering can attract or detract from its effectiveness. An effectively designed sign will:

•    Be compatible with the surrounding physical and visual character of the area;

•    Promote the “individuality” of establishments;

•    Identify the business clearly and attractively;

•    Enhance the building on which it is located; and,

•    Reduce the amount of visual clutter caused by excessive and poorly placed signage.

Photo 28: Attractive window sign

The City’s Zoning Ordinance has regulations to help control the size, location and number of signs, but code restrictions alone may not be enough. Design criteria are needed to encourage and coordinate well-designed signs.

The following sign criteria are intended to assure high quality business identification.

I.2.    General Sign Design Criteria

a.    Use a brief message. The fewer the words, the more effective the sign. A sign with a brief, succinct message is simpler and faster to read, looks cleaner and is more attractive.

b.    Avoid hard-to-read, overly intricate typefaces, as they reduce the sign’s ability to communicate.

c.    Two and three dimensional symbols of merchandise and services are encouraged, as well as graphic signage.

d.    Lettering should generally be in proportion to the size of the sign. As a rule of thumb, the recommended size of letters is between one-third (1/3) to one-half (¾) the height of the sign.

e.    Avoid signs with strange shapes. Signs that are unnecessarily narrow, oddly shaped, or unrelated to the products or services being provided on site can restrict the legibility of the message. If an unusual shape is not symbolic, it is probably confusing.

f.    Use widely recognized symbols rather than print or text whenever possible.

Photo 29: Decorative signage

g.    To blend these standard “symbols” into Coronado’s unique atmosphere, incorporate logos into a sign whose style and materials fit the character of the immediate area and its architecture.



Photo 30: Sign complements building façade

h.    Signs should be made smaller if they are oriented to pedestrians. The pedestrian-oriented sign is usually read from a distance of fifteen to twenty feet; the vehicle-oriented sign is viewed from a much greater distance.

i.    Both signs and symbols must be specific to the building, business, or service in Coronado and not prepackaged and furnished by outside suppliers and/or bearing their product names or trademarks.

j.    Backlit plastic box type signs are prohibited. Individual lit lexan letters attached to facades are discouraged as inappropriate to Coronado. Flashing or moving signs, signs placed on poles, roofs, benches, balloons or vehicles are prohibited.

k.    Sign upkeep and maintenance is pertinent. Weathered, faded or tattered signs that are deteriorated or have chipped paint or worn lettering are unacceptable for Downtown Coronado. Painted signs must exhibit high quality design and craftsmanship.

Figure VI-8: Sign prohibitions

I.3.    Signs and Architectural Compatibility

a.    Signs shall make a positive contribution to the general appearance of Orange Avenue.

b.    The size and shape of a sign shall be proportionate with the scale of the structure on which they are placed and shall not overwhelm the architecture of the building or the character of the neighborhood.

Photo 31: An appropriately-scaled sign.

c.    Corporate logos should be scaled and placed appropriately in accordance with these criteria. Simply stated, sign information and sign design must be specifically appropriate to Coronado.

d.    Franchises and format businesses shall adapt their graphics to meet local criteria and ordinances. Where corporate logo color, shape or design clashes with building or neighborhood design, the logo shall be omitted or scaled to conform.

I.4.    Awning Signs

An awning is a roof-like covering or shelter that is usually constructed of canvas or other fabric extending over a pedestrian walkway. Awnings provide shelter from weather, provide scale to the building architecture and add color and liveliness to the pedestrian path and street.

Figure VI-9: Undesirable sign composition

An awning is permanently attached to a building or can be raised or retracted to a position against the building when not in use. An awning sign is a message that is painted, printed, sewn, or stained onto the awning or awning flap.



Photo 32: Signage on valence flap

a.    The sign on awnings shall be placed on the awning flap or shade panel. The flap shall be at least eight (8) inches in height so that the letters and symbols can be large enough to easily read.

b.    The color of an awning sign should be compatible with and complementary to the color and material of the building to which it is attached.

I.5.    Blade or Projecting Signs

A blade or projecting sign uses a building structure as its main source of support and projects more than two feet beyond the building’s vertical plane. A projecting sign can add interest and vitality to a street. Projecting signs can include pictorial images, logos and symbols.

A projecting sign is generally intended to be read by pedestrians along a sidewalk or arcade and by motorists in slow-moving vehicles.



Photo 33: Projecting sign

a.    The size of a projecting sign should be proportional to the building facade to which it is attached and typically shall not exceed six (6) square feet.

b.    A projecting sign should be hung perpendicular to and shall not project more than three (3) feet from the building face.

c.    To minimize visual clutter, projecting signs should not be located within close proximity to other hanging signs or projecting signs, preferably at least twenty-five (25) feet from each other.

d.    The placement of a projecting sign shall not impede the safe movement of people or vehicles within a public right-of-way and shall be properly secured to a building in a structurally sound manner.

I.6.    Window Signs

A window sign is a permanent sign painted on the window and is designed to be viewed principally from outside the business by pedestrians and motorists.

a.    Window signs are encouraged on the ground floor windows facing the primary street frontage or adjoining parking lot.

b.    Temporary window signs shall be in conformance with the regulations of this Specific Plan.

Photo 34: An attractive window sign

c.    Paper hand lettered signs are prohibited.

d.    A proliferation of neon window signs (ATM, Beer signs, UPS, etc.), other than “open” signs are discouraged.

I.7.    A - Frame and Portable Signs

A portable sign is any sign or advertising device that rests on the ground and is not designed to be permanently attached to a building or permanently anchored to the ground.

a.    The maximum allowable size of a portable sign and supporting structure shall not exceed 48 inches in height, 30 inches in width, and 36 inches in depth.

b.    No business will be allowed to have more than one portable sign.



Photo 35: A-Frame sign

c.    Portable signs shall not encroach into required off street parking areas, public right-of-way or alleys and may not be arranged so as to create site distance conflicts or other traffic hazards. Portable signs shall not be placed within the sight triangle requirements.

d.    Portable signs shall be utilized only during regular business hours and should be removed during non business hours.

e.    Materials for portable signs should be of a permanent nature and not be subject to fading or damage from weather. The use of paper or cloth is prohibited unless located within a glass or plastic enclosure.

f.    Portable signs shall be designed in an attractive manner and maintained in a neat, orderly fashion to present an image of quality and creativity for the commercial areas.

g.    Portable signs must be immediately adjacent to the storefront and shall not restrict pedestrian passage in any way.



Photo 36: Portable sign

J. PUBLIC SPACES
Public space associated with commercial buildings should serve as a transition from the outside to the inside of buildings, shall be complementary to the commercial buildings, and should be supportive of pedestrian activity. Methods of doing this include providing pedestrian amenities such as benches, fountains, and continuing the hardscape of the sidewalk. Public space can add to the vitality of commercial areas, when designed and located in a manner that attracts pedestrian activities.



Photo 37: Adella Plaza

J.1.    Plazas

a.    Plazas are encouraged to be physically and visually accessible from the public sidewalk. Security fences, walls, and entry gates shall not block the sidewalk edge of the plaza or views into the plaza.

b.    Plazas should be designed to supplement, rather than detract from street activity.

c.    The function and appearance of the plaza or courtyard shall not be dominated by stairs or elevators.

d.    Where inconsistent front setbacks occur along the street in Downtown Coronado, plazas could be considered to compensate for the broken building edge.

e.    Plazas should be designed with unimpeded lines-of-sight to and from the public sidewalk, and physical access shall be provided from the public sidewalk to plazas.



Photo 38: Seating and decorative elements in plaza area

f.    Entries to the plaza, and storefront entries within the plaza shall be designed and lighted so they do not create hiding places.

g.    Seating shall be provided in all plazas. Where applicable, plaza users should be provided with a choice between active (i.e. watching goings-on) and passive (i.e. private) seating.

h.    Visual features, such as public art or a fountain, should be incorporated in plazas to attract pedestrians.

i.    Shade trees or other elements providing cover from the sun or rain should be incorporated within plazas, in a manner that does not impair pedestrian movement.



Photo 39: Adella Plaza

j.    Security gates and security fencing should not be used in public plazas. They may only be permitted by the Director of Community Development.

k.    Landscaping for the plazas should provide special interest through plant materials, such as special foliage color, seasonal changes in plant habit, scent or floral display.

J.2.    Public Art



Photo 40: Art can be used in many places

a.    Art associated with commercial buildings is strongly encouraged, as it invites participation and interaction, adds local meaning, interprets the community by revealing its culture or history and/or captures or reinforces the unique character of a place.

b.    The setting of public art should be considered in its design; likewise, the impact of physical space and nearby structures on public art should also be considered.

Photo 41: Art should be integral to its surroundings

c.    Freestanding art or sculpture shall be placed to avoid locations where it would compete with a storefront or obstruct a pedestrian path, create a traffic hazard or compete with another piece of art or sculpture.

J.3.    Paseos Between Buildings

The word “paseo” is derived from the Spanish word, “paso” meaning passage. Passages in Downtown Coronado shall adhere to the following criteria:

a.    The minimum width of any paseo shall not be less than 10 feet at any point. Paseos longer than 50 feet shall be an average of 20 feet wide.

b.    Paseos shall be designed to be an integral part of the overall project and shall be configured to provide straight forward access from an alley or rear parking area to the street. The incorporation of plazas into the paseo design is highly encouraged. Business entrances are encouraged to front onto a paseo.

c.    Paseos shall incorporate landscape features, lighting, shade, textured paving and other design elements to enhance the overall pedestrian environment and provide a high level of security, natural surveillance, and convenience.

K. ROLE MODEL BUILDINGS
Coronado has a number of beautiful buildings of various architectural styles. Several of these buildings have been selected as “role model buildings” to convey the level of quality, detail and relationships desired for the Orange Avenue Corridor.

These role model buildings should guide, inspire, and serve as a creative resource for owners and designers. A photograph of each building and the attributes that make it exemplary for Coronado are noted below. Be aware that imitation of these role model buildings is not desired. The buildings are assets to the City because each is unique to its function and site.

K.1.    The Brigantine Restaurant

Photo 42: The Brigantine Restaurant

•    Colorful distinctive blue awnings and white siding emulate seaside theme

•    Lush landscaping

•    Top railing and tower provide second story features with minimal mass

•    Scale of the project enhances the downtown village atmosphere

•    Sign is an excellent example of high quality craftsmanship

Photo 43: Signage for the Brigantine Restaurant

K.2.    La Avenida Complex

Photo 44: La Avenida Complex

•    Design of complex inspired by the desire to preserve corner tower of the original structure

•    Building’s asymmetry helps define the corner

•    Upper level mass notably set back from the street

•    Arches and deep recesses break up first story mass

•    Detailing is exceptional; most notably the tiling, ornamentation, railings, lighting and signage

•    Second story outdoor seating with attractive umbrellas and awnings unique to Orange Avenue

•    Creative use of nighttime lighting

•    Use of flags and pennants adds action, color and interest to the property

•    Streetscape treatment; i.e. palms and sidewalk pavers visually continue building theme into public spaces

K.3.    El Cordova Complex

Photo 45: El Cordova Hotel

•    Complex of interrelated buildings has delightful network of patios and passageways

•    Upper balconies break up mass of façade

•    Lush landscaping provides canopy and shade

•    Awnings provide shelter and define ground floor

•    Expansive storefront windows provide view into shops

•    Excellent example of early California architecture

•    Iron balconies and flower boxes add upper story interest

•    Small scale signs over gateway welcome pedestrians passing by



Photo 46: Signage for the El Cordova Shops

K.4.    Coronado Brewing Company

Photo 47: Coronado Brewing Company

•    Handsome building reminiscent of the Arts and Crafts era

•    Attractive use of brick

•    Inviting open air seating allows patrons to interact with pedestrians

•    Use of columns creates bays that enhance the rhythm of the street

•    Building mass and scale are compatible with nearby buildings

•    Unique awnings create visual interest while providing shade for diners and pedestrians

•    Architectural lettering and hand painted sign are examples of quality signage



Photo 48: Signage for the Coronado Brewing Company

K.5.    Spreckels Building



Photo 49: Façade of the Spreckels Building

•    Long façade broken into pedestrian scale segments

•    Cornice line gives strong upper edge to structure

•    Building follows curve of Orange Avenue

•    Smaller second floor windows create horizontal band along Orange Avenue that creates residential character

•    Offices and private residences co-exist harmoniously

•    Awnings define street level and enhance pedestrian orientation

•    Large street level display windows encourage pedestrian interaction

•    While the building exhibits visually massive architectural features along the property line, the beautiful restoration, quality decoration, heavy ornamentation, exquisite craftsmanship and historic significance are attributes that make this building precious to Coronado

Photo 50: Spreckels Building, circa 1955

K.6.    Baywalk Neighborhood Shops



Photo 51: Façades of the Baywalk Neighborhood Shops

•    Single story building, bay windows, small gables, wood siding and brick veneer create a residential feel

•    Large bay windows provide interior views from the sidewalk

•    Varied roof line with gables add visual interest

•    Brick bordered sidewalks and patios define individual businesses

•    Street trees provide much needed shade for pedestrians and coffee shop patrons

K.7.    Glorietta Bay Inn



Photo 52: Façade of the Glorietta Bay Inn

•    Beautiful historic restoration of the Spreckels’ home

•    Grand entry, spacious and inviting

•    Stately columns and wrought iron fencing define property lines

•    New structure integrates well with original mansion

•    Wonderful use of awnings and umbrellas throughout the property

•    Lovely ornamental railings and window balconies

•    Visual impact of parking lot minimized through the use of contoured berms and landscaping

•    Dramatic arbors covered in bougainvillea welcome pedestrians

•    Signage complements the elegant style of the building



Photo 53: Signage for the Glorietta Bay Inn

K.8.    Coronado Police Station



Photo 54: Façade of the Coronado Police Station

•    Building mass visually broken up by use of arched covered walkway

•    Significant second story setback reduces perceived mass of building

•    Arches, walkway and low planter walls enhance pedestrian scale

•    First floor element to south relates to neighboring one-story structures

•    Unique green roof tiles complement the architecture and blends with the landscaping

•    Initial planting of mature landscaping immediately softened visual impact of large building at street level

•    Unobtrusive and elegant sign – simple and to the point

K.9.    Condominium Project: 1005-1009 8th Street



Photo 55: 3-unit Condominium Complex on 8th Street

•    Interesting and varied rooflines and chimneys

•    Decorative wooden railings and front porches are visually inviting

•    Noteworthy use of ornamentation and color scheme adds to Victorian charm

•    Offset entrances add to the residential feel of this multi-family property

•    Corner building with two unique façades provides attractive views from either street

Chapter VII
R-4 MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE DESIGN CRITERIA
A. INTRODUCTION
The R-4 Multiple Family Residential Zone, located along Orange Avenue primarily between Second and Eighth Streets, includes some non-residential buildings (primarily motels) amongst the residential buildings.

Section B Residential Character and Style discusses the multi-functional nature of the R-4 Zone. Readers should note that many of the criteria presented in Chapter 6 Commercial Zone Design Criteria can be adapted to the special character of the R-4 area. Therefore, following Section B of this chapter, the remaining criteria emphasize modifications from the commercial zone’s criteria to appropriately address the R-4 neighborhood.

Existing non-residential buildings in the R-4 Zone are allowed to remain. Any existing business remodeling in this area should utilize the criteria found in this section as general criteria for scale and design.

B. RESIDENTIAL CHARACTER AND STYLE
The R-4 Multiple Family Residential Zone sits at the hub of Coronado’s “village” area. The commercial areas radiate from it to the north and south along Orange Avenue, while to the east and west lower density housing spreads out at decreasing densities.

This R-4 Zone shares the commercial area’s scale, general streetscape, and some of its uses, with the setbacks, landscaping and building character similar to the lower density residential zones. While the R-4 area does include some minor non-residential uses, it is primarily residential in character, and should retain a “residential,” not “commercial” ambiance.

Photo 56: Well-designed multi-family housing can be an attractive, positive addition to the community

The R-4 Zone segments Orange Avenue into commercial and residential areas, helping to distinguish the commercial activity areas. In addition, the area serves as a transition both between these uses along Orange Avenue and between the downtown and the remaining residential areas of the community.

Photo 57: This building’s scale relates to other buildings along Orange Avenue, while attractive landscaped setbacks enhance the transition into the residential zone

The multi-functional nature of the R-4 area places unusual demands upon design professionals. Therefore, designers should demonstrate particular sensitivity in their projects so that this “most urban” of the City’s residential neighborhoods can be maintained and enriched.

As in the commercial areas, there is no one style or decor that is appropriate for the R-4 Zone. While projects can be designed to differ from neighboring development, they should maintain the overall unity and ambiance of the area.

Photo 58: Projecting balconies, porches and varied rooflines add visual interest and break up the building mass

C. ARCHITECTURAL CRITERIA
C.1.    Character Defining Elements

a.    There is no particular architectural “style” proposed for multi-family residential structures in the Specific Plan area. The primary focus should be on constructing a high quality residential environment.

b.    A visual balance or rhythm should be created by the dimensional ratio of multi-family buildings, their elements and the spaces around them.

c.    Architectural elements that add visual interest, scale and character to the neighborhood are encouraged, such as bays, bay windows, recessed or projecting balconies and verandas.

C.2.    Building Design Criteria

a.    Large expanses of flat wall planes and boxy and monotonous facades that lack a sense of human scale are strongly discouraged.

b.    Building heights should be varied and building facades should use horizontal and/or vertical offsets to help give the appearance of a collection of smaller structures.

c.    To screen the stairs from view to the greatest extent possible, stairways should incorporate a solid or decorative balustrade.

Photo 59: Decorative balustrade enhances the building façade

d.    Prefabricated metal stairs are strongly discouraged.

e.    All mechanical equipment, whether mounted on the roof or ground, should be screened from view. Utility meters and equipment should be placed in locations that are not exposed to view from the street or they should be suitably screened. All screening devices are to be compatible with the architecture and color of the adjacent buildings.

Figure VII-1: Visual screening of utilities

C.3.    Building Scale and Height

Multiple family developments can often dominate adjacent uses. The following criteria are provided to address building scale, massing and height design issues. All multiple family projects on Orange Avenue shall incorporate the following: (Ord. 1981)

Photo 60: Multiple family developments can dominate adjacent uses. The mass of this apartment complex has been broken up to resemble individual homes.

a.    New multiple family residential development shall consider the multiple family development in the immediate area through the use of similar setbacks, complementary building arrangements, buffer yards and avoidance of overwhelming building scale and visual obstructions. (Ord. 1981)

b.    Building designs shall be sensitive and compatible to adjoining multiple family developments with respect to building height, scale and massing. (Ord. 1981)

c.    Building designs shall take into consideration the shadows the building scale casts onto adjoining multiple family developments. (Ord. 1981)

d.    Awnings, moldings, pilasters and comparable architectural elements that increase the building articulation are encouraged. Arcades and other types of overhangs should be used to provide a human scale relationship between building façade and sidewalk.

Photo 61: Awnings, stairs, and an overhang help to break up the building mass

e.    The perceived height and bulk of multi-story buildings should be reduced by dividing the building mass into smaller-scale components and adding details such as projecting eaves, dormers and balconies.

Photo 62: A tiered setback helps to “scale down” the building façade

C.4.    Building Materials

a.    Building materials should be durable, low maintenance and relate a sense of quality and permanence. Frequent change of materials should be avoided.

b.    The building and its elements should be unified by textures, colors and materials.

c.    Exterior columns for trellises, porches or colonnades should utilize materials and colors that are compatible with the adjacent building.



Photo 63: Use of high quality materials enhance this building’s design features

C.5.    Roofs

a.    Rooflines should be segmented and varied within an overall horizontal context. Varying heights are encouraged.

b.    Combinations of one, two and three story units create variation and visual interest and are encouraged.

c.    Use of vertical elements such as towers may be used to accent the predominant horizontal massing and provide visual interest.

d.    Hipped or gabled roofs covering the entire building are preferable to mansard roofs, flat roofs or segments of pitched roofs applied at the building’s edge.



Photo 64: A gable, pitched roof, chimneys and details such as paint and decorative railings add to the interest and charm of this building

e.    Roofs should reflect a residential appearance through pitch and use of materials.

f.    Roof pitch for a porch may be slightly lower than that of the main building.

C.6.    Colors

a.    Color is an important element in establishing the character of a structure’s design. The predominant color of dwelling units and accessory structures should have a muted neutral tone.

b.    Bright or intense colors may be used very sparingly, but should typically be reserved for refined or delicate detailing such as grillwork or more transient features, such as awnings, signs and utility doors.

D. SIGNS AND SYMBOLS
Signage in the R-4 Zone should be interesting, informative and of a scale appropriate to the building facade. Signs must reflect the “residential” character of the neighborhood. Every effort should be made to avoid commercial looking signs. In keeping with the character of the building, the style of the R-4 area signs should embrace Coronado’s village-like character. For example, a sandblasted wood sign hanging from a lamppost at the end of a sidewalk would be an appropriate addition to a residential building.

Simple, classic signage is preferred in the R 4 Zone. Individual architectural letters made of metallic finishes such as antique gold, bronze and copper are encouraged. External spotlights create pleasing shadows and contrast, adding to the beauty of the building exterior.

Photo 65: Signage for the Rothbury Manor

a.    Creative use of neon is encouraged in the commercial areas and neon signs may be appropriate in certain R-4 Zone applications.

b.    Signs that are painted directly on the building are acceptable. Such signs should exhibit high quality design and craftsmanship.

c.    Regular maintenance of signs is required since there is a tendency to fade over time.

d.    Internally illuminated can signs with translucent copy and field are prohibited throughout the Commercial Zone and would not be considered appropriate in the R-4 Zone.

e.    While the “content” of the sign should be determined by the individual property owner or designer, care should be taken to assure that the building facade does not become a “billboard.” A simple address number and the name of the building, when appropriate, is usually sufficient.

Examples of appropriate signage for the R-4 Zone are:

    La Casa Mia

    Casa de Anza

    Rothbury Manor

Photo 66: Signage for the Casa De Anza

E. PUBLIC SAFETY THROUGH DESIGN
Public safety can be improved or achieved through careful design techniques such as attention to paving surfaces, visibility, and adequate nighttime lighting. The following design criteria are intended to improve public safety in the Commercial Zone

a.    Strongly delineate public/private space with paving, building materials, grade separations, or with physical barriers such as landscaping, fences, walls, screens or building enclosures.



Photo 67: Creative use of materials, such as this lattice fence, helps define private space and provides visibility onto the public sidewalk

b.    All site entrances should be visible from a public street or alleyway and very well lit.

c.    Open spaces, courtyards, circulation corridors and individual living unit entrances in multi-family complexes should be designed to be visible from as many dwelling units as possible.

F. CONTEXT/GENERAL PROJECT CONSIDERATIONS
a.    All new multi-family development in the Specific Plan area should be compatible with the character of existing quality development and should respect the context of their site.

b.    Existing site amenities should be preserved and incorporated within new multi-family projects whenever feasible.

c.    Views, mature trees, and similar amenities unique to the site should be preserved and incorporated into development proposals whenever possible.

e.    New landscaping should complement the existing landscape materials, location and massing on adjacent established developments where appropriate.

G. SITE PLANNING
G.1.    Building Siting

a.    Buildings should be generally oriented parallel to streets with varying setbacks to provide visual interest and varying shadow patterns.

Photo 68: New multi-family residential development uses setbacks, complementary building arrangements, buffer yards and avoids visual obstructions

b.    The maintenance of privacy is an acceptable design factor; therefore applicants shall demonstrate an effort to promote privacy to the greatest extent possible.

G.2.    Parking/Circulation

For multi-family development to sustain high quality and positive character, attention should be paid to on-site pedestrian and vehicular circulation.

a.    Principal vehicular access into multifamily projects should be via rear alley access where available, rather than from the street front.



Photo 69: Access to underground parking is available from a side street

b.    Multi-family parking areas should be divided into a series of connected smaller parking courts or be underground.

c.    Blank walls, garage doors, parking facilities and driveway openings along street frontages should be minimized to avoid adverse visual impacts.

d.    Courtyard doors or gates used at multi-family building entries should be attractively designed as an important architectural feature of the building or complex. The main site entry shall incorporate patterned concrete or decorative pavers.

e.    Special accents such as monumental articulation of the building or appropriately scaled art, ornamental features, decoration, special textured paving, flowering accents, walls, shrubs and the use of specimen trees should be used to generate visual interest at entries.



Photo 70: Attractive alleyways include landscaping, pavement material changes and balconies

f.    Where possible, all multi-family projects should incorporate pedestrian connections to adjoining residential uses, commercial projects and other compatible land uses.

Photo 71: Driveway does not overwhelm the building from the street side

G.3.    Trash and Storage Areas

a.    Trash enclosures should be located in convenient, non-obtrusive areas, such as inside parking courts, in subterranean lots, in rear alleys or at the end of parking bays. All trash enclosures shall be covered.

b.    Trash enclosures should be located to allow access for refuse collection but should not block circulation drives or conflict with parking or through traffic.

c.    Trash bins shall be located within a masonry structure or other approved solid trash enclosure that protects adjacent uses from noise and odors. Gates should be solid metal painted to match adjacent building design.

d.    Trash enclosures should be adequately screened from adjacent units.

Figure VII-2: Trash enclosures should be well designed and adequately screened with landscaping

e.    Architectural screening elements should be constructed of the same materials and finishes as the primary building.

G.4.    Lighting

a.    Street lighting should be installed on both sides of the street, no less than 150 feet apart.

b.    All lighting in both underground and surface parking areas shall illuminate the entire lot, yet be arranged to prevent direct glare from illumination onto adjacent units.

c.    Pedestrian-scaled lighting should be located along all pedestrian routes of travel within multi-family projects.

d.    All lighting shall be designed to shine downward and eliminate all skyward glare.

Chapter VIII
MOBILITY, WAYFINDING AND PARKING
A. INTRODUCTION
This chapter includes non-regulatory information on vehicular circulation, transit, bikeways, pedestrian walkways, wayfinding and parking.

B. VEHICULAR CIRCULATION
B.1.    Existing Conditions

Automobiles are the primary means by which people access Coronado’s Downtown, and they will continue to be the primary mode in the foreseeable future. It should be relatively painless for someone to get to and from Coronado’s Downtown. Figure VIII-1 (see next page) shows the roadway classifications in Coronado within the Specific Plan area. Orange Avenue (designated as State Route 75 south of Third Street), along with Third and Fourth Streets are principal arterials, with four lanes of traffic. Orange Avenue north of Third Street is a minor arterial, while First Street, Sixth Street, Tenth Street and B Avenue are two lane collectors.

Traffic Flows. Figure VIII-2 portrays traffic flows along key roads downtown for the year 2000, as measured in “average daily trips” (ADT). Traffic flows are heaviest on Orange Avenue between Fourth Street and Tenth Street, and on Fourth Street from Orange Avenue to the Bridge, at slightly under 30,000 vehicle trips per day.



Figure VIII-2 Traffic Flows in Downtown Coronado for the Year 2000

Primary destinations for much of the commute traffic coming over the bridge are the North Island Naval Air Station and military facilities located further south, on the Strand. Major visitor destinations are the Hotel Del Coronado and the Downtown Commercial Zone (restaurants, shopping, and plays.)

B.2.    Current Planning

Traffic congestion occurs in the blocks surrounding the intersection of the Third/Fourth Street couplets and Orange Avenue, and not only during commute hours. There are ongoing efforts by the City and Caltrans to address traffic issues on a city-wide scale, which would improve vehicular circulation within the Specific Plan area.

B.3.    Recommendations

Improvements that can be made to traffic flows in the Downtown Coronado Specific Plan area relate primarily to efforts to reduce the number of auto trips on Orange Avenue. Two primary strategies are recommended:

Improved Parking. A better managed parking supply means that fewer autos would need to circle streets looking for a parking space.



Figure VIII-1 Roadway Classifications

Improved Transit. Properly configured, operated, and designed, transit may be able to siphon off somewhere between 10 and 20 percent of traffic from Orange Avenue, according to initial ridership estimates prepared by SANDAG on the impact of MTDB’s long-range Transit First plan. Transit is further discussed in the next section.

C. TRANSIT
C.1.    Transit Today

As shown in Figures VIII-3 and VIII-4, Coronado is currently served by four transit routes, operated under the direction of the Metropolitan Transit Development Board (MTDB): 901, 902, 903, and the Coronado Shuttle (Route 904). These routes connect Coronado to surrounding communities, as well as transfer points to other transit services.

For the most part, current transit routes serving Coronado may be characterized as slow and limited, serving primarily a transit-dependent population. In general, fewer than 1,500 people travel by transit along Orange Avenue on any given weekday (2001 data), with the majority of them traveling through Downtown Coronado to destinations on the other side of the Bridge or down the Silver Strand.

C.2.    Transit Tomorrow

MTDB has proposed a number of improvements to the regional transit system, most notably through the Transit First Strategic Plan. The Transit First Plan proposes four kinds of transit services, color-coded as Yellow Car, Red Car, Blue Car, and Green Car. The existing trolley system is seen as a part of an expanded Red Car system, incorporating both light rail and “bus rapid transit” (BRT) components. Red Car service is corridor-focused, much like the existing trolley system, traveling at speeds of 15 to 30 mph, with stations spaced approximately every mile.

SANDAG’s Regional Transportation Plan includes a proposed “Red Car” line connecting Coronado to Downtown San Diego, Hillcrest, and University Town Center. This line will operate similar to MTDB’s existing trolley but will use rubber-tired vehicles that resemble a cross between a bus and a trolley car. “Flex-Trolleys” are expected to enjoy priority treatment on roads.

C.3.    Recommendations

It should be a goal of the City to encourage visitors to use transit to access Coronado, where such transit can actually meet the needs of these persons, whether visitors, local business employees, or local military installation personnel and employees. Increased transit use decreases auto trips, reducing the pressure on parking, road congestion, and overall traffic.

Efforts should be made to ensure that future transit lines in Coronado connect appropriate areas both within and outside Coronado; that transit routes are outfitted with signal-priority systems and other means to speed services to their maximum safe potential; and that customer convenience and comfort is considered.

See The Mission Group’s 2002 report, “Mobility Plan for Downtown Coronado Specific Plan” for more detail.



Figure VIII-3 The Coronado Shuttle (Route 904) operates hourly

Figure VIII-4 – Existing transit routes serving Coronado. The 901 is an all-day service (15 minute frequency peak period, 30 minute frequency off-peak); whereas the 902 and 903 only operate during peak hours.

D. BICYCLING/PEDESTRIAN CIRCULATION
D.1.    Existing Conditions

Coronado is a city well suited for bicycling. The traditional street grid pattern, relatively wide streets, attractive streetscapes, abundant landscaping, mild climate, and relatively flat elevations combine with the many sights of Coronado to create one of the most attractive bicycling environments found in any city. The street grid’s high degree of connectivity gives cyclists a choice of routes and the ability to easily reach most city destinations. The wide streets, which operate at generally low traffic volumes (outside of Orange Avenue and the Third Street/Fourth Street couplets) create “safe zones” for cyclists, who may be passed safely by cars. The variety of architecture, landscaping, and scenic views make cycling in Coronado a visual pleasure and an interesting experience.

In general, traffic is not a major impediment to cyclists, except on Orange Avenue and on the Third/Fourth Street couplets (or getting across those couplets). Just the same, there is little to be recommended for improving bicycle travel to/from the Downtown. Outside of special pathways such as the Silver Strand bike path, the safest place for cyclists is on the road. The use of alleyways as alternative routes for bicyclists is generally not recommended, due to a heightened risk of accidents. Most motorists do not expect cyclists to emerge from alleyways and cross over or merge with traffic.

D.2.    Bicycle Racks

The real issue facing cyclists accessing Coronado’s Downtown is where to safely leave their bicycles while they take advantage of shopping, dining, entertainment, or even employment opportunities. Since bicycles can bring riders closer to their destination than a car could, most cyclists expect to find bicycle parking closer to their destination than a car driver would in searching for parking.

Bicycle racks should be provided throughout the commercial areas, located in appropriate well-illuminated places to reduce the possibility of theft or vandalism but not obstruct pedestrian activity.

D.3.    Pedestrian Walkways

Coronado is one of the most pedestrian-friendly cities in all of Southern California, and its Downtown is generally very accommodating to pedestrians. Sidewalks are wide, storefronts are mostly continuous and interesting, and attractive landscaping enlivens the experience. It is a short, “easy” walk -- approximately 10 to 15 minutes on level surfaces -- from much of Coronado to the commercial areas along and near Orange Avenue.

Potential future implementation strategies to further enhance the pedestrian environment include:

Expansion of Rotary Park. Located at the intersection of Orange Avenue with Isabella Avenue, Tenth Street, and Park Place, this is the “hinge point” of Downtown Coronado, where Orange Avenue turns to the southeast. Unfortunately, the streetscape edge on the western side of Orange Avenue breaks down at this key point, where inappropriately sited buildings create more of an “auto zone” than a pedestrian-scaled zone. Perceived distances on this segment of Orange Avenue are exaggerated, which affects pedestrians’ decision to continue walking or to turn back. It also influences the pedestrian’s feeling of safety, as they must interact with cars crossing from many streets and parking lots, and therefore need to exercise a higher degree of caution.

A redesigned western edge of Orange Avenue, between Tenth Street and Park Place, would significantly improve the pedestrian experience and increase their willingness to walk a little further to get from parking to their Orange Avenue destination.

Alleys. Limit pedestrian circulation in the alleys because most alleys run parallel to Orange Avenue, offering little in the way of “short cuts” between any given points; and the alleys generally serve vehicular uses quite well. Employee, residential, and limited customer parking, in addition to commercial loading, all take advantage of this resource. The alleys permit Orange Avenue’s Commercial Zone to be generally free of the curb cuts, garage entrances, and other disruptions to streetscape and sidewalk that mar many other cities’ downtown areas. Because most sidewalks in Downtown Coronado are well-designed, pedestrian friendly, and conveniently located (most buildings open onto the sidewalk, not a rear parking lot), there is no real desire, need, or incentive for most pedestrians to use the alleys.

E. WAYFINDING
E.1.    Introduction

Wayfinding refers to a system of design features (e.g., signs, lighting, landmarks, directories) used to both help people orient themselves and navigate between places. Once viewed as a navigational aid, “wayfinding” systems now are seen as a way to market an area’s resources, alter negative perceptions, evoke a sense of downtown history and character, and improve the streetscape.

For years, well-designed wayfinding systems have been used by indoor malls, airports, and corporate campuses. Now these environmental graphics are being used increasingly often by traditional downtown commercial areas. People make qualitative assessments about a place based upon how well-designed and understandable it is to find where they need to go.

Currently, the only wayfinding in the Specific Plan area is CalTrans’ standard green and white signs and occasional California State historical site signs. A well thought out wayfinding system will orient visitors to Coronado by pointing out attractions, adding historical explanations, directing vehicles to parking facilities for specific activities, and locating amenities.

The vehicular traveler approaching Coronado over the Bridge is greeted by a simple yet elegant classic-design entry sign located on the left side of the road. While the sign is well- designed, due to its location on an inside curve it can be easily overlooked by arriving visitors. The City may want to re-locate the sign to a more visible location at some future time.



Photo 72: Entry Sign on Third Avenue

Arriving at Orange Avenue, one sees a California historical marker for the Hotel Del Coronado and Caltrans’ generic green “business district” sign directing travelers both north and south on Orange Avenue. Orange Avenue’s signature landscaped medians provide a strong sense of identification for the Orange Avenue corridor and the Downtown area. The visual impact of the northern median end, although less than in the south, was enhanced by additional landscaping (in 2003) that helps to create a stronger entry statement.

E.2.    Directional Signage

Visitors approaching downtown’s commercial areas will need easily recognizable directional signs to help them locate important destinations. It is very important that these signs are:

•    Graphically interesting

•    Unique public signage

•    Used in the Commercial Zone only

It is recommended that all new public wayfinding signs incorporate a custom designed “downtown” logo (by separate graphic artist) over a field of color and a crisp, non-italicized lettering style.

There are several City locations that visitors and residents could be directed to. Some of these locations are outside the Orange Avenue Corridor; however, it is very important to link the commercial areas with these attractions/locations. While it is not practical as part of the Specific Plan to list every single place that could be identified on directional signs, the following are considered excellent candidates:

•    

City Hall

•    

Library

•    

Police Station

•    

Post Office

•    

Marina

•    

Spreckels Park

•    

Ferry Landing

•    

Rotary Park (after expansion)

•    

Hotel Del Coronado

•    

History Museum

•    

Public Beach

•    

Uptown & Downtown Commercial Area

The graphic example shown in Figure VIII-5 is for illustration concept purposes only. It is recommended that these images be refined further or that a new distinctive public signage program be developed for the Orange Avenue Corridor.

Figure VIII-5 Conceptual Directional Signage

Businesses located on less traveled side streets have less exposure to pedestrian and vehicular traffic than do businesses on Orange Avenue. Directional signage for side street businesses is allowed but must congregate in a single location, such as a street corner. The directional signage should be designed as public art, compatible with its surroundings, and contribute to the overall pedestrian environment.

E.3.    Parking Signage

Various activities in Coronado are served by different parking areas, e.g., shopping in the Downtown commercial area or going to the beach. Parking signage that both directs users to parking areas and indicates the nearby activity helps users to park in the most convenient location for their purpose. See Figure VIII-6 for an example.



Figure VIII-6 Conceptual Beach Parking Signage

E.4.    Street Signage

A unique street sign should be created and installed for all street corners within the Specific Plan area. This helps create an identity and sense of place that is distinct from the rest of Coronado. Figure VIII-7 is a conceptual design for such signage.



Figure VIII-7 Conceptual Street Signage

E.5.    Kiosk Program

The previous sections focused on vehicular signage; however, once people are out on foot, a system of pedestrian informational kiosks is desirable for orientation and to stimulate interest in walking further. The kiosks would display a key map with various destinations (see list above.) Kiosk design should be compatible with the character of the Specific Plan’s commercial areas.

For planning purposes, the following locations are recommended for kiosk locations:

•    

Downtown commercial area in near proximity to Hotel Del Coronado and/or Adella Plaza

•    

Rotary Park (after expansion)

•    

Uptown commercial area near the Ferry Landing

F. PARKING
The Mission Group prepared a parking study as part of the Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan process. While portions of the study are summarized below, the full document is available at City of Coronado’s Community Development Department.

The parking study looked at conditions in the commercial areas within the Specific Plan area and some residential blocks outside of the Specific Plan area, but adjacent to it. The parking study’s area encompasses Coronado’s northern and southern commercial centers, and included 20 blocks of off-street parking and 85 block faces of on-street parking (See Figure VIII-8).

For the purposes of the study, the larger area was divided into three sub-areas (See Figure VIII-9).



Figure VIII-8 Parking Study Area



Figure VIII-9 Parking Study Sub-areas

F.1.    Existing Parking Conditions

On-Street Parking. There are 1,269 on-street parking spaces available within the study area before 6:00 pm. Forty percent (505 spaces) are metered and 60 percent (764 spaces) are non-metered. An additional 39 non-metered spaces are available only after 6:00 pm, when commercial loading zone spaces become available for public parking. Figure VIII-10 shows the total on-street parking spaces available before 6:00 pm. Segment totals are for block sides that face each other, e.g., the east and west side of Orange Avenue between First and Second streets.

Twelve percent (157 spaces) of all on-street parking spaces are located on Isabella Avenue. Fourteen percent (183 spaces) of all on-street parking spaces are located along Orange Avenue. Twelve percent of metered spaces are located on Isabella Avenue. One-third of all metered spaces are within one block of the intersection of Orange Avenue and Tenth Street.



Figure VIII-10 On-Street Parking Inventory Before 6 PM

Off-Street Parking. Within the study area there are 1,432 total off-street parking spaces available to customers and employees of commercial uses (Figure VIII-11). Of these, 204 spaces are in lots with limited hours. These lots include the Bank of America parking garage (block 13), an office lot (block 14), and a commercial lot (block 13). On weekdays, these lots are not available to the general public after 6:00 pm. On weekends, 92 of the spaces are not available at all (office lot in block 14), 99 are not available after 3:00 pm (Bank of America garage) and 13 are not available after 6:00 pm (commercial lot in block 13). Figure VIII-11 shows the off-street parking spaces for each block within the study area.

Figure VIII-11 Off-Street Parking Spaces

Table VIII-1 shows on- and off-street parking spaces within a subset of the study area; Figure VIII-12 shows the Block ID numbers referred to in the table.



Figure VIII-12 Block ID numbers

 

Table VIII-1 – Off-Street Parking Spaces*

Block ID

Existing Off-Street Parking Spaces*

Existing On-Street Parking Spaces

Total Parking Spaces

2

57

31

88

3

75

46

121

4

185

54

239

7

117

29

146

8

46

29

75

9

68

30

98

10

83

33

116

11

14

87

101

12

6

29

35

13

177

35

212

16

98

55

153

18

91

40

131

19

26

85

111

20

15

80

95

21

0

38

38

TOTAL

1,058

701

1,759

* Does not include entire parking study area.

F.2.    Parking Utilization

Parking utilization gives the proportion of cars parked compared to the total number of parking spaces available in a specified area. On-street parking is generally considered “optimal” when 85 percent of the available parking spaces are occupied at any given time. This rate ensures that a parking space is almost always available for arriving cars, but that all other spaces are occupied. Once utilization exceeds 85 percent, parking becomes progressively more difficult to find. Areas can exceed 100 percent utilization when multiple vehicles are parked in a space intended to fit only one car, when vehicles are parked illegally, or when vehicles are double-parked.

During weekdays, on-street parking in the study area is consistently heavy, with the highest overall demand at lunchtime (81 percent of spaces occupied) and the lowest between 5:00 pm and 6:00 pm (66 percent of spaces occupied).

Overall, parking is impacted in the commercial core of Coronado, but the extent was rarely severe during the periods surveyed. For example, although parking along most street segments in the Southeast sub-area were fully or over-subscribed, parking was still available along nearby streets.

On weekends, overall demand for on-street parking is even more constant than on weekdays, with a tight range of 68-76 percent utilization. Parking utilization in the Southeast sub-area is highest, especially for the two meal-time periods: 12:00 – 2:00 pm and 6:00 – 8:00 pm.

F.3.    Future Demand

Coronado’s commercial areas are virtually “built out” but some redevelopment of underutilized lots, expansion of existing businesses, or tenant changes are likely to occur, resulting in the need for more parking. Keyser Marston’s Market Study for Downtown Coronado (June 2002) notes that the type of businesses with the strongest potential to succeed include restaurants, one-of-a-kind specialty retailers, upscale boutique retailers, and specialty food outlets.

The additional parking demand that would be generated by any new development or redevelopment will be subject to the parking requirements of this Specific Plan.

Factors which contribute to Coronado’s parking situation are:

a.    Downtown Coronado’s relatively small storefronts, combined with its pedestrian-friendly character, effectively create an environment where people park in one place and patronize several businesses within a couple blocks instead of parking separately for each destination.

b.    Different commercial uses have different peak demand times, such as offices from 8:00 am to 5:00 pm, restaurants during lunch, and the live theater during the evening. Because of this, peak demand is spread out throughout the day, instead of occurring at one time.

F.4.    Parking Recommendations

The study of parking utilization in Coronado confirms that much of the commercial core of this city is “parking impacted,” meaning that demand outstrips supply. The situation is especially pronounced in the Central and Southeast sub-areas, with the Southeast portion showing the greatest demand during the day as well as additional evening impacts. The North section is also impacted, but in a much more concentrated manner, with parking always available near impacted areas. Given the nature of potential development/ redevelopment in each of the three sub-areas, the following strategies are recommended for ensuring minimal parking impacts:

a.    Encourage large developments in the Specific Plan area to provide more off-street parking than is required.

b.    As a short-term strategy to increase parking in the Southeast sub-area, explore options to lease or assume liability for public parking in existing private facilities during those hours for which those facilities are closed.

c.    Ensure that an adequate number of metered spaces on Orange Avenue are designated for relatively short-term parking (30 minutes or one hour maximum), in order to best support resident access to local businesses.

d.    Revise the Parking Ordinance so that parking requirements are based solely on square footage; parking requirements based on number of employees or number of seats should be eliminated.

Chapter IX
INFRASTRUCTURE
A. INTRODUCTION
Utility service infrastructure such as water, wastewater, and storm drainage facilities are essential services and allow for the orderly growth and redevelopment of a community.

Per the City’s 1986 General Plan, service infrastructure for City of Coronado has been found satisfactory to accommodate the General Plan land uses and intensity of use. The Specific Plan area is largely built out and the Specific Plan does not increase residential density or commercial floor area nor does it intensify the land uses set out in the General Plan or the Zoning Ordinance; therefore, Coronado’s existing infrastructure framework is generally considered adequate to service the Specific Plan land uses.

For informational purposes these facilities are briefly discussed in this section of the Specific Plan.

B. WATER SERVICE
The City of Coronado obtains its domestic water from the California-American Water Company (the Company), whose primary supplier is the City of San Diego. The San Diego County Water Authority (CWA) supplies approximately 90 percent of San Diego’s water, imported from the Colorado River and the California Water Project, while the remaining 10 percent of the raw water supply comes from local reservoir systems owned and operated by the City of San Diego.

The Company service boundaries include the entire City of Coronado. Potable water is supplied by two trunk lines – one is a 24-inch transbay pipeline from San Diego that enters Coronado at First Street and A Avenue at the northeast end of the City, while the other is a 16-inch main that comes up the Strand from Imperial Beach. Additionally, a second 24-inch line under the bay from San Diego supplies North Island with water. The two 24-inch trunk lines are inter-connected for backup supply in the case of an emergency or other event that would cause one of the trunk lines to be out of service.

Since a facilities improvement program was completed in 1992, Coronado’s distribution system is free of main and service leaks, provides excellent water pressure, and is well maintained. The contract between the Company and the City of San Diego ensures that the Company has the right to purchase unlimited amounts of water for an indefinite period of time.

The 1986 Coronado General Plan Land Use Element states that the “water system is in excellent condition with no major deficiencies” and that “the overall flow rates and pressure are sufficient to accommodate the future growth projections for the community.” This Specific Plan does not propose any land use changes different from the General Plan land uses, which are also identical to the City’s zoning.

To conserve water, new development and redevelopment will comply with the applicable requirements of City of Coronado Municipal Code’s Title 64: Water Conservation. The section addresses low flow fixtures for residential development and low volume drip or bubble emitters for outside irrigation.

C. WASTEWATER SERVICE
The Specific Plan area lies entirely within the “Village” wastewater service area,” which is operated and maintained by City of Coronado’s Department of Public Services. Wastewater in the City flows northbound through gravity sewers from the Coronado Cays into the Village, and then flows by gravity and force to the Transbay Sewage Pump Station at the Old Ferry Landing. The Transbay Pump Station transfers all the liquid sanitary waste collected in the City through a 24-inch force main under San Diego Bay to the City of San Diego’s Point Loma Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP), where it is treated and then discharged through an ocean outfall located two miles offshore. Figure IX-1 shows wastewater conveyance pipes ten inches and larger within the Specific Plan area and its near vicinity.

The 1986 Coronado General Plan Land Use Element states that the “sanitary system is in good overall condition and of adequate capacity to serve the projected population and development growth anticipated over the next several years” and also states that the entire system should serve for at least the next 40 years based upon current information.”

City of Coronado’s Sewer Master Plan (Poutney & Associates, Inc. 2000) indicates that the Transbay Pump Station is at its current capacity, which is 12.1 million gallons per day (MGD), if certain scenarios are assumed regarding peak flows coming from other pump stations in Coronado. The 2000 Sewer Master Plan considered existing and future sewage flows based on existing land uses and future land uses on vacant lots and parking lots, based on existing zoning.

This Specific Plan does not propose any land use changes different from the General Plan land uses, which are also identical to the City’s zoning.

D. STORM DRAINAGE
Due to Coronado’s location and its relatively flat topography, most storm water runoff flows by gravity into either the Pacific Ocean or San Diego Bay. The average rainfall in the City is 8.1 inches. Localized street and residential and commercial flooding occurs approximately two to four times per year with moderately heavy rainfall in less than 10-year frequency storms.

City of Coronado’s Department of Public Services is responsible for the maintenance and operation of the storm drainage system within the City. Portions of the Specific Plan Area lie within the following storm drainage basins, as seen in Figure IX-2:

1.    First Street Storm Drain

2.    North Orange Storm Drain (entirely within the Specific Plan area)

3.    A Avenue Storm Drain

4.    Palm Avenue Storm Drain

5.    McCain Boulevard Storm Drain

6.    G Avenue Storm Drain

7.    Orange Avenue Storm Drain (encompassing a significant portion of the Specific Plan area)

8.    Isabella Avenue Storm Drain

9.    C Avenue Storm Drain

10.    Churchill-Dana Storm Drain

Storm drainage system pipes 18 inches and larger within the Specific Plan area and its near vicinity and storm water discharge points are shown on Figure IX-3.

According to the City’s adopted Master Plan of Drainage (Berryman & Stephenson, Inc. 1980), six of the Storm Drain subareas that are part of the Specific Plan area are identified as having major drainage defiencies:

1.    First Street Storm Drain

2.    A Avenue Storm Drain

3.    McCain Boulevard Storm Drain

4.    G Avenue Storm Drain

5.    Orange Avenue Storm Drain (encompassing a significant portion of the Specific Plan area)

6.    Isabella Avenue Storm Drain

The City’s Master Environmental Assessment (Harland Bartholomew & Associates, 1995) indicates that several recommended improvements have occurred or are proposed.

Private site development within the Specific Plan area would be designed to discharge into an approved storm drainage system as determined appropriate at the time of individual permitting. Individual projects must comply with Regional Water Quality Control Board Standards for discharge and pollutant runoff mitigation. All public right-of-way projects would need to be designed compatibly with existing and planned drainage systems and infrastructure.



Figure IX-1 Wastewater System



Figure IX-2 Storm Drainage Subareas



Figure IX-3 Storm Drainage System

 

E. SOLID WASTE
Solid waste is provided by the City of Coronado through a private waste collection service. It was estimated that the City disposes of approximately 18,000 tons of solid waste annually (Master Environmental Assessment, Harland Bartholomew & Associates, 1995.) Solid waste is disposed at the Otay landfill in the City of Chula Vista.

New development and redevelopment within the Specific Plan area should be conditioned to reduce solid waste generation by participating in available commercial and residential recycling programs.

In accordance with the provisions of the California Administrative Code, the design of any new, remodeled or expanded building or complex of buildings shall make provision for adequate storage and handling facilities which will accommodate the solid waste loading anticipated and which will allow for efficient and safe waste removal or collection. The design shall demonstrate that it includes the required provisions for storage capabilities and access to waste containers. Every new location for waste receptacles shall be screened by a wall or fence so that the receptacles are not visible from any adjacent street or property. (CAC Section 17313)

F. ENERGY
The City of Coronado obtains its energy supply of natural gas and electricity from the San Diego Gas & Electric Company (SDG&E.) SDG&E’s local substation has a capacity of approximately 90 MVA of firm capacity, with the ability to increase to 120 MVA. Natural gas is supplied to the City by two transbay gas mains. SDG&E is able to meet existing demands and per the Master Environmental Assessment (Harland Bartholomew & Associates, 1995) was analyzing the feasibility of another gas feeder system to improve service levels.

The City General Plan’s Conservation Element addresses the strategies for regional and local energy conservation and states that “the City Council has approved a number of...programs/policies that will reduce...energy consumption” and cites lack of an alternative efficient energy infrastructure.

The Specific Plan continues to promote and enhance the existing pattern of dense shopping and employment uses very close to residential areas, which conserves energy because people can use alternative modes of transportation, such as walking, bicycling, and the shuttle bus.

New development and redevelopment within the Specific Plan area are encouraged to use energy efficient designs and materials when possible, and to take advantage of any City programs to conserve energy.

APPENDIX 1
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
•    Alterations: Interior or exterior changes to a building that do not result in additional floor area.

•    Appurtenances: An incidental right attached to a principal property right and passing in possession with it, or an accessory object.

•    Automobile Repair Facility: An establishment used primarily for the repair and maintenance of automobiles, motorcycles, or light trucks, including but not limited to body, fender, muffler or upholstery work, oil change and lubrication, tire service and sales, or the installation of radios, car alarms, or stereo equipment.

•    Automotive Parts and Accessory Store: Establishments primarily engaged in retailing new, used, and/or rebuilt automotive parts and accessories or establishments primarily engaged in retailing and installing automotive accessories.

•    Awnings: Coverings of sidewalks projecting from above first floor doors and windows of buildings. Foldable fabric awnings are preferred. Colors should lie in the range of hues described in the Design Criteria. Individual awnings over upper floor windows are also encouraged.

•    Bay Width: The linear street front width of a window or series of windows forming a storefront bay.

•    Bulkhead: The space located between the pavement/sidewalk and the bottom of a traditional storefront.

•    Cabinet or Can Sign: A cabinet or can sign has a plastic (or other type of translucent) face(s) that are internally illuminated by fluorescent lamps. The faces are retained to a metal frame, usually extruded aluminum. These are shaped like a box to enclose the illumination so that it shines through the translucent portions of the signs copy panel(s). Logo boxes are not considered cabinet signs.

•    Channel Letter Signs: Individual sign letters that are three-dimensional, hollow, typically internally illuminated and used as wall signs on the corresponding business. The back of a standard channel letter is aluminum. The letter face is a colored plexiglass to diffuse the glow of the neon tubes beneath. A Reverse Channel letter sign has an aluminum face with a back made of clear lexan. The letter is typically mounted 1-1/2" to 2" off the mounting surface, which allows the neon within to cast a soft outline glow on the wall behind it. This is ideal for situations where a softer, more subdued lighting effect is desired.

•    Coffeehouse: A retail food establishment whose primary business is the sale of coffee, or other beverages (non-alcoholic). Food service, such as the sale of baked or deli goods, is secondary.

•    Continuity: Continuity of the general street facade implies that the context of Coronado’s streetscape (see below) should be preserved without the addition of inappropriate configurations. Continuity of the community’s qualities of historical buildings and natural environment implies that these qualities should be respected and used as design inspiration sources, not for slavish imitation.

•    Convenience Store: An establishment primarily engaged in retailing a limited line of goods that generally include milk, bread, soda, and snacks.

•    Corner “Cut-offs”: A 45 degree angle bisecting a right angle of a building.

•    Cornice: Projecting molding along the top, or roofline, of a building.

•    Downtown Commercial Area: Generally the Orange Avenue Corridor from Adella Avenue to Eighth Avenue.

•    Edge Condition: A distinct transition between the end of one area and the beginning of another.

•    Entertainment Uses: Cinemas, live (non-adult) theatres, video rentals, etc.

•    Facade: The major viewable side of the building facing the street; its principal elevation, the one seen and experienced by most people.

•    Fenestration: Specifically, the placing and pattern of the windows in a building. Generally, the placing and pattern of all openings in a building. Discussed under “Windows, Doors and Entrances.”

•    Formed or Injection Molded Signs: These signs are typically made of a cotton-based plastic and are non-illuminated, three-dimensional letters used as a wall sign.

•    Formula Fast Food Restaurant: Any “Fast food restaurant” having both of the following characteristics: (a) uses trademark, logo, service mark or other mutually identifying name or symbol that is shared by fifteen or more restaurants; and (b) serves a prescribed (“formula”) menu that is substantially the same as fifteen or more restaurants that shares its trademark, logo, service mark or other mutually identifying name or symbol.

•    Formula Business: Any type of commercial business establishment that uses a trademark, logo, service mark or other mutually identifying name or symbol that is shared by fifteen or more commercial businesses (other than a “formula fast food restaurant”) and which maintains any standardized (“formula”) array of services and/or merchandise, decor, business method, architecture, layout, uniform, or similar, standardized feature.

•    Hardscape: Pertains to street furnishings and pedestrian amenities as well as other paving treatment that make up the street scene.

•    Hardware Store: An establishment primarily engaged in retailing a general line of new hardware items, such as tools and builders’ hardware.

•    Health Care Facility: Medical facilities including medical practitioner offices, freestanding surgery, optometry, dental/orthodontic, chiropractic, and other medical clinics.

•    Home Improvement Center: An establishment primarily engaged in retailing a general line of new home repair and improvement materials and supplies, such as lumber, plumbing goods, electrical goods, tools, housewares, hardware, and lawn and garden supplies, with no one merchandise line predominating.

•    Injected Molded Signs: Any sign constructed of plastic or fiberglass produced by a mold process.

•    Internet Café: A business with a series of computer terminals with Internet or game access that sells use time in increments to the public.

•    Light Assembly: A facility whose primary use is assembling items which do not create any danger to health and safety in surrounding areas, which do not create offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, heat or glare, and which by reason of high value in relation to size and weight of product or merchandise handled, does not create large volumes of truck traffic.

•    Lighting, Night-time: Evening illumination of downtown buildings and areas, both public and private. Private evening lighting should follow the tone and precepts of the Criteria for an environment that is cordial, welcoming, and even quietly exciting, but not chaotic or raucous.

•    Mansard Roof: A mansard roof in contemporary commercial architecture is actually not a roof at all. A mansard is typically a single sloped structure “tacked on” to the edge of a flat roof to give the appearance of a traditional roof or to hide the flat roof and provide additional space for signs.

•    Masonry: Brickwork.

•    Massing: (See Configurations.) The bulk and three-dimensional space occupied by buildings and their neighbors.

•    Microbrewery: Any use where the square footage for brewing operations is equal to or greater than forty percent of the total business square footage.

•    Minor Repairs (Light Assembly): Bicycle assembly, simple auto repair and services, cabinet making, etc.

•    Mixed Use Development: The development of a site in an integrated, compatible and comprehensively planned manner with two or more different land uses, only one of which would normally not be permitted in the underlying zone. (Ord. 1981)

•    Monolithic: Refers to a building’s scale being bulky, boxy, and/or too large for its context.

•    Open Space: The spaces between, behind, and on upper levels of buildings that can be used to enhance people’s use and introduce elements of the natural landscape into the built environment.

•    Optical Goods Stores: Establishments primarily engaged in one or more of the following: (1) retailing and fitting prescription eyeglasses and contact lenses; (2) retailing prescription eyeglasses in combination with the grinding of lenses to order on the premises; and (3) selling nonprescription eyeglasses.

•    Paseos: A walkway that serves as a connector between parking facilities, commercial street frontage, and other popular destinations. Paseos are intended for use by the general public and may be either publicly or privately owned and maintained.

•    Pavers: Decorative material (such as brickwork, stone, stamped concrete or other elements) that forms a firm level surface for travel, in accessory to traditional street paving material.

•    Permitted Use: A use permitted by right within the designated land use classification. These uses must obtain a business license and a certificate of occupancy prior to commencement of the use.

•    Plant Materials: The range of natural vegetation that can be used to enhance open spaces and the streetscape. Plant materials native to, or long since introduced to this region should be used. The official flower of Coronado is the Crown of Bohemia Hibiscus.

•    Prohibited: A use that is not permitted within the designated land use classification.

•    Proprietary Design: Used herein to cite those facades, parts of buildings, complete buildings, and signs and symbols that are fabricated elsewhere, generally as part of the corporate image of products and businesses, and erected in many communities usually with scant regard for their environmental, historic, cultural or social appropriateness.

•    Recessed Entry: An entryway that is inset from the rest of the building’s façade, increasing the distance between the right-of-way and the structure’s entry.

•    Renovation: Restoring, repair, remodeling and/or recycling of an existing building and its facade. The Design Criteria apply with special force to the facades and open spaces of these buildings.

•    Rhythm: Combination of a number of elements that produce the overall impact of the streetscape. They include relationships of building openings, rooflines, colors, awnings & trellises, open spaces, and the public precincts of the streets and sidewalks. When designed in context with existing neighbors, buildings can evoke interesting rhythms, modulated or syncopated in turn. When a design is out of context, it can produce discordant and unsettling rhythms.

•    Sight Triangle Requirements: In the case of corner lots in the Specific Plan area, the sight triangle refers to an area created by a line connecting points along the street curb lines which are established 50 feet in distance from the intersection of such curb lines at the corner of a block.

•    Special Effects: The “extras” in the public and private environment that can make a community livelier and more pleasurable. They include fountains and other uses of water; murals, sculpture and other public and private art works; kiosks, flower stalls, and temporary displays of interest to the community. Plazas, courts and other places to move in and congregate can be powerful special effects that make a downtown memorable.

•    Special Qualities, Coronado’s: Coronado is a community enriched by its setting of beach and water and lush greenery; notable in its colorful history; resplendent in a rich variety of architectural styles; and fortunate in a continually concerned and involved citizenry. The designer who appreciates and utilizes all these qualities will enhance his or her creativity; the one who ignores or degrades them will encounter opposition and disdain.

•    Street Wall: The edges created by buildings and landscaping that enclose the street and create space.

•    Streetscape: The confluence in visual and sensory experience of the observer of all the manmade and natural aspects of the environment in the urban scene. Includes street furniture, public signing, surfaces and textures and colors of public and private elements, landscaping; indeed, all the design elements treated in these Criteria.

•    Symbols: Three dimensional, bas relief or intaglio objects that can adorn buildings to proclaim products, services, or simply act as decoration.

•    Transom: The horizontal division or crossbar in a window. A window opening above a door.

•    Trellises: Coverings for pedestrian passageways and courtyard areas and arcades. Can be of wood or metal. Appropriate for supporting signs, symbols, banners, flags, and vines.

•    Uptown Commercial Area: The approximate area encompassed by the 100 block of Orange Avenue and the two blocks located immediately east, between Orange Avenue and B Street.

APPENDIX 2
LIST OF LOCATIONS FOR PHOTOGRAPHS FOUND IN THE ORANGE AVENUE CORRIDOR SPECIFIC PLAN
 

CITY OF CORONADO

Addresses for Photographs Shown in Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan

Photo

Name

Address

1

6-unit Condominium

226-238 Orange Ave

2

Spreckels Park

600-700 Orange Ave

3

Public Library

640 Orange Ave

4

Village Theater

1142 Orange Ave

5

Landscaped Median

 

6

On-street Parking

 

7

Lambs Players Theatre

1142 Orange Ave

8

Adella Pedestrian Plaza

Orange Ave and Adella Intersection

9

Tent City Restaurant

1100 Orange Ave

10

Clayton’s Coffee Shop

979 Orange Ave

11

Beach Grill & Deli

1015 Orange Ave

12

Coronado Bakery

1206 Orange Ave

13

Commercial Storefronts

800-block Orange Ave (odd side)

14

Bull Shirt

1007 Orange Ave

15

Anderson Building

900-block Orange Ave (even side)

16

Spreckels Building

1122-1190 Orange Ave

17

Coronado Bakery

1206 Orange Ave

18

Bull Shirt

1007 Orange Ave

19

Spreckels Building

1122-1190 Orange Ave

20

El Cordova shops

1333 Orange Ave

21

La Avenida Complex

1301 Orange Ave

22

Adella Pedestrian Plaza

Orange Ave and Adella Intersection

23

El Cordova Shops

1333 Orange Ave

24

Light Fixture

 

25

Ground Level Walkway Lighting

 

26

Spreckels Building

1122-1190 Orange Ave

27

La Avenida Complex

1301 Orange Ave

28

Tent City

1100 Orange Ave

29

Tomaso’s Ristorante

1309 Orange Ave

30

Sydney’s

1349 “B” Orange Ave

31

Village Hardware

949 Orange Ave

32

Other Municipality

 

33

The Brigantine Restaurant

1333 Orange Ave

34

In Good Taste

1146 Orange Ave

35

Coronado Bakery – Menu Board

1206 Orange Ave

36

Rhinoceros Café & Grill – Menu Board

1166 Orange Ave

37

Adella Pedestrian Plaza

Orange Ave and Adella Intersection

38

El Cordova Complex

Orange Ave and Adella Intersection

39

Adella Pedestrian Plaza

Orange Ave and Adella Intersection

40

 

 

41

El Cordova Complex

Orange Ave and Adella Intersection

42

The Brigantine Restaurant

1333 Orange Ave

43

The Brigantine Restaurant

1333 Orange Ave

44

La Avenida Complex

1301 Orange Ave

45

El Cordova Hotel

1351 Orange Ave

46

El Cordova Signage/Shops

Orange and Adella Intersection

47

Coronado Brewing Co.

170 Orange Ave

48

Coronado Brewing Co.

170 Orange Ave

49

Spreckels Building

1122-1190 Orange Ave

50

Spreckels Building

1122-1190 Orange Ave

51

Baywalk Neighborhood Shops

1106 1st St

52

Glorietta Bay Inn

1630 Glorietta Blvd

53

Glorietta Bay Inn

1630 Glorietta Blvd

54

Coronado Police Station

700 Orange Ave

55

3-unit condominium

1005-1009 Eighth St

56

3-unit condominium

1005-1009 Eighth St

57

8-unit condominium

1106-1112 Second St

58

3-unit condominium

175 D Avenue

59

Monterey Apartment Complex

850 D Avenue

60

4-unit condominium

305 D Avenue

61

Monterey Apartment Complex

850 D Avenue

62

8-unit condominium

1106-1112 Second St

63

Monterey Apartment Complex

850 D Avenue

64

3-unit condominium

1005-1009 Eighth St

65

Rothbury Manor

924 Tenth St

66

Casa de Anza

904 Ninth St

67

3-unit condominium

717 C Avenue

68

3-unit condominium

175 D Avenue

69

3-unit condominium

1005-1009 Eighth St

70

8-unit condominium

1106-1112 Second St

71

6-unit condominium

729 Orange Ave

72

Coronado Entry Sign

Third St

APPENDIX 3
GENERAL PLAN CONSISTENCY ANALYSIS
A.2.    General Plan Consistency Analysis

California law requires a Specific Plan to be consistent with the General Plan of the adopting locality. To ensure consistency with the General Plan, a review was done of the existing City of Coronado General Plan for any relevant goals and policies. This review revealed the Specific Plan and the General Plan to be complementary and consistent.

California Government Code Section 65450-65553 allows for the adoption and administration of Specific Plans as an implementation tool for elements contained in a jurisdiction’s General Plan. State law requires that Specific Plans must demonstrate consistency with goals, objectives, policies and programs of a jurisdiction’s General Plan. To ensure that the Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan is consistent with City of Coronado’s General Plan, a thorough review was undertaken. The following section provides analysis of applicable General Plan goals and provides discussion regarding consistency with the Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan. Where there are inconsistencies, the General Plan will need to be amended. The Local Coastal Program (LCP) Land Use Plan will also need to be amended.

This section analyzes the goals and policies of the City’s General Plan that are most relevant to the Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan area. Goals and policies in the General Plan that are not applicable to the Specific Plan were not included. Below each of the identified goals and policies is a brief discussion of the consistency of the Specific Plan with the City’s General Plan (shown in italics.)

Community Design Element

Goals and policies identified in the Community Design Element that relate to the Specific Plan include:

Design Goal 2 – To maintain and enhance vibrant commercial districts that are in scale with the remainder of the community, and that facilitate and encourage pedestrian usage.

Design Goal 4 – To encourage preservation of the City’s historic and architecturally significant structures.

Design Goal 5 – To assure that adequate emphasis is placed on community design/project design efforts in order to improve the quality of new development in the City; and

Design Goal 6 – To provide developers, where appropriate, with adequate design criteria and feedback.

Also in the General Plan is a subsection that discusses community design principles, titled “Scale/Configurations /Continuity/ Rhythm/Land Use.” The following list summarizes those principles:

•    Conserve and continue Coronado’s present human-scale, pedestrian-oriented, intimately textured environment.

•    By and large, the scale of downtown should remain one and two stories, with appropriate higher accent structures at corners.

•    The rhythm of the street as provided by 20-30 feet wide structures and storefronts must be preserved, and larger expanses of façade should be broken up to conform to this rhythm.

•    A variety of building configurations and rooflines is essential to respect the village-like scale.

•    Achieve a continuity of the good qualities that already exist in Coronado and not replace them with inappropriate fad designs.

•    Create a pedestrian environment that is safe, inviting, and has vitality.

•    Reduce the visual bulk of multi-family development through height, setback, structural coverage, floor area and façade restrictions.

•    Use open spaces between and behind buildings to improve the street environment.

•    Encourage off-the-sidewalk indentations and upper floor setbacks for outdoor uses.

•    Develop outdoor community gathering places downtown.

•    On-site parking should be accessed when possible from the alleys or secondary streets.

•    Commercial development should be encouraged to provide required parking at the rear or beneath the project.

•    Drive-in automobile oriented uses should be discouraged from locating on Orange Avenue.

Specific Plan Consistency with General Plan: The Specific Plan’s goals and objectives are consistent with the General Plan. The Plan’s development standards, design standards and design criteria directly address appropriate scale and pedestrian enhancements. Design criteria addresses improvements to older or historic structures, as well as new development. Since developers of new projects must adhere to the design standards, development standards and design criteria in the Plan, the quality of new development in the Specific Plan area is improved. Design criteria is presented in a user-friendly manner, with many photographs and diagrams. Furthermore, the design criteria directly addresses and incorporates the intent of the community design principles discussed in the General Plan.

Land Use Element

Goals and policies identified in the Land Use Element that relate to the Specific Plan include:

Land Use Goal 3 – That the residential character and village ambiance of the City should be maintained and enhanced.

Also in the General Plan is a subsection that discusses each land use designation. The following list is a summary of that discussion which is relevant to the Specific Plan’s land uses:

•    Land uses anticipated in the Central Commercial zone are customary downtown type facilities for comparison shopping, convenience and personal facilities, and space for offices.

•    Office spaces in the Central Commercial zone should include specific office structures and office use over street level commercial facilities.

•    Land uses in the Limited Commercial zone are intended primarily for convenience centers with land uses customarily located within a short distance of the residential areas they serve.

•    Tradesmen may locate in the Limited Commercial zone; however, service facilities requiring outdoor storage and trading activities and light repair shops of a semi-industrial nature, are only permitted under controlled conditions with a SUP.

Specific Plan Consistency with General Plan: The Specific Plan’s goals and objectives are consistent with the General Plan’s goals and objectives. The Specific Plan combines the Central Commercial and Limited Commercial Zones into one Commercial Zone, but remains consistent with the listed discussion items of the General Plan. The Specific Plan does not propose changes in existing land use, i.e., commercial, multiple family residential, civic use, open space, nor does it propose any increased intensity in use.

Parking Element

Goals and policies identified in the Parking Element that relate to the Specific Plan include:

Parking Goal 1 – To require that new development or redevelopment provide adequate parking facilities in a functional and unobtrusive manner;

Parking Goal 6 – To minimize the amount of City land area utilized solely for parking purposes by encouraging the provision of underground or under building parking facilities.

Specific Plan Consistency with General Plan: The Specific Plan’s goals and objectives are consistent with the General Plan’s goals and objectives. The Specific Plan’s design criteria requires new development to minimize curb cuts and utilize side street and alley access for parking areas whenever possible. The Specific Plan encourages underground parking in the Commercial Zone through a lower parking requirement ratio (parking space per for building square footage) than if surface parking is used.

Circulation Element

The following goal from the General Plan dealing with circulation is consistent with and supported by the DSPC.

Circulation Goal 7 – Minimize pedestrian / bicycle / motor vehicle conflict points within the system.

Specific Plan Consistency with General Plan: The Specific Plan does not encourage bicycle or pedestrian usage in the alleys, due to their functional nature and to limit the potential for bicyclist/vehicle conflicts, especially where alleys intersect with streets.

Conclusion

The goals and objectives of the Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan are consistent with those of the City of Coronado General Plan. Establishment of development standards, design standards and design criteria within the Specific Plan combine to effectively implement a variety of goals and policies of the General Plan. The Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan is consistent with the General Plan.

APPENDIX 4
MARKET STUDY SUMMARY
As part of the Orange Avenue Corridor Specific Plan effort (formerly called Downtown Specific Plan), a Market Study with a demographic overview and evaluation of current conditions for commercial, residential, and hotel land uses within and around the Specific Plan area was prepared by Keyser Marston Associates (June 2002.) The reader is encouraged to read the entire Market Demand Study on file in the Community Development Department at City Hall. The following is a summary of the Market Demand Study.

MARKET OVERVIEW

Introduction

This section identifies Coronado’s demographic trends; provides an overview of market conditions for retail, residential, office, and lodging; and includes KMA’s key observations on real estate market conditions; the City’s assets and constraints; and main factors affecting various land uses. The conclusions were reached through a process of interaction with stakeholders, City staff, and Navy service providers as well as through research and analysis of market conditions and economic trends.

Demographic Overview

Coronado has approximately 24,500 residents -- one-third are military personnel (8,100 persons) and two-thirds are civilians (16,400 persons.) Coronado’s overall demographic characteristics reflect an affluent non-ethnic community with high proportions of seniors/retirees and youthful military personnel. The following bullet points summarize demographic characteristics of Coronado’s combined military and civilian population, unless otherwise indicated.

•    Population and Income

•    

Population growth declined slightly between 1990 and 2002 (-0.61%).

•    

Over the next five years, population growth is expected to be relatively static (0.76% annually), adding about 950 persons by 2007.

•    

Household incomes are strong -- approximately 69% of households have yearly incomes more than $50,000 and roughly 51% have incomes more than $75,000.

•    

Per capita income (PCI) in 2002 was estimated at approximately $40,000, which is much higher than City of San Diego ($27,500) or the County ($26,400).

•    

Coronado’s median household income in Coronado ($76,900) far outpaces the City ($54,833) and County ($56,039.)

•    

If looking only at civilian census tracts, Coronado’s PCI rises by more than $11,000 to approximately $51,300, equating to an annual spending potential of $842 million. Median household income increases to nearly $81,000.

•    Age

Coronado is a mature community with many Seniors, and for the most part, Coronado’s age distribution is similar to age distributions in the City of San Diego and the County of San Diego. Notable exceptions include:

•    

Coronado has a lesser share of residents in the Under 20 Years age group, 20.5%, as compared with the City and County of San Diego at 27.3% and 28.7%, respectively.

•    

Coronado’s share of 20-24 Year olds is much higher than the City of San Diego’s share and nearly double that of the County of San Diego. This is attributable to the large proportion of the military population within this age category.

•    

Coronado has a higher proportion of seniors, aged 60 and above. This age segment represents nearly 20% of the City’s population, at least 5% higher than metropolitan or regional geographies.

•    Ethnicity

The resident population in Coronado is less ethnically diverse than in the City/County of San Diego. Whites are the predominant ethnic group comprising 83.8% of the population. Other Ethnicities, 7.1%; African Americans, 5.2%; and Asians, 4.0%. Approximately 10.3% indicate Hispanic heritage.

Many of these statistics change dramatically when the military census tracts are removed, as detailed below:

•    

Coronado’s civilian population becomes more elderly and even less ethnically diverse.

•    

The median age rises from 34 years to 46 years.

•    

The proportion of residents aged 20 to 24 years falls from 15.9% to just 3.6%.

•    

The proportion of residents aged 45 and over increases from 35.3% to 51.4%.

•    

The 60 and Over age category jumps from 19.1% of the population to 28.4%.

•    

The proportion of ethnic residents declines from 16.3% to 6.90% and the percentage of Whites rises from 83.8% to 93.2%.

Retail Market Overview

This section describes Coronado’s Commercial Zone, identifies year 2000 trends in retail sales (the most recent year for which complete data is available), and provides key retail findings and recommendations.

•    Retail Market Districts

The retail concentration along the Orange Avenue Corridor is segmented into two main districts, north of Second Street and south of Eighth Street. The intervening blocks from Second Street to Eighth Street are dominated by dense rental housing, condominiums, and small hotels/motels.

North Commercial Area. The area north of Second St. is primarily restaurant anchored, including eating and drinking establishments and a grocery store. The north area’s retail mix includes approximately 39,000 SF of tourist-serving uses located at Coronado Ferry Landing, a tourist-oriented specialty retail center. Although the Ferry Landing is outside the Specific Plan boundary, its size and proximity influence the Specific Plan area.



Downtown Commercial Area. Most of the Plan area’s retail space is located along Orange Avenue, south of Eighth St. extending to the Hotel Del Coronado. The area is comprised of dense storefronts, generally narrow and deep in configuration, occupied by local-serving retail/commercial users. The Downtown retail segment is dominated by the following categories:



•    

Eating Places

•    

Personal Services

•    

Business Services

•    

Tourist Serving

The true core of the Coronado’s retail market lies in the area between Tenth St. and the Hotel Del Coronado. This area is characterized by a curving streetscape accented by unique architecture with historic character. A number of small retail centers, totaling more than 94,000 SF of retail space, are located on Orange Avenue between the southern terminus of C Avenue and the Hotel Del Coronado. The retail mix in the core is similar to that found throughout the remainder of the Orange Avenue corridor but introduces modest amounts of apparel, books, housewares, jewelry, and specialty retail shops.

The retail market is performing well at the current time. Lease rates are strong and vacancy is low throughout Downtown. However, the retail mix is slanted toward eating and drinking and business/personal service uses. Other retail categories are not well represented Downtown. Local residents appear willing to support business and personal service providers but exhibit price sensitivity on purchases of general merchandise and comparison goods, preferring to shop outside the City for these items.

•    Retail Sales Trends

It is possible to estimate total retail sales for a given retail category based on the city’s population and the income characteristics and expenditure patterns in the region. Import of retail sales is assumed to occur when the actual level of retail sales in a given category exceeds potential retail expenditure. When potential retail expenditures exceed actual sales, export is evidenced. In such cases, it is assumed that Coronado residents are exporting a portion of their expenditure potential to other jurisdictions.

In 2000, Coronado’s retail sales potential amounted to approximately $269.5 million in the retail categories detailed below. Actual sales in 2000 were $95.6 million, leading to the conclusion that Coronado exported sales of approximately $173.9 million in 2000. Coronado exports sales in each retail category, excepting the Eating and Drinking category. Sales in the Eating and Drinking Category exceeded estimated expenditure in Coronado, totaling 135% of potential. This is due largely to the City’s strong tourism base.

The Specific Plan area should capitalize on its existing tourist base and strive to create a unique retail destination featuring upscale retailers and goods that appeals to both residents and visitors. The types of tenants representing the strongest potential to succeed in the Specific Plan area include restaurants; one-of-a-kind specialty retailers; upscale boutique retailers; and specialty food outlets such as Whole Foods or Trader Joes.

•    Key Retail Findings and Recommendations

•    

Currently, Coronado’s economy is in equilibrium. The City’s actions to limit/restrict the introduction of chain retailers and national credit tenants and to forego active marketing campaigns in support of the tourist industry have not adversely affected the City’s economy or property values.

•    

The City is exporting the vast majority of its retail sales potential out of the City. The most recent figures available indicate that Coronado is retaining only 35% of its sales potential. This is due in large part to the presence of the Navy Exchange at North Island Naval Air Station (NASNI) and an abundance of established discount retailers and super-regional malls on the mainland.

•    

The City’s potential for attracting a large national discount retailer or general merchandise powerhouse is limited by: (a) small population base, (b) lack of available sites, (c) lack of access/visibility to freeway arterial, and (d) strong competition from Navy Exchange.

•    

The Orange Avenue retail corridor should not attempt to compete with the Navy Exchange at North Island Naval Air Station (NASNI) to recapture General Merchandise sales. The scale of the Exchange and the deep discounts offered to active-duty and retired military personnel residing in Coronado cannot be overcome by the local business district.

•    

The City should encourage businesses that contribute to create a unique retail environment oriented to one-of-a-kind upscale retail. An objective should be to retain local merchants and attract new merchants whose uniqueness will: (a) add to downtown’s ability to offer both merchandise and ambiance that is difficult to duplicate in most shopping centers and other downtowns, (b) help to establish and maintain Downtown Coronado as a significant destination retail location, and (c) serve the retail needs of local residents.

•    

Service uses (e.g. plumbers, electricians, automotive, etc.) are not appropriate for Orange Avenue. Moreover, commercial lease rates in Downtown are unattractively high for such users. The City should seek to establish suitable locations elsewhere in the City.

•    

The Village Theater should be revived to serve as an anchor for Downtown. It is thought that the single-screen theater can be supported by the local non-military population despite the presence of first-run movies at NASNI. However, finding an operator for a single screen movie theater may be difficult and expensive.

Office Market

Coronado’s approximately 60,000 SF of office space is concentrated in the extreme southern portion of the Plan area, south of 10th Street. Slightly over 56,000 SF of office space is concentrated in three primary locations: California Plaza (33,000 SF), Eldorado Square (13,800 SF), and Coronado Plaza (9,500 SF.) Coronado’s office inventory also includes small amounts of second-story space that lacks amenities such as air conditioning, e.g., the Winchester Building and the Spreckels Building. There have been no new office buildings built in Coronado since the early 1980s when California Plaza and El Dorado Square were constructed.

Overall, the office market is healthy with relatively low vacancy throughout. There may be moderate demand for suites larger than 1,000 SF to serve tenants wishing to expand. This is evidenced in part by the instances of street level retail shop space being occupied by potential office users; however, this segment is dominated by real estate agents and financial service firms and is not considered a deep pool of prospective tenants. There is not a significant demand for new office buildings within the Plan area but the City should consider facilitating periodic infusions of office space in mixed-use buildings as warranted by market conditions.

Housing Market Overview

The majority of housing stock within the Plan area is concentrated between Second and Sixth Streets. It consists primarily of for-sale condominiums and rental properties in various multi-unit configurations. Plan area housing products vary widely with respect to age, style, density, and orientation to Orange Avenue.

There are very few detached housing units within the Plan area, however, attached housing values in the Orange Avenue corridor are strong at approximately $317/SF. The rental housing market is also quite strong and demand for units is high. According to local leasing agents, units within the Plan area are much sought after by prospective renters. Most units are one- and two-bedroom units, typically with 1 bath. Average rents for 2 BR/1 BA units range from $800 to $1,200 per month and 2 BR/ 2 BA units rent for between $1,000 and $1,300 per month. Reported vacancy within the Plan area is quoted as zero by local leasing agents. Three-bedroom units are rare and can rent for between $1,750 and $2,200 per month in proximity to the Plan area.

Lodging Market Overview

The City of Coronado is recognized as a world-class resort destination with the Hotel Del Coronado as its anchor. The majority of Coronado’s lodging properties are located along Orange Avenue or are close to the boundaries of the Plan area. According to estimates prepared by the Coronado Visitors Bureau, approximately one million visitors come to Coronado each year.

The lodging market is supported primarily by three main segments of the visitor market -- tourists, groups, and the military. The Hotel Del Coronado caters largely to groups and, to a lesser extent, tourists. The mid-market and economy lodging facilities are supported mainly by tourists and spill-over from the group market segment. The more affordable properties report that the military segment currently comprises about 50% of their business, as Coronado military installations have increased activity and personnel in relation to the events of 9/11 and ongoing overseas conflicts; however, this percentage has historically been lower.

Despite the high occupancy figures typically achieved in Coronado, the introduction of new room supply into Coronado is unlikely due to several limiting factors, including:

•    

Lack of encouragement from City government.

•    

Lack of available sites

•    

Numerous hotel projects planned for Downtown San Diego.

•    

Slow population growth.

Summary of Assets and Constraints that Affect Land Uses

This section summarizes the aspects of the Plan area and the City of Coronado that either support or constrain the market conditions affecting various land uses. The key assets and constraints are summarized as follows:

•    Assets

•    

High Incomes – Household and per capita incomes in Coronado are very strong, as compared with comparable incomes for the San Diego region. These factors indicate that Coronado residents have above-average amounts of disposable income to spend on goods and services.

•    

Strong Demand for Housing – The Plan area is surrounded by dense rental and multi-unit for-sale housing. The Orange Ave. corridor between Second St. and Seventh St. consists primarily of housing. Demand for units in the Plan area is very high and vacancy is practically non-existent with many property owners/managers maintaining lengthy waiting lists of applicants looking for Coronado housing.

•    

Access/Views of the Ocean and Bay – Coronado offers visitors and residents excellent access to both San Diego Bay and the Pacific Ocean, each within almost a “stones throw” from the other. The narrow Coronado peninsula separates the tranquil bay from the crashing surf at the white-sand Coronado Beach, recently rated as the second-best beach in the country by the TravelChannel. Views of the water and the San Diego skyline are wonderful.

•    

Hotel Del Coronado – The Hotel Del Coronado is recognized throughout the world as a landmark resort destination. Its one-of-a-kind historic architecture and location on Coronado’s white-sand beach have established the hotel as an anchor of not only Coronado’s lodging market but also of San Diego County’s lodging market.

•    

Strong Military Presence – Coronado is home to two major military installations, the Naval Amphibious Base (NAB) and NASNI. The base-related workforce is estimated at approximately 35,000, inclusive of enlisted, officers, and civilian workers. Although the military bases provide top-quality on-base retail and services to enlisted and retired military personnel, spill-over demand from the military for services is a positive economic generator for the City.

•    

Small-town Ambience – Despite its reputation as a major tourist destination and a key west-coast military installation, Coronado is a small town in terms of population. It has retained its small-town atmosphere by concentrating its commercial uses in a pedestrian-oriented corridor reminiscent of a time before malls when shopping was a pedestrian exercise concentrated in a business district. The Orange Avenue corridor’s small storefronts, wide sidewalks, and low buildings have preserved a small town ambience and an inviting pedestrian scale.

•    Constraints

•    

Small Population Base and Isolated Geography – Coronado’s population base is relatively small in comparison to other cities in the region. The City’s ability to compete for retail sales in a trade area beyond Coronado is hampered by is physical separation from San Diego/South Bay proper which, in turn, limits the City’s potential to attract a broad range of national retail tenants. The City’s population growth is stagnant and, at least with respect to retail sales potential, the enlisted and retired military personnel are considered absent because they primarily utilize on-base retail as opposed to Orange Ave. retailers.

•    

Competition from On-base Retail – The only large format retailer in Coronado is the U.S. Military. The Navy Exchange at NASNI offers approximately 100,000 square feet of shopping comparable to a Wal-Mart or Target, inclusive of a food court and other amenities. The NASNI Exchange is the eighth largest Navy Exchange worldwide in terms of sales volume. The NAB offers an additional 20,000 square feet but does not provide the range of goods and services found at NASNI. Adjacent to the NASNI Exchange is a 48,000 SF Commissary. The NASNI Exchange offers a standard discount of approximately 17% before sales tax and the Commissary offers a 30% discount. Neither Exchanges nor Commissaries are subject to state or local sales tax regimes.

•    

Competition from Established Nodes – Coronado faces stiff competition from the proliferation of regional malls in proximity to the City. Four regional malls offering nearly five million square feet of anchors stores and in-line space are located within seven miles (or within 25 minutes drive) of Downtown.

•    

Limited Transportation Access – Vehicular access to Coronado is limited to Hwy. 75 from the south through Imperial Beach and the Coronado Cays and via the Coronado Bridge. Although these routes provide access through Imperial Beach/Coronado Cays from the south and from the City of San Diego to the east, it is not direct access to the Specific Plan area. This may limit the City’s chances of attracting national retail tenants. Also, the $1.00 toll to cross the Coronado Bridge was eliminated in the summer of 2002 and there now may be increased traffic volumes as a result.

•    

Lack of Assemblage Opportunities – There are few vacant sites within the boundaries of the Plan area that can be combined to form larger development opportunities. Moreover, existing parcels tend to be narrow and deep, fronted by Orange Avenue and backed by multi-unit residential properties.

•    

Limited Public Parking – Public parking in proximity to the Plan area is very limited. Although there are parking spaces available to the public, they are few in number and identifying signage is absent. Public parking is available in the northern segment of the Plan area at Coronado Ferry Landing and in the southern segment of the Plan area at Coronado Plaza and along Isabella Ave.

•    

Disagreement Between City and Business – Many business and property owners expressed the opinion that the City is overly restrictive and un-supportive of the business community. Fair and consistent policies must be established and followed in order to overcome the skepticism regarding the objectives of City government.

Title 90
Coronado Cays Specific Plan
Chapters:

90.02    General Provisions

90.04    Definitions

90.06    Custom Homes Zone

90.08    Waterfront Villa Zone

90.10    Village Residence Zone

90.12    Village Townhouse Zone

90.14    Village Condominium Zone

90.16    Nonresidential Zones

Chapter 90.02
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

90.02.010    Effect.

90.02.020    Recreational facilities.

90.02.030    Swimming pools.

90.02.040    Greens, commons, malls and parks.

90.02.050    Density.

90.02.060    Parking.

90.02.070    Bulkheads.

90.02.080    Waterways.

90.02.090    Street lights and traffic signs.

90.02.100    Underground utilities.

90.02.110    Median strips and parkways.

90.02.120    Corner lots.

90.02.130    Land use plan.

90.02.140    Signs.

90.02.150    Height measurement of fence or wall.

90.02.160    Visibility across rear yards of waterfront dwellings.

90.02.010 Effect.
These provisions with respect to the Coronado Cays constitute a comprehensive plan of development, control and regulation by the City of Coronado, except as may otherwise be provided herein. The City of Coronado recognizes that a master planned community has been developed and that this specific plan is necessary to maintain the unique quality of the Cays, including the right to continue the land uses existing on the effective date of the plan codified in this title.

90.02.020 Recreational facilities.
Recreational facilities may be located in any zone of the Coronado Cays. Recreational facilities may include, but are not limited to, the following: beaches, swimming rafts and floats, launching ramps, dry and wet boat storage, volley ball courts, fire pits and rings; beach club and yacht club buildings, including dining, cooking and bar facilities, locker rooms, sauna rooms, game and club rooms; offices related to management of common areas, playground facilities, badminton and tennis courts, therapeutic pools, swimming pools, and other equipment related to recreational use including buoys and markers, related parking and storage areas and other related recreational facilities constructed, erected, or installed for the benefit and exclusive use of the residents and their guests.

90.02.030 Swimming pools.
Any swimming pool, or decorative pond (including associated equipment) or any other body of water which contains water 18 inches or more in depth for use in connection with any dwelling unit, shall be at least five feet from any side or rear property line and 10 feet from any front property line. No such body of water shall be permitted in any required yard space unless the enclosing fence required by the City of Coronado is permitted under the provisions of walls and fences of the zoning area that is applicable. Pool and decorative pond equipment shall be required to comply with the City of Coronado noise ordinance.

90.02.040 Greens, commons, malls and parks.
Facilities and features within these areas may include, but are not limited to, the following: walks and malls, sprinklers and lawns, shrubbery, trees and greenery, rocks, boardwalks, benches, outdoor furniture, outdoor lighting, sculpture, fountains and reflecting pools. All other items related to and a part of the landscape design, including screen walls and fences, shall be permitted, providing no items are detrimental to public welfare or a hazard to traffic safety. Landscape and sprinkler system plans shall be submitted to the City for review and approval.

90.02.050 Density.
The maximum allowable density for the specific plan area is the net area of fee lands expressed in square feet and divided by 4,000. Net area shall be the gross area less the areas devoted to commercial use and the street rights-of-way. Waterway areas of fee lands, parks, school site and municipal service areas shall not be deducted. Density shall not exceed one living unit for each 4,000 square feet of land.

90.02.060 Parking.
A. Residential Parking Requirements. Each residential unit shall provide a minimum of two conveniently accessible, continuously usable off-street parking spaces to be used exclusively for parking operable motor vehicles. Storage of inoperable motor vehicles in Residential Zones shall be prohibited except for residential units that provide more than two enclosed off-street parking spaces. The net dimensions of each space shall be a minimum of nine feet by 20 feet except for waterfront villas. The parking requirement for waterfront villas is contained in Chapter 90.08 CMC, Waterfront Villa Zone.

B. Parking and Storage on Residential Lots. No boats, trailers, motor vehicles, machinery, or other material and equipment may be stored on the exterior areas of residential lots. However, boats, trailers, and motor vehicles in an operable condition may be parked in the driveway of a residential lot not to exceed 72 consecutive hours. Vehicles parked on a driveway, including boats and trailers, shall be parked perpendicular to the street and not block any portion of the adjoining sidewalk.

90.02.070 Bulkheads.
Bulkheads shall be concrete installed on all fee lands fronting on waterways, except those areas devoted to beaches. Bulkheads shall not be located within the channel right-of-way. The City shall maintain the causeways including bulkheads. All other bulkheads shall be the responsibility of the homeowners or their association.

90.02.080 Waterways.
A. Standards. Docks, rafts, floats, beaches, navigational aids, footings, pilings and related wharfage facilities may be constructed and maintained within a 45-foot easement on each side and each end of the 150- and 170-foot channels and within a 55-foot easement on 200-foot channels. Additionally there will be a mooring encroachment of five feet beyond the 45-foot area and seven feet beyond the 55-foot area.

B. Maintenance. (Reserved).

C. Protection. The City shall provide police and fire protection for the waterways.

90.02.090 Street lights and traffic signs.
The City will provide and maintain street lights and traffic signs.

90.02.100 Underground utilities.
All utilities shall be located underground.

90.02.110 Median strips and parkways.
Maintenance within the median strips on the 86- and 90-foot rights-of-way, as well as tree pruning in the median, shall be the responsibility of the City of Coronado. All parkway maintenance, trees in wells within the dedicated streets, parking islands and planters on the causeways is the responsibility of the homeowners’ association.

90.02.120 Corner lots.
Fences, walls or hedges on corner lots may not be closer than 25 feet to the property line for traffic safety vision.

90.02.130 Land use plan.
A. Map. The boundaries of the specific plan area are depicted on a map entitled the Coronado Cays Specific Plan Map, initially dated March 23, 2001, adopted by resolution of the City Council, as may be amended from time to time, likewise by resolution of the City Council, and which shall at all times be on file in the Office of the City Clerk. The specific plan area is divided into village areas whose boundaries are also depicted on that map.

B. Both the City zoning ordinance and the specific plan applies to the Coronado Cays.

C. If a conflict arises between the terms and conditions of the specific plan and the zoning ordinance, the specific plan shall prevail.

D. Any more stringent requirements will be the responsibility of the Coronado Cays homeowners’ association by inclusion in its member handbook.

90.02.140 Signs.
All signage will comply with the City’s sign ordinance as modified from time to time.

90.02.150 Height measurement of fence or wall.
The height of a fence, a wall or hedges shall be measured from the lowest adjoining side.

90.02.160 Visibility across rear yards of waterfront dwellings.
The rear yard of dwellings adjoining either a channel or the bay must be kept sufficiently clear of plants and trees to allow good visibility across that portion of the lot within 10 feet of the bulkhead wall.

Chapter 90.04
DEFINITIONS
Sections:

90.04.010    General.

90.04.020    Architectural features.

90.04.030    Basement.

90.04.040    Building height.

90.04.050    Developer.

90.04.060    Ell.

90.04.070    Garage, one-story.

90.04.080    Garage, private.

90.04.090    Green area.

90.04.100    Hedge.

90.04.110    Story.

90.04.120    Sun shade or patio structure.

90.04.130    Waterway.

90.04.140    Wing or ell.

90.04.150    Yard.

90.04.010 General.
For the purpose of this specific plan, certain terms used herein are defined as follows. Where this specific plan is silent the Coronado Municipal Code shall prevail.

90.04.020 Architectural features.
“Architectural features” may include eaves, rakes, fireplace chimneys, bay windows, corbels, copings, abutments, veneers, caps, cornices, awnings, hoods, canopies, planters, oriels, and unenclosed balconies.

“Architectural features” shall not extend to the ground or increase the gross floor area.

90.04.030 Basement.
“Basement” means a story partly underground and having one-half or more of its height below the average level of the adjoining ground. A basement occupied only for parking storage or heating or other building accessories shall be designated as a cellar and shall not be considered to be a story.

90.04.040 Building height.
The height of a building shall be measured vertically from the top of the crown in the street at mid-point of building, as constructed by the original developer in front of the building, to the highest point of the structure, excluding chimneys, except for custom homes described in Chapter 90.06 CMC, which shall be measured from the top of the coping or cap on the bulkhead, as constructed by the original developer, to the highest point of the structure excluding chimneys.

90.04.050 Developer.
“Developer” means the original grantee of the Coronado Cays from the City of Coronado and/or his successors and assigns.

90.04.060 Ell.
See “Wing or ell.”

90.04.070 Garage, one-story.
“One-story garage” means that portion of a private garage between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the ceiling or roof above.

90.04.080 Garage, private.
“Private garage” means an accessory to, or a portion of, a main building, used or designed for use only for the shelter and/or storage of operable passenger vehicles or trucks of not more than one ton rated capacity, owned or operated by occupants of the main building, including usable space (including storage areas, workshops, and similar areas, as long as the area is not more than 50 percent separated by a wall) and convenient ingress and egress thereto.

90.04.090 Green area.
“Green area” means a lot within a subdivision, used for landscaping and/or recreational purposes, owned by an association and/or residents of the subdivision or project. Green areas are created for nonresidential use for the benefit of the residents, and shall be maintained by them.

90.04.100 Hedge.
“Hedge” means a fence or boundary formed by a dense row of shrubs or trees.

90.04.110 Story.
“Story” means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between such floor and the ceiling next above it.

90.04.120 Sun shade or patio structure.
A “sun shade or patio structure” is a one-story structure partly or completely covered by a roof, and with a least one-half of its perimeter walls completely open on one or more of its sides, and which is designated to be used as a shelter for recreational or outdoor living purposes accessory to a single-family dwelling. The structure shall not include vehicle or other storage structures. It may be either freestanding or attached to a main or accessory building.

90.04.130 Waterway.
“Waterway” means a navigable body of water from the face of a bulkhead to the face of any other bulkhead.

90.04.140 Wing or ell.
“Wing or ell” means apart or feature projecting from and subordinate to the main or central part of the main dwelling, containing one or more rooms of the dwelling.

90.04.150 Yard.
“Yard” means an open space on a lot on which a building is situated and, except as otherwise provided in applicable provisions of this specific plan, is unoccupied or unobstructed from the ground to the sky. When a yard dimension is given, it represents the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line from which the distance must be measured and a line parallel to said lot line.

A. Front Yard. A yard across the full width of the lot, and extending from the front lot line to a line parallel thereto, which passes through the nearest portion of that main building which is closest to said front lot line, excepting those projections of a main building permitted in a front yard by other sections of these provisions.

B. Rear Yard. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, and measured between the rear lot line of the lot and the nearest rear portion of that main building which is closest to said rear lot line, excepting those projections of a main building permitted in a rear yard by other sections of these provisions.

C. Side Yard. A yard on each side of the building and extending from the front yard to the rear yard of said lot, and located between the side lot line and the main buildings; the measured distance of which yard shall represent the shortest distance between the side line of the lot and that portion of the main building nearest said side line from which measurement is taken, excepting those projections of a main building permitted in a side yard by other sections of these provisions.

Chapter 90.06
CUSTOM HOMES ZONE
Sections:

90.06.010    Application – Purpose.

90.06.020    Uses permitted.

90.06.030    Development standards.

90.06.040    Width determination.

90.06.050    Maximum density.

90.06.060    Lot coverage.

90.06.070    Distance between main and accessory buildings.

90.06.080    Maximum building height.

90.06.090    Minimum floor area.

90.06.100    Yard requirements.

90.06.110    Yard setback exceptions.

90.06.120    Fences, walls or hedges.

90.06.130    Garages.

90.06.010 Application – Purpose.
The Custom Waterfront Homes Zone provides an area of medium density for custom-built, single-family homes to promote and protect those special amenities associated with waterfront living. The provisions of this chapter apply to the following villages: Green Turtle and Blue Anchor.

90.06.020 Uses permitted.
Detached single-family dwellings, including customary accessory uses and structures.

90.06.030 Development standards.
A. Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall be 4,000 square feet for interior lots and 4,500 square feet for corner lots.

Any three or more contiguous lots of record, under one ownership, may be divided into two or more lots by the filing of record of survey or parcel maps, subject to City ordinances and/or State law. All lots thus created shall conform to all minimum standards of area, frontage and setbacks, as elsewhere set forth in this chapter.

B. Minimum Lot Width and Frontage. The minimum lot width shall be 40 feet for interior lots and 45 feet for corner lots. The minimum street frontage shall be 25 feet. The minimum water frontage shall be 25 feet, measured at the bulkhead.

90.06.040 Width determination.
A. Rectangular-Shaped Lots. Lot width shall be measured along a line equidistant to, and 10 feet from, the front property line.

B. Cul-de-Sac, Knuckle or Similar Lots. Lot width shall be measured 30 feet from the front property line along a curve concentric with the street line.

C. Cul-de-Sac Lots Abutting Another Street, Channel, Bay or Similar Properties. Lot width shall be measured 30 feet from the front property line along a curve concentric with the street line.

90.06.050 Maximum density.
Maximum density shall not exceed one dwelling unit for each 4,000 square feet of lot area. In no case shall there be more than one dwelling unit located on any one parcel of land or lot. No building other than the main building shall be used for living purposes. Where a main building crosses the boundary line(s) between two or more lots, those lots shall be considered as a single parcel, and an additional main building may not be constructed thereon.

90.06.060 Lot coverage.
The ground floor area of all roofed structures on lots shall not occupy more than 55 percent of the lot area. Sun shades and/or patios, roofed or trellised, shall not be considered roofed structures.

90.06.070 Distance between main and accessory buildings.
The minimum distance between the exterior walls of a main dwelling and an accessory building on the same lot shall be 10 feet.

90.06.080 Maximum building height.
The maximum building height shall not exceed two stories or 35 feet.

90.06.090 Minimum floor area.
Each dwelling, constructed or erected, shall have a minimum living floor area of 2,000 square feet, including walls but exclusive of garage.

90.06.100 Yard requirements.
A. Front Yard. The minimum front yard shall be 10 feet, except that on cul-de-sacs the minimum front yard may be reduced to five feet. Planters not to exceed 24 inches above grade shall be allowed in the front yard. For those lots that front partially on a cul-de-sac, the setback shall be five feet on the cul-de-sac portion and 10 feet on the remaining street frontage.

B. Interior Side Yard.

1. The minimum interior side yard shall be five feet, except for a one-story garage the side yard of which on one side shall not be less than three feet. A garage may not be split for purposes of this section.

2. For a wharfage lot or an easement area in a waterway, the minimum side yard shall be five feet from the sides of the wharfage lot or water easement area to the dock, wharf or ramp in this area. Planters not to exceed 24 inches above grade shall be allowed in the interior side yard.

3. Exterior Side Yard. The minimum exterior side yard of a corner lot shall be 10 feet.

4. Rear Yard. The minimum rear yard shall be 15 feet, measured from the bulkhead wall to the main dwelling, or furthermost projection of the cantilevered wall, balcony or deck; however, sun shades may project to within five feet of the exterior wall of the bulkhead. Lots bounded on two sides by channel waterways shall maintain a minimum of 15 feet from bulkhead to main dwelling on both sides.

a. Structures other than the aforementioned sun shades shall be limited to planter walls, seats, benches, fountains, spas or pools including equipment for same, or barbecue facilities not exceeding three and one-half feet in height measured from top of the coping or cap on the bulkhead in the rear yard of the property as constructed by the original developer.

b. Patio slabs, decks or other surface materials shall be limited to 12 inches in height, measured from the top of the bulkhead as constructed by the original developer, but shall not exceed seven inches on the bulkhead.

90.06.110 Yard setback exceptions.
A. Architectural Features. Architectural features may project 30 inches into the required side yard and three feet into the required front and rear yard. Architectural features of one-story garages may project to within 18 inches of the side lot line.

Architectural features are limited to a maximum of 25 percent of the length of each ground floor side and each second story side.

B. Unenclosed Stairways. Unenclosed stairways may extend four feet into the required rear yard and may extend into the required side yard to within three feet of the property line.

90.06.120 Fences, walls or hedges.
A. Fences, walls or hedges may not be located in the required front yard.

B. Fences or walls located in the required side yards shall not exceed eight feet in height; provided, that fences or walls in the required side yard located within one foot of the rear yard shall comply with subsections (B)(1) and (B)(2) of this section.

1. No other portion of the rear yard shall have a fence or wall, over three and one-half feet in height, other than a clear, shatterproof glass windscreen with no top rail, or wrought iron or aluminum fence with balusters not exceeding one-half inch in thickness and five feet in height.

2. Pilasters not exceeding four and one-half feet in height with a ball light mounted on each pilaster, not exceeding eight feet in height measured from top of bulkhead to top of globe, may be located in the rear yard. These regulations for fences or walls in required rear yards shall apply to both sides of the lot or lots, which have a bulkhead on two sides of the lot.

3. Fences, walls or hedges not exceeding eight feet in height may be erected in the exterior side yard of a corner lot, provided they are not closer than 25 feet to the front property line for traffic safety vision. (Ord. 1956 § 12, 2004)

90.06.130 Garages.
Each dwelling unit shall maintain a fully enclosed garage capable of providing at the minimum two residential off-street parking spaces as set forth in Chapter 90.02 CMC, General Provisions. Garages shall be equipped with an operable garage door to provide for its complete enclosure when not in active use by occupants.

Chapter 90.08
WATERFRONT VILLA ZONE
Sections:

90.08.010    Application – Purpose.

90.08.020    Uses permitted.

90.08.030    Development standards.

90.08.040    Yard requirements.

90.08.050    Setback exceptions.

90.08.060    Parking requirements.

90.08.010 Application – Purpose.
The regulations contained in this chapter establishing the Waterfront Villa Zone apply to the following association villages: Antigua, Kingston and Montego.

90.08.020 Uses permitted.
Residential buildings containing four or more attached dwelling units, and the customary accessory uses and structures.

90.08.030 Development standards.
A. Lot Coverage. The total ground floor area of all roofed structures shall not occupy more than 60 percent of the lot area.

B. Maximum Building Height. The maximum building height shall not exceed three stories or 40 feet.

C. Minimum Floor Area. Each dwelling unit, constructed or erected, shall have a minimum living floor area of 1,400 square feet, including walls but exclusive of garage or carport.

90.08.040 Yard requirements.
A. Waterway Setback. The minimum setback shall be 20 feet, measured from the face of the bulkhead to the building wall at the center of each building.

B. Street Setback. The minimum setback shall be four feet, measured from the property line to the wall of a building.

C. Garage/Carport Setback. The minimum setback from the property line to the building wall of a garage/carport shall be two feet on the interior street and zero setback on the exterior street.

90.08.050 Setback exceptions.
A. Architectural Features. Architectural features may project 30 inches into the setback from the waterways, the setback from the street, or the courtyard. Second floor balconies or building wing walls may project 10 feet into the required setback from the waterways.

B. Unenclosed Stairways. Unenclosed stairways may extend from the second floor balcony to within five feet of the face of the bulkhead wall, between patios.

C. Fences, Walls or Hedges. Masonry walls at the perimeter of a waterfront villa development or erected as part of the entry detail, or as a garage/carport wall, shall not exceed 10 feet in height. Fences used as screening, patio area or trash area enclosures may be located from the building face to a court or street elevation walk, and shall not exceed eight feet in height. Hedges not exceeding eight feet in height may be located on any part of the lot, provided they are not closer than 25 feet to the entrance property line for traffic safety vision.

90.08.060 Parking requirements.
Each dwelling unit shall be provided with a minimum of two reasonably accessible, continuously usable, off-street parking spaces. The net dimensions of each space shall be a minimum of nine feet by 18 feet. Space may be provided by either garage or carport. The minimum width of the required parking may be reduced to 17 feet and four inches when two spaces assigned to a particular unit are enclosed.

Chapter 90.10
VILLAGE RESIDENCE ZONE
Sections:

90.10.010    Application – Purpose.

90.10.020    Uses permitted.

90.10.030    Development standards.

90.10.040    Width determination.

90.10.050    Maximum density.

90.10.060    Lot coverage.

90.10.070    Distance between main and accessory buildings.

90.10.080    Maximum building height.

90.10.090    Minimum floor area.

90.10.100    Yard requirements.

90.10.110    Yard setback exceptions.

90.10.010 Application – Purpose.
The Village Residence Zone is designed as an integrated community of single-family, water-oriented housing and recreational facilities. The Village Zone includes the following villages: Jamaica, Bahama, Trinidad, and Port Royale.

90.10.020 Uses permitted.
The following uses are permitted in this zone:

A. Detached single-family dwellings and the customary accessory uses and structures.

90.10.030 Development standards.
A. Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall be 3,600 square feet for interior lots and 4,050 square feet for corner lots, providing said lots are adjoining a green area or mall. Lots not adjoining a green area or mall shall be 3,800 square feet for interior lots and 4,275 square feet for corner lots.

B. Minimum Lot Width and Frontage. The minimum lot width shall be 40 feet for interior lots and 45 feet for corner lots. The minimum street frontage shall be 25 feet.

90.10.040 Width determination.
A. Rectangular-Shaped Lots. Lot width shall be measured along a line equidistant to, and eight feet from, the front property line.

B. Cul-de-Sac, Knuckle or Similar Lots. Lot width shall be measured 30 feet from the front property line along a curve concentric with the street line.

C. Cul-de-Sac Lots Siding onto Another Street, Channel, Bay, or Similar Properties. The lot width shall be measured along a line 30 feet from the front property line along a curve concentric with the street.

90.10.050 Maximum density.
The maximum density shall not exceed one dwelling unit for each 3,600 square feet of lot area. In no case shall there be more than one dwelling unit located on any one parcel of land or lot under single ownership. No building other than the main building shall be used for living purposes.

90.10.060 Lot coverage.
The total ground floor area of all roofed structures shall not occupy more than 55 percent of the lot area.

90.10.070 Distance between main and accessory buildings.
The minimum distance between the exterior walls of a main dwelling and an accessory building on the same lot shall be 10 feet.

90.10.080 Maximum building height.
The maximum building height shall not exceed two stories or 35 feet.

90.10.090 Minimum floor area.
Each dwelling unit constructed or erected shall have a minimum living floor area of 1,600 square feet, including walls but exclusive of garage.

90.10.100 Yard requirements.
A. Front Yard. The minimum front yard shall be eight feet, excepting that on a cul-de-sac the front yard may be reduced to zero setback.

B. Interior Side Yard. The minimum interior side yard shall be five feet, except for a one-story garage, the side yard of which shall not be less than three feet. One interior side yard of any lot may be reduced to zero setback in accordance with subsection C of this section, Special Side Yard.

C. Special Side Yard. One side yard of any lot in Village Residence areas may be reduced to zero setback, providing that the remaining, opposite, side yard (a “special side yard”) is increased from five feet to 10 feet, except that the special side yard for the “Egret” model dwellings in Port Royale Village may be six feet, and further except that any corner lot shall be subject to subsection D of this section, Exterior Side Yard. Development of homes with a special side yard shall be subject to the following standards:

1. The special side yard for a one-story garage shall not be less than five feet. The wall of the main dwelling and/or garage erected upon the property line shall have no door or window openings. The eave or rake of the first-story roof along the zero setback may project 30 inches beyond the property line; provided, that the roof shall not drain upon the adjoining property; and provided further, that the deed to said property shall contain an easement right for said encroachment.

2. Any modification, addition, reconstruction or replacement of a home constructed utilizing the special side yard may be expanded only on the first floor, and only within a rectangular area formed by a projection of the outermost exterior walls of the home as constructed by the original developer.

The “Egret” models referred to herein are located on lots 591, 596, 599, 601, 605, 607, 609, 611, 614, 616, 618 of Map 11557, lots 794, 797, 799, 801, 804, 808, 810, 812, 814, 817, 819, 821, 823, 824, 830 of Map 11913, and lots 871, 873, 877, 880, 882, 884, 885, 888, 890, 891, 895, 898, 901, 905, 907, 912, 915, 918, and 920 of Map 12317.

D. Exterior Side Yard. The minimum exterior side yard of a corner lot shall be 10 feet. When the interior side yard of a corner lot is reduced to zero feet, the exterior side yard shall be increased to 15 feet.

E. Rear Yard. The minimum rear yard shall be 20 feet; however, a wing or ell of the main dwelling or a deck may project to within 10 feet of the rear property line, providing a usable rear yard of not less than 800 square feet remains. (Ord. 1987 § 2, 2007)

90.10.110 Yard setback exceptions.
A. Trellis. A trellis or sun shade may be installed in the required rear yard provided it is not less than 10 feet from the rear property line and does not encroach into the required 10-foot side yard; it may abut the side property line at the zero lot line side of the residence. Height of said trellis or sun shade shall be limited to nine feet six inches above the first floor house slab, as constructed by the original developer. Posts or columns may extend a maximum of one foot above top of trellis or sun shade.

B. Decks. For those properties which rear upon public property or common association space, decks or balconies may be installed in the required rear yard provided they are not less than 10 feet from the rear property line and do not encroach into the required side yards. The maximum height, including any projections, guardrails, walls, or windscreens, shall be limited to 13 feet above the first floor house slab as constructed by the original developer. Rear yards with such decks or balconies shall be exempt from providing the minimum 800 square feet usable rear yard. Said guardrails, walls or windscreens shall be constructed only of clear shatterproof glass with no top rail, or wrought iron or aluminum fence with balusters not exceeding one-half inch in thickness and no closer to each other than the minimum building code requirement.

C. Other Structures. Other structures in the rear yard shall be limited to planter walls, barbecue facilities, pools or spas, including equipment for same, benches or seats, fountains whose height shall be limited to three feet six inches above thefirst floor house slab as constructed by the original developer.

D. Architectural Features. Architectural features may project 30 inches into the required side yard and three feet into the required front and rear yard or common area. For zero side yards the eave or rake of the roof may project 30 inches into the adjoining lot or common area, provided the roof does not drain upon the adjoining property; and provided further, that the deed to said property shall contain an easement right for said encroachment. Architectural features of one-story garages may project to within 18 inches of the nonzero side lot line.

E. Unenclosed Stairways. Unenclosed stairways may extend four feet into the required rear yard and may extend into the required side yard to within three feet of the property line, where five-foot side yards are required, and to within five feet of the property line where 10-foot side yards are required.

F. Fences, Walls or Hedges.

1. Front Yard. Fences, walls and hedges may not be located in the required front yard.

2. Rear Yard. Fences, walls and hedges, not exceeding six feet in height, may be located in the required rear yards, and not exceeding eight feet in height in the required side yards; however, when common side yards of two lots are reduced to zero setback, fences, walls or hedges, not exceeding eight feet in height, may be located in the required front and rear yards, and remaining side yard.

3. Corner Lots. Fences or walls, not exceeding six feet in height, may be erected in the exterior side yard of a corner lot, provided they are not closer than 25 feet to the front property line. When a corner lot and the adjoining lot have a common side yard with a zero setback, fences or walls, not exceeding eight feet in height, may be erected in the exterior side yard of the corner lot, provided they are not closer than 25 feet to the front property line to preclude impairment of traffic safety vision.

Chapter 90.12
VILLAGE TOWNHOUSE ZONE
Sections:

90.12.010    Application – Purpose.

90.12.020    Uses permitted.

90.12.030    Development standards.

90.12.040    Yard requirements.

90.12.050    Yard setback.

90.12.010 Application – Purpose.
The regulations contained in this chapter establishing the Village Townhouse Zone apply to attached homes in the following association villages: Jamaica, Bahama, Trinidad and Port Royale Villages.

90.12.020 Uses permitted.
The following uses are permitted in this zone:

A. Attached dwellings and the customary accessory uses and structures.

90.12.030 Development standards.
Single-story townhouses as constructed by the original developer cannot be converted to two stories.

A. Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall include the area occupied by the residence and garage, plus a minimum rear yard of 500 square feet, excepting that when an entry court or atrium of a least 150 square feet is provided, the rear yard may be reduced to 400 square feet; provided, that there are common areas as shown on the land use plan.

B. Lot Coverage. The ground floor area of all roofed structures may occupy up to 100 percent of the lot area, less required front and rear yards.

C. Distance between Main and Accessory Buildings. The minimum distance between the exterior walls of a main dwelling and an accessory building on the same lot shall be 10 feet.

D. Distance between Main Buildings. The minimum distance from the end exterior wall of a two-story building to the end exterior wall of an adjacent one- or two-story building shall be 25 feet clear.

E. Maximum Building Height. The maximum building height shall not exceed two stories to a maximum height of 35 feet.

F. Minimum Floor Area. Each dwelling constructed or erected shall have a minimum floor area of 1,400 square feet, including walls but exclusive of garages.

90.12.040 Yard requirements.
A. Front Yard. The minimum front yard shall be four feet, excepting that on a cul-de-sac the front yard may be reduced to zero setback.

B. Interior Side Yard. All interior side yards are zero setbacks with common walls.

C. Exterior Side Yard. The minimum distance from the exterior wall of an end unit of a building, siding onto another street shall be 20 feet to the face of the curb.

D. Rear Yard. The minimum rear yard shall be 20 feet; however, a wing or ell of a main dwelling may project to within 10 feet of the rear property line, providing a usable rear yard of not less than 500 square feet remains. When an entry court or atrium of at least 150 square feet is provided, the usable rear yard may be reduced to 400 square feet.

1. Structures permitted in rear yards other than fences and walls described in CMC 90.12.050(B) shall be planter walls, barbecue facilities, pools or spas including equipment for same, benches or seats and fountains whose height shall be limited to three feet six inches above the first floor house slab as constructed by the original developer. (Ord. 1956 § 13, 2004)

90.12.050 Yard setback.
A. Architectural Features. Architectural features, including eaves and fireplaces, may project 30 inches into the adjoining lot or common area and two feet into the required front and rear yard or common area, providing that the roof shall not drain upon the adjoining property; and provided further, that the deed to said property shall contain an easement right for said encroachment.

B. Fences or Walls. Fences or walls may not be located in the required front yard. Fences or walls not exceeding four feet in height may be located in the required rear yard of homes in Bahama, Trinidad and Port Royale Villages. Homes in Jamaica Village may have fences not exceeding eight feet in height.

C. End or Corner Lot. The end lot or unit of a building siding onto another street may have a fence or wall not exceeding eight feet in height, located in the required rear yard, but no fence or wall on the exterior side of an end lot or unit shall be closer than 25 feet to the front property line for traffic safety vision.

Chapter 90.14
VILLAGE CONDOMINIUM ZONE
Sections:

90.14.010    Application and purpose.

90.14.020    Uses permitted.

90.14.030    Development standards.

90.14.040    Yard requirements.

90.14.050    Parking requirements.

90.14.060    Exclusive use common areas.

90.14.010 Application and purpose.
The Village Condominium Zone provides a medium density area in the Mardi Gras Village for statutory condominium structures meeting the social, economic, and aesthetic requirements of the Coronado Cays community.

90.14.020 Uses permitted.
Residences of one- and/or two-story structures containing four or more living units or one- and two-story unattached structures, each providing a single living unit including the customary accessory uses and structures.

90.14.030 Development standards.
A. Lot Coverage. The ground floor area of all roofed structures shall not occupy more than 55 percent of the lot area.

B. Maximum Building Height. Buildings and/or dwelling units may be either one or two stories but may not exceed a maximum height of 35 feet.

C. Minimum Floor Area. Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum floor area of 1,300 square feet of living area, including walls, but exclusive of garage or carport.

90.14.040 Yard requirements.
A. Setback Requirements. The minimum setback from any private street shall be four feet from curb face, excepting that on a cul-de-sac the setback may be reduced to zero. The minimum setback from any property line shall be 25 feet, except that the minimum setback from the property lines adjacent to Lots 849, 850, 855, and 926 shall be 10 feet. The minimum setback from any property line within Lot 853 shall be 10 feet.

B. Architectural Features. Architectural features may project 30 inches into the required setback.

C. Fences, Walls or Hedges. Masonry walls at the west property lines shall not exceed seven feet in height. Masonry walls erected as part of the entry detail, or as a garage/carport wall, shall not exceed 10 feet in height. Fences used as screening for a patio area or trash enclosure area shall not exceed seven feet in height. Fences, wall, or hedges may not be closer than 25 feet to the entrance property line to preclude impairment of traffic safety vision.

90.14.050 Parking requirements.
Each dwelling unit shall be provided with a minimum of two reasonably accessible, continuously usable, off-street parking spaces. The net dimensions of each space shall be nine feet by 20 feet. Space may be provided by either garage or carport.

90.14.060 Exclusive use common areas.
Front, rear and side yards shall be for the exclusive use of respective units as defined in the condominium plan.

Chapter 90.16
NONRESIDENTIAL ZONES
Sections:

90.16.010    General.

90.16.020    Lot 926, association maintenance facility.

90.16.030    Lot 855, wetlands.

90.16.010 General.
The regulations contained in this chapter shall apply to Lot 926 and Lot 855.

90.16.020 Lot 926, association maintenance facility.
A. In addition to other uses permitted in the Village Condominium Zone, a maintenance facility is an additional permitted use in Lot 926. Uses permitted in use area(s) designated “maintenance facility” shall be limited to use by the homeowners’ association and City of Coronado maintenance crews and/or their subcontractors in connection with the maintenance of Coronado Cays subject to conditions set forth in the final paragraph of this section. One or more buildings may be constructed upon the site but total first floor building coverage shall not exceed 50 percent of the lot. Maximum overall height of any building(s) or structure(s) on the lot shall not exceed 23 feet. Setback requirements for buildings shall be a minimum of 10 feet from all property lines. The site use shall be limited to the following: (1) storage and maintenance of equipment such as trucks and rolling stock, (2) landscape and building maintenance supplies and equipment, and (3) an office from which maintenance personnel may gather for assignment and dispatch.

B. The areas shall be completely screened from outside view by walls, screen fences and/or landscaping so as not to impair the use and enjoyment of the adjacent residential areas. Walls and fences shall not exceed eight feet in height.

90.16.030 Lot 855, wetlands.
A. Lot 855 was created by dredging to create a wetland as an ecological site under an agreement with the State Department of Fish and Game and the United States Department of Fish and Wildlife.

B. Maintenance of the wetlands will be in accordance with said agreement and will be the responsibility of the Coronado Cays homeowners’ association.

Title 92
CALIFORNIA ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY ACT (CEQA) IMPLEMENTATION
Chapters:

92.00    California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) Implementation

Chapter 92.00
CALIFORNIA ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY ACT (CEQA) IMPLEMENTATION
Sections:

92.00.010    Local environmental guidelines for the implementation of CEQA.

92.00.020    Fees and charges for CEQA implementation.

92.00.010 Local environmental guidelines for the implementation of CEQA.
Local environmental guidelines for the implementation of the California Environmental Quality Act and the State Guidelines for that Act have been enacted and shall be maintained by City Council resolution. (Ord. 2018 § 5 (Att. D), 2010)

92.00.020 Fees and charges for CEQA implementation.
The fees and charges associated with CEQA processing and implementation shall be as established as required and from time to time by City Council resolution. (Ord. 2018 § 5 (Att. D), 2010)